Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T O C ODE , OR N OT T O C ODE ?
E XPLORING I MPACT OF C ODE IN P RE - TRAINING
 Viraat Aryabumi, Yixuan Su, Raymond Ma, Adrien Morisot, Ivan Zhang,
 Acyr Locatelli, Marzieh Fadaee, Ahmet Üstün, Sara Hooker
 {viraat,ahmetustun,sarahooker}@cohere.com



                                            A BSTRACT

         Including code in the pre-training data mixture, even for models not specifically
         designed for code, has become a common practice in LLMs pre-training. While
         there has been anecdotal consensus among practitioners that code data plays a vi-
         tal role in general LLMs’ performance, there is only limited work analyzing the
         precise impact of code on non-code tasks. In this work, we systematically in-
         vestigate the impact of code data on general performance. We ask “what is the
         impact of code data used in pre-training on a large variety of downstream tasks
         beyond code generation”. We conduct extensive ablations and evaluate across a
         broad range of natural language reasoning tasks, world knowledge tasks, code
         benchmarks, and LLM-as-a-judge win-rates for models with sizes ranging from
         470M to 2.8B parameters. Across settings, we find a consistent results that code
         is a critical building block for generalization far beyond coding tasks and im-
         provements to code quality have an outsized impact across all tasks. In particular,
         compared to text-only pre-training, the addition of code results in up to relative
         increase of 8.2% in natural language (NL) reasoning, 4.2% in world knowledge,
         6.6% improvement in generative win-rates, and a 12x boost in code performance
         respectively. Our work suggests investments in code quality and preserving code
         during pre-training have positive impacts.



1   I NTRODUCTION

The role of data has taken on critical significance in recent breakthroughs. State-of-the-art models
highlight the importance of the pre-training data mixture, diversity of data sources (Brown et al.,
2020; Longpre et al., 2023; Singh et al., 2024) combined with compute availability as key drivers on
performance (Dubey et al., 2024; Üstün et al., 2024; Team et al., 2023; Aryabumi et al., 2024). A
critical question is what properties of data impart the best general performance?
Perhaps surprisingly, code is often included in pre-training even if a model is not explicitly intended
to generate high-quality code. Code datasets differ significantly in terms of structure and textural
characteristics from high-quality web datasets (Wikimedia; Raffel et al., 2019). Despite this, several
previous generations of LLMs like PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022), Gopher (Rae et al., 2022) and
Bloom (Workshop et al., 2023) that were not explicitly intended to support code generation, included
code data together with high-quality natural language data in their pre-training mixture.
In current state-of-the-art models, it is an accepted norm to not only include code data but further
increase the proportion – for instance, Llama 3 (Dubey et al., 2024) has four times more code data
in proportion (17%), of its pre-training mixture than Llama 2 (4.5%) (Touvron et al., 2023). While
there has been consensus anecdotally among practitioners that code data plays a vital role in LLMs’
performance, there has been only limited work analyzing the precise impact of code on non-code
tasks. Prior work shows particular side benefits of the inclusion of code data, such as impact on
scaling in limited data regime (Muennighoff et al., 2023a), entity tracking capabilities (Kim et al.,
2024), and mathematical reasoning (Razeghi et al.). However, there has been no exhaustive study to
date that systematically investigates the impact of code data on general performance. In this work,
we ask “what is the impact of code data used in pre-training on a large variety of downstream tasks
beyond code generation?”.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We embark on an exhaustive set of large-scale controlled pre-training experiments. This includes a
consideration of where in the training process adding code is beneficial, code proportions, the role
of scaling, and the quality and properties of code added. While a costly endeavor to perform these
ablations in a rigorous way, we find consistent and valuable results that code provides critical im-
provements to non-code performance. In particular, compared to text-only pre-training, for our best
variant, the addition of code results in relative increase of 8.2% in natural language (NL) reasoning ,
4.2% in world knowledge, 6.6% improvement in generative win-rates, and a 12x boost in code per-
formance respectively. Further performing cooldown with code, improves NL reasoning by 3.7%,
World knowledge by 6.8%, and code by 20%, relative to cooldown without code and leads to a 4.1%
additional win-rate increase.
Here, several factors matter including getting the proportion of code correct, improving the quality of
code by including synthetic code and code adjacent data such as commits, and leveraging code across
multiple stages of training including during cooldown. Our results suggest code is a critical building
block for generalization far beyond coding tasks and improvements to code quality have an outsized
impact on performance. We conduct an extensive evaluation on a broad range of benchmarks, which
cover world knowledge tasks, natural language reasoning, and code generation, as well as LLM-as-
a-judge win-rates. Across experiments on models ranging from 470 million to 2.8 billion parameter
models, we find the following detailed results:
1. Code provides critical improvements to non-code performance. Initialization with code pre-
   trained models results in improved performance for natural language tasks. In particular, com-
   pared to text-only pre-training, for our best variant, the addition of code results in a relative
   increase of 8.2% in NL reasoning, 4.2% in world knowledge, 6.6% improvement in generative
   win-rates, and a 12x boost in code performance respectively.
2. Code quality and properties matter. Using markup-style programming languages, code-
   adjacent datasets such as GitHub commits and synthetically generated code improves the per-
   formance in pre-training. In particular, training on a higher quality synthetically generated code
   dataset results in a 9% and 44% increase in natural language reasoning and code performance, re-
   spectively, compared to web-based code data in pre-training. Additionally, continual pre-training
   from a code model that includes synthetic data results in 1.9% and 41% relative increases in
   natural language reasoning and code performance respectively, compared to initialization from a
   code model that does not include code data.
3. Code in cooldown enables further improvement across all tasks. Including code data in pre-
   training cooldown, where high-quality datasets are up-weighted, leads to an increase of 3.6% in
   NL reasoning, 10.1% in world knowledge, and 20% in code performance relative to no cooldown.
   More significantly, cooldown with code beats the baseline (no cooldown) by 52.3% win-rates,
   where win-rates are 4.1% higher compared to cooldown without code.

2     M ETHODOLOGY
We describe the details of our Pre-training Data (§ 2.1), Evaluation (§ 2.2), Training and Model
details (§ 2.3). Figure 1 shows the high-level experimental framework. Precise details for each
experiment and their results are presented in Section 3.

2.1   P RE - TRAINING DATA

In this section, we describe the details of our pre-training and cooldown datasets. We aim to evaluate
the role of code in pre-training, following current state-of-art practices. Hence, we consider pre-
training runs that consist of two phases: 1) continued pretraining and 2) cooldown. Continued
pre-training refers to training a model that is initialized from a pre-trained model and trained for a
fixed token budget. Cooldown (Team et al., 2023; Parmar et al., 2024) involves up-weighting high-
quality datasets and annealing the learning rate for a relatively small number of tokens during the
final stages of training. This up-weighting of high-quality datasets for a smaller amount of steps at
the end of training can significantly boost model quality.
Text dataset. We use the SlimPajama pre-training corpus (Soboleva et al., 2023) as our source
of natural language text data. SlimPajama is a de-duplicated, quality-filtered, multi-corpora, open-
source dataset based on RedPajama-1.2T (Computer, 2023). SlimPajama consists of documents


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Evaluation                                                    Model Initialization
                                                                               Random         Code          Balanced
                 Natural Language Reasoning             Model
                      World Knowledge


                           Code


                  Open-ended Generations


                                                                                 Model Ablations
                                                     Data mixture
                                                                                Model initialization from
                   Data Ablations                                                      Code LM

                   Proportions of code
                                                                                     Model Scale

                 Code-data in cooldown
                                                      Datasets
                                                                                 Phase of pre-training

                      Token budget
                                              Text      Code        Cooldown
                  Markup-style / Code-
                 adjacent / Synthetic data


Figure 1: Overview of our experimental framework: We exhaustively evaluate the impact of
code by varying: 1) the proportion of code in pre-training, 2) code quality and properties, 3) model
initialization, 4) model scale, and 5) stage of training at which code is introduced. We evaluate
the resulting model on a wide-ranging set of tasks, including natural language reasoning, world
knowledge, code, and open-ended generations.


from CommonCrawl, C4, GitHub, Books, ArXiv, Wikipedia, and StackExchange. We filter out all
documents from GitHub and StackExchange to remove code and code-adjacent data sources and
ensure this is a text-only source. SlimPajama has a total of 627B tokens. After removing all code
sources, this results in our text pre-training corpus with a total of 503B tokens.
Code datasets. To explore the impact of different properties of code data, we use multiple sources
of code in our experiments:

         • W EB - BASED C ODE DATA: For our main source of code data, we start with the Stack
           dataset (Kocetkov et al., 2022) that was used to train StarCoder (Li et al., 2023a). The
           Stack consists of permissively licensed code data scraped from GitHub. We apply quality
           filters1 and restrict to the top 25 programming languages based on document count 2 . After
           all filtering steps, the size of the code-only and markup subset is 139B tokens.
         • M ARKDOWN DATA We also separately process markup-style languages such as Markdown,
           CSS, and HTML.2 After all filtering steps, the size of this markup subset is 180B tokens.
         • S YNTHETIC C ODE DATA: To ablate the quality of the code dataset, we use a proprietary
           synthetically generated code dataset that consists of Python programming problems that
           have been formally verified. We treat this as a high-quality source of code data (See the
           details in § 3.4). The final synthetic dataset consists of 3.2B code tokens.
         • C ODE A DJACENT DATA: Finally, to explore different properties of code data, we include
           a version of the code data which includes auxiliary data such as GitHub commits, jupyter
           notebooks, StackExchange threads. For GitHub commits, and jupyter notebooks we use
           the datasets provided as part of the Stack (Kocetkov et al., 2022). We use the version of
           StackExchange that is part of SlimPajama (Soboleva et al., 2023). In total we have 21.4B
           tokens of code-adjacent data.

Pre-training cooldown datasets. Cooldown involves up-weighting higher quality datasets for the
final steps of pre-training and has been found to improve performance on downstream tasks (Parmar
et al., 2024; Team et al., 2023), in particular to impart instruction-following capabilities. We choose
a cooldown mixture comprising high-quality text, math, code, and instruct-style text datasets.


   1
       See Appendix C.1 for details about quality filters
   2
       Refer to Appendix C.2, C.3 for the full list of programming and markup-style languages included


                                                               3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.2        E VALUATION

Our goal is to systematically understand the impact of code on general performance, which requires
a broad evaluation suite that extends to a large variety of downstream tasks beyond code generation.
To achieve this, we evaluate models on benchmarks that are reasonable proxies for model ability on
1) world knowledge, 2) natural language reasoning, and 3) code performance. In addition, we report
win-rates as evaluated by an LLM-as-a-judge. Table 1 (Appendix A) shows the full evaluation suite
and their respective grouping, along with the metric used.
For World knowledge, we use benchmarks to measure knowledge memorization, retrieval, and
question answering capability given context. We include Natural Questions Open (Kwiatkowski
et al., 2019), and TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017) as the datasets. Natural language reasoning suite
consists of 11 benchmarks that involve natural language based reasoning such as Question Answer-
ing, natural language inference (NLI), sentence completion, co-reference resolution, and general
intelligence. We include the full list of the constituent benchmarks with references in Table 1. Fi-
nally, while our main focus is general performance, we also want to measure any changes to code
generation performance. For Code benchmarks, we focus on the function completion task where
we use HumanEval-Python (Chen et al., 2022) and MBPP (Austin et al., 2021).
We evaluate performance at two scales: 470M to 2.8B parameter models. At 470M scale, model
capabilities are limited, thus to ensure fair comparisons, we only compare benchmarks for which all
models achieve scores above random similar to Muennighoff et al. (2023a); Lozhkov et al. (2024).
LLM-as-a-judge win-rates. In addition to task-specific discriminative performance, to allow for
a more holistic view across all performance measures, we also evaluate generative performance
using LLM-as-a-judge win-rates. This is particularly valuable given recent work that has shown that
as performance on open-ended generations improves, there is deterioration in traditional academic
tasks (Üstün et al., 2024; Ouyang et al., 2022; Iyer et al., 2022; Muennighoff et al., 2023c). The
use of LLMs-as-a-Judge benchmarks (Fu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Chiang & yi Lee, 2023;
Shimabucoro et al., 2024) has gained traction as an alternative to performing human evaluation,
which tends to be laborious and expensive (Wang et al., 2023; Boubdir et al., 2023). LLMs as
evaluators compare two completions based upon detailed prompts and are reasonable proxies aligned
with human preference (Üstün et al., 2024; Dubois et al., 2024).
We use the Dolly-200 English dataset (Üstün et al., 2024; Singh et al., 2024), which consists of 200
hand-picked examples from the Dolly-15K dataset (Conover et al., 2023). These prompts are open-
ended and capture general-purpose non-code use cases making them a valuable proxy for how code
impacts more fluid and often open-ended tasks. For our win-rate evaluations, we use Command-R+3
as the LLM judge. Details about the prompt are provided in Appendix D.

2.3        T RAINING AND M ODEL D ETAILS

We use 470M and 2.8B parameters decoder-only auto-regressive Transformer models (Radford
et al., 2019) that are trained with a standard language modeling objective. We use parallel atten-
tion layers, (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021), SwiGLU activation (Shazeer,
2020), no biases in dense layers, and a byte-pair-encoding tokenizer with a vocabulary size of 256K.
All models are pre-trained using AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) with a max sequence length
of 8192, batch size of 512 and a cosine LR schedule with a warmup of 1325 steps.
Infrastructure. We use TPU v5e chips (Jouppi et al., 2017) for training and evaluation. All models
are trained using Jax (Bradbury et al., 2018) framework. We pre-train 64 models in total. This is an
enormous endeavour given the scale and computational resources required. Each pre-training run for
200B tokens takes 4736 TPU-chip hours for 470M and 13824 TPU-chip-hours for 2.8B parameter
models. Each cooldown run for 40B tokens takes 1024 TPU-chip hours for 470M models.

3         R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
In this section, we will report descriptions and results for each experimental variants. We systemati-
cally investigate, (1) initializing an LLM with code pre-trained models (§ 3.1), and (2) the impact of
      3
          https://huggingface.co/CohereForAI/c4ai-command-r-plus


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Impact of initialization using code pre-trained models: Initializing model training with
code pre-trained models improves reasoning and code generation compared to text-only models,
where the improvement is the most when continued pre-training with high percentage text (Bal-
anced→Text, Code→Text). Note that these variants are designed to isolate the role of initialization,
so do not include cooldown.


model scale (§ 3.2), (3) varying proportion of code in pre-training data (§ 3.3), (4) quality and prop-
erties of the code data (§ 3.4), (5) code data in pre-training cooldown (§ 3.5). Finally, we compare
the resulting pre-training recipes (§ 3.6). Figure 1 shows the key levers of our experimental design.

3.1   I NITIALIZING AN LLM WITH C ODE P RE - TRAINED M ODELS

We explore different initializations of pre-trained models to understand if using an LM with a large
portion of code data as initialization improves the performance. These key ablations, along with
their token counts, are summarized in Table 2. We briefly describe below:

       • Text LM (TEXT- ONLY BASELINE): Pre-trained model from scratch using glorot-normal
         initialization (Glorot et al., 2011) on the text-only data for 400B tokens.
       • Balanced LM (BALANCED - ONLY): A model is trained with an equal ratio of code and text
         data (50% text and 50% code) in pre-training for 400B tokens.
       • Balance-initialized Text LM (BALANCED → TEXT): This model is initialized with a bal-
         anced LM (50% text and 50% code) and further pre-trained using text data for 200B tokens.
       • Code-initialized Text LM (CODE → TEXT): Different from other variants, this model is
         initialized with a code-LM which is pre-trained on a code dataset for 200B tokens. The
         code dataset contains a mixture of 80% code data and 20% markup-style code data. We
         then continually pre-train this model on text for another 200B tokens.4

Natural Language Reasoning As seen in Figure 2, initializing with 100% code pre-trained model
(code→text) has the best performance for NL Reasoning benchmarks, and is closely followed
by the balanced→text model. The code→text model and balanced→text model beat the
text-only baseline on NL reasoning tasks by 8.8% and 8.2% relative improvement respectively.
The balanced-only model improves upon the baseline by 3.2%. This shows that initialization
from a pre-trained model with a mix of code has a strong positive effect on NL reasoning tasks.
Further using a text mix with a small percentage of code for continual pre-training results in the best
performance as evidenced by both the code→text and balanced→text models.
World Knowledge For World Knowledge tasks, we see that the balanced→text model has the
best performance over all other variants, beating the code→text by 21% and text-only by
4.1% relative improvement. This suggests that performance on world knowledge tasks depends on
a more balanced data mixture for initialization and a larger proportion of text in the continual pre-
training stage. Overall, code data is still beneficial compared to text-only pre-training for world
knowledge tasks.

   4
     We use a 10% of code in text mixture data during continual pre-training of code-initialized models
(balanced→text, code→text) to avoid a full distribution shift and maintain the benefits of code.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Impact of model scale on different tasks. We observe that scale provides pronounced
gains across tasks of up-to 2.7x increase, however the overall trend remains the same across scales
showing consistency of findings across model sizes.


Trade-offs between NL tasks and code generation For code generation, balanced-only
achieves the best performance, where we see a 46.7% and 54.5% relative improvement over
balanced→text and code→text. This is expected as balanced-only includes 50% code
throughout pre-training. However, this model trades off better code generation with lower perfor-
mance in NL tasks. code→text and balanced→text achieves 2.9% and 2.3% relative increase
in NL reasoning, and 17.3% and 22.2% relative increase in world knowledge respectively compared
to balanced-only.
Generative quality win-rates comparison Additionally, we compare the generative performance
of each code variant (code→text and balanced-only) against the text-only model. We
report win-rates and observe that the presence of code has a strong positive impact on generation
quality. Both code→text and balanced-only) models beat the text-only variant by a
6.6% difference in win-loss rates. We again note that Dolly-200-English evaluation set we use for
win-rate calculation is curated to reflect open ended questions and is a non-code evaluation. This
confirms that code data in the pre-training mix does not only improves reasoning but also helps the
model produce better quality generations.5

3.2        I MPACT OF S CALE

To understand if the findings of Section 3.1 transfer to larger models, we train 2.8B parameters
models with the same token budget following the same model variants at 470M scale. Figure 3
shows the results of 2.8B models in comparison with 470M results.
Comparison between 2.8B and 470M models Scaling model size to 2.8B enables higher perfor-
mance for all model variants in all task categories, compared to 470M results. In terms of average
performance across NL reasoning and world knowledge, balanced→text model benefits from
scaling-up by a 33.1% increase relative to the same model with 470M size. The improvement for
code→text and balanced-only are 31.7% and 30% relative increase.
We find that the improvements in NL reasoning are relatively modest with 5.3%, 9.2%, and 5.2%
relative gains for balanced→text, code→text, and balanced-only respectively. However,
world knowledge and code performance nearly triples for all the model variants. In particular,
2.8B balanced→text results increase by 2.7x in world knowledge and 2.5x in code evaluation
compared to 470M.
Trends between model variants in 2.8B Notably, in terms of initialization with code pre-trained
models, the same trends seen in 470M parameter scale hold at 2.8B models. code→text and
balanced→text models improve over balanced models by 6.9% and 6.1% relative gain, how-
ever, fall significantly behind in code generation performance with 43.1% and 46.3% relative drop.
These results show that the trade-off between NL tasks and code generation increases with the model
size. Overall our experiments scaling to a larger size shows that our results hold and are consistent
with the trends we observe at 470M parameter ablations.
      5
          We include the extended Win-rates for these experiments in Appendix E.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Impact of the proportion of code in pre-training for different tasks: We observe that
as the code proportion of pre-training increases, the performance on code tasks increases linearly.
In contrast, there is more sensitivity for NL reasoning and World knowledge tasks and an optimal
range of code proportions where benefits are most tangible. Model size is 470M parameters and
trained for 200B tokens.


3.3   C ODE DATA P ROPORTION IN P RE - TRAINING

In these experiments, we ablate the proportions of code data in the pre-training mixture to understand
what is the optimal amount of code to maximize performance on non-code tasks. Here, we focus
on the first phase of pre-training with random initialization. We train six models for 200B tokens
with increasing code proportions: 0%, 25%, 50%, 75%, 90%, and 100%. The remaining proportion
is filled with text data. For each variant, we train a new model independently in order to carefully
ablate the impact of varying code proportions.
Natural Language Reasoning and World Knowledge For NL Reasoning, as the amount of code
increases, in Figure 4 we see an increase in performance compared to a text-only (0% code) model.
The best performance is from a model with 25% code and 75% text, with a 3.4% relative improve-
ment over a model with 0% code. While performance is maintained up to 75% code, it starts to
rapidly erode at higher proportions with a sharp relative drop of 18.3% when the model is trained on
100% code compared to a model with no code.
For World Knowledge tasks, we see an inverse relationship with increasing the amount of code. As
seen in Figure 4 middle inset, there is a slight relative drop of 3.4% at 25% code and this relative
drop worsens to 31% at 75% code compared to the no-code model. The fully code model (100%
code) is unable to perform in world knowledge task (86% drop relative to text-only) as there are no
data sources to acquire the required knowledge in the pre-training mix.
Performance on Code For code evaluation, there is a linear increase in performance as the amount
of code increases, with the best model being a code-only model. As observable in Figure 4 right
inset, the 100% code leads to a 2.6x increase in the code benchmarks compared to the 25% code
model. As expected, for the model with 0% code, the average pass@1 score drops to 0.


3.4   I NFLUENCE OF C ODE Q UALITY AND P ROPERTIES ON G ENERAL P ERFORMANCE

In this section, we investigate the properties of code data by varying its quality and composition. We
study this firstly (a) from the perspective of training from scratch, as we want to isolate the exact
effects of different properties of code data. Secondly (b), we incorporate the best variant of the code
data (high-quality synthetic code), in our continual pre-training experiments to see if the impact of
the code quality transfer. We report performance on NL reasoning and Code tasks.
We study the effect of the following properties: (1) M ARKUP - STYLE DATA: we separate markup-
style programming languages (§ 2.1) from the rest of web-based code (Appendix C.3). We replace
20% of code-only tokens with markup-style tokens. (2) C ODE A DJACENT DATA: Instead of us-
ing purely web-based code data, we replaced 15% percentage of code tokens with code-adjacent
datasets - GitHub issues (5%), StackExchange (5%) and Jupyter Notebooks (5%), resulting in a
code-adjacent model. (3) C ODE Q UALITY: To control the quality of the code, we replaced
10% of existing code tokens with a synthetically generated high-quality code dataset. The remain-
ing proportions of web-based code data are kept the same, resulting in a code-synth model.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                (a) Code-only Pre-training                         (b) Continual Pre-training

Figure 5: Impact of using different properties of code data: (a) As the most impactful code data
source, synthetically generated high-quality code improves NL reasoning and code performance for
code pre-training. (b) These improvements with synthetically generated high-quality code data also
transfer the continual pre-training setting. All models are of size 470M parameters.


Code-only pre-training We compare the above variants to a model that is trained only on web-
based code data (code) from the stack dataset (Kocetkov et al., 2022), which forms our baseline
model. All the variants are pre-trained using the same amount of tokens (200B) for fair comparison.
In Figure 5a, we evaluate the impact of code quality and code composition. We observe that across
all variants, including diverse code sources and also synthetic code leads to gains in natural language
performance relative to code, however, only synthetically generated code improves the code bench-
marks. We relate this to our code evaluation where we measure performance in python, thus different
programming languages or code-adjacent data slightly decrease the results. Here, code+markup
and code+adjacent leads to 2.8% and 6.3% relative improvement in NL reasoning compared to
code (web-code-only), but cause 15.7% and 9.4% drop in code evaluation.
Our synthetic code data (code+synth) is the most impactful ablation. It is particularly impres-
sive given its relatively small share of the overall dataset. Despite a small weighting of 10%, the
inclusion of synthetic data leads to relative improvements of 9% on NL reasoning, and 44.9% on
code benchmarks compared to the baseline of web-code-only. We note that the lifts observed for
synthetic data are even more impressive given the limited amount of synthetic data available com-
pared to code-adjacent data (3.2B tokens vs 21.4B tokens) or code+markup data (3.2B tokens vs
40B tokens), and the weighting during pre-training allocation (10% vs 15% vs 20% for synthetic
data, code-adjacent, code-markup respectively). This suggests a key future lever of improvement is
increasing the proportion of such high-quality code data sources.
Continual pre-training Here, based on the findings from code-only pre-training, we incorporated
code+synth into our best continual pre-training variant (balanced+synth→text). We com-
pare this against the same variant without synthetic code data (balanced→text) to evaluate the
benefits of synthetic data. We use the same amount of code and text tokens in these experiments.
As shown in Figure 5b, balanced+synth→text achieves 2% and 35% relative improvement
over balanced→text in NL reasoning and code, respectively. This further confirms that even a
small percentage of a high-quality code data, not only improves performance in code pre-training
but also increases code and non-code performance after continual pre-training with text data.

3.5   C ODE IN P RE - TRAINING C OOLDOWN

In this section, we evaluate the impact of code at the final stage of pre-training. Here, we consider
cooldown, where we up-weight high-quality text, math, code, and instruct-style datasets. We change
the learning rate schedule from cosine-based to linear annealing with a final learning rate of 1e − 6.
We evaluate the impact of code in cooldown by comparing 3 models: a pre-trained model before
cooldown, cooldown without code data, and cooldown with 20% code data. For our pre-trained
model, we use balanced→text as it is our best pre-trained variant. We preserve the same token
budget across variants – 40B tokens which is 10% of the token budget of the pre-trained model.
Impact of code used during cooldown in different tasks In Figure 6a, we evaluate the impact of
code in cooldown on model performance in NL Reasoning, world knowledge, and code benchmarks.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   (a) Downstream tasks                               (b) Generative win-rates

Figure 6: Impact of code data in pre-training cooldown: Including code data in the cooldown
phase improves downstream relative to cooldown with no code. All cooldown variants benefit for
downstream tasks and especially generative quality. We find the largest gains from cooldown with
code, with the highest win-rates of 52.3 % over a model with no cooldown.


Across tasks, we find that a cooldown with code data is most beneficial with 3.6%, 10.1%, and 20%
in NL reasoning, world knowledge, and code relative to the model without cooldown.
In contrast, we find that cooldown without code does not provide any increases for both NL reason-
ing and Code, while providing a relative improvement of 3.1% in World Knowledge tasks compared
to no cooldown, showing the critical role of code data in also cooldown phase of pre-training.
Generative win-rates after cooldown As expected, cooldown has a significant impact on gener-
ative performance as measured by win-rates (seen in Figure 6b). This is because we up-weight
high-quality data sources in pre-training mix including instruction-style datasets such as Dolly v2
(Conover et al., 2023). Both cooldown variants (cooldown w/o code, cooldown w/ code)
beat no-cooldown model by large win-rates (48.2% and 52.3%) as seen in Figure 6b. Compar-
ing the cooldown variants, including code leads an additional 4.1% generative win-rates against
no-cooldown compared to cooldown without code.

3.6   C OMPARING P RE -T RAINING R ECIPES

Considering all our experiments, we summarize our findings and recommend recipes for pre-training
with code data. Table 2 (Appendix B) shows the different variants along with pre-training phases.
Best recipe for natural language tasks As seen in Sections 3.1, 3.3, and 3.5, including code in
all phases of pre-training provides improvements across all task categories. When looking at the
final recipes, we find that balanced→text model followed by cooldown that includes code data
corresponds to the best overall performance in natural language tasks considering NL reasoning,
world knowledge, and generative performance. Notably this model achieves the highest generative
win-rates with 37.7% vs 33.7 against text-only as shown in Figure 7.
Best recipe for code performance Among complete recipes shown in Table 2, balanced-only
provides the best performance in code benchmarks. This model achieves 20% relative gain com-
pared to second best code→text and 55% relative gain compared to balanced→text. How-
ever, balanced-only falls behind in natural language performance by 2.5% relative difference
and 5.0% win-rate difference (vs text-only), both compared to balanced→text.
Including code in all phases of pre-training is beneficial across our three task categories and gener-
ative performance. Our recommendation for the best overall performance is to include a balanced
mixture of code and text data during pre-training from scratch (§ 3.3), use a relatively lower code
percentage during continual pre-training (§ 3.1), and include code data into cooldown mixture. Fur-
ther, we recommend including high-quality code data during all phases of pre-training (§ 3.4).

4     R ELATED WORK
Understanding the impact of pre-training mixes Several works have studied the effects of data
age, quality, toxicity and domain of pre-training data (Longpre et al., 2023; Üstün et al., 2024). Sev-
eral works have looked at the impact of filtering (Raffel et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021; Penedo et al.,
2023), de-duping (Zhang et al., 2022) and data pruning (Lozhkov et al., 2024; Marion et al., 2023;


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Figure 7: Generative performance as measured by win-rates for variants with full-cooldown.


Chimoto et al., 2024; Boubdir et al., 2023). Furthermore, several works have considered the role of
synthetic data at improving performance (Shimabucoro et al., 2024; Dang et al., 2024; Aakanksha
et al., 2024) and helping bridge the gap in performance between open weights and proprietary mod-
els (Gunasekar et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b). In contrast to our work which focuses explicitly on
understanding the role of code, these studies focus on characteristics of training data as a whole.
Understanding the role of code Including code in the pre-training data mixture, even for mod-
els not specifically designed for code, has been a common practice in LLMs pre-training (Dubey
et al., 2024; Gemini-Team et al., 2024; Groeneveld et al., 2024). In addition to serving the pop-
ular use case in code completion and generation (Chen et al., 2021), previous studies suggest that
the addition of code improves the performance of LLMs on various NLP tasks, such as entity link-
ing (Kim et al., 2024) and commonsense reasoning (Madaan et al., 2022b)), mathematical reasoning
tasks (Liang et al., 2022; Madaan et al., 2022a; Gao et al., 2023; Shao et al., 2024), and general
reasoning capabilities (Muennighoff et al., 2023a; Fu & Khot, 2022; Ma et al., 2023). Muennighoff
et al. (2023b) demonstrated Python code data can be used to improve pretraining performance. They
focused on a low-resource pre-training regime with limited data and an evaluation set-up limited to
perplexity evaluations. Zhang et al. (2024) investigated the impact of code on LLMs’ internal rea-
soning capability across various tasks and model families. They only focus on the effect of code
in the supervised fine-tuning stage (SFT) primarily measuring the impact on reasoning. Zhu et al.
(2024) report the performance of their DeepSeek-Coder-V2 models on General Natural Language
benchmarks. They compare chat and instruct models, and do not investigate different phases of
pre-training and properties of code.
To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first study that presents a thorough investigation of
the impact of code in pre-training on non-code tasks. Our experiment spans several axes and a
exhaustive evaluation suite, with costly ablations at scale including model initialization strategies,
different proportions and properties of code data, and model scales.

5    C ONCLUSION
We perform a first-of-its-kind systematic study to answer “what is the impact of code data used in
pre-training on a large variety of downstream tasks beyond code generation”. We focus, not just on
code performance but on downstream natural language performance, as well as generative quality
using LLM-as-a-judge win-rates. We conduct ablations that look at initialization, proportions of
code, quality and properties of code, and role of code in pre-training cooldown. We find across all
scales of experiments that code provides critical improvements to performance on non-code tasks.
Compared to text-only pre-training, for our best variant, the addition of code results in relative
increase of 8.2% in natural language (NL) reasoning, 4.2% in world knowledge, 6.6% improvement
in generative win-rates, and a 12x boost in code performance respectively. Further performing
cooldown with code, improves 3.6%, 10.1%, and 20% in NL reasoning, world knowledge, and
code relative to the model before cooldown and leads 52.3% generative win-rates. Finally, we find
that adding a small amount of high-quality synthetic data can have an outsized impact on both NL
reasoning (9% relative increase) and code performance (44.9% relative increase).


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Aakanksha, Arash Ahmadian, Beyza Ermis, Seraphina Goldfarb-Tarrant, Julia Kreutzer, Marzieh
  Fadaee, and Sara Hooker. The multilingual alignment prism: Aligning global and local prefer-
  ences to reduce harm, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.18682.
Viraat Aryabumi, John Dang, Dwarak Talupuru, Saurabh Dash, David Cairuz, Hangyu Lin, Bharat
  Venkitesh, Madeline Smith, Jon Ander Campos, Yi Chern Tan, Kelly Marchisio, Max Bartolo, Se-
  bastian Ruder, Acyr Locatelli, Julia Kreutzer, Nick Frosst, Aidan Gomez, Phil Blunsom, Marzieh
  Fadaee, Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. Aya 23: Open weight releases to further multilingual
  progress, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15032.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and Charles Sutton. Program synthesis with large
  language models, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07732.
Meriem Boubdir, Edward Kim, Beyza Ermis, Marzieh Fadaee, and Sara Hooker. Which prompts
 make the difference? data prioritization for efficient human llm evaluation, 2023. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2310.14424.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/google/jax.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv,
  abs/2005.14165, 2020.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
 Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
 Grew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.
Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Yue Wu, Quanquan Gu, and Yuanzhi Li. Towards understanding the
  mixture-of-experts layer in deep learning. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
  and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=MaYzugDmQV.
Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung yi Lee. Can large language models be an alternative to human evalu-
  ations?, 2023.
Everlyn Asiko Chimoto, Jay Gala, Orevaoghene Ahia, Julia Kreutzer, Bruce A. Bassett, and Sara
  Hooker. Critical learning periods: Leveraging early training dynamics for efficient data pruning,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19462.
Eunsol Choi, He He, Mohit Iyyer, Mark Yatskar, Wen-tau Yih, Yejin Choi, Percy Liang, and
  Luke Zettlemoyer. QuAC: Question answering in context. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-
  ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2174–2184, Brussels, Bel-
  gium, October-November 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  D18-1241. URL https://aclanthology.org/D18-1241.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02311.
Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina
  Toutanova. BoolQ: Exploring the surprising difficulty of natural yes/no questions. In Proceedings
  of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 2924–2936,
  Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/N19-1300. URL https://aclanthology.org/N19-1300.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge.
  arXiv:1803.05457v1, 2018.
Together Computer. Redpajama: an open dataset for training large language models, 2023. URL
  https://github.com/togethercomputer/RedPajama-Data.
Mike Conover, Matt Hayes, Ankit Mathur, Jianwei Xie, Jun Wan, Sam Shah, Ali Ghodsi, Patrick
 Wendell, Matei Zaharia, and Reynold Xin. Free dolly: Introducing the world’s first truly open
 instruction-tuned llm, 2023. URL https://www.databricks.com/blog/2023/04/
 12/dolly-first-open-commercially-viable-instruction-tuned-llm.
John Dang, Arash Ahmadian, Kelly Marchisio, Julia Kreutzer, Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. Rlhf
  can speak many languages: Unlocking multilingual preference optimization for llms, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.02552.
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Mandy Simons, and Judith Tonhauser. The commitmentbank: Inves-
 tigating projection in naturally occurring discourse, 2019.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
  Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
  Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere,
  Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
  Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
  Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
  Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
  Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-
  son, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah
  Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan
  Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy
  Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak,
  Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Al-
  wala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini,
  Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der
  Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
  Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Man-
  nat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova,


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal,
  Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur
  Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhar-
  gava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
  Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
  Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sum-
  baly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa,
  Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang,
  Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende,
  Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney
  Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom,
  Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta,
  Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petro-
  vic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang,
  Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur,
  Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre
  Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha
  Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay
  Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda
  Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew
  Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita
  Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh
  Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De
  Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon
  Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina
  Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris
  Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel
  Li, Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Di-
  ana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa
  Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Es-
  teban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel,
  Francesco Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Flo-
  rez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Her-
  man, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou,
  Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren,
  Hunter Goldman, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman,
  James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer
  Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe
  Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie
  Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun
  Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal
  Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva,
  Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian
  Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson,
  Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Ke-
  neally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel
  Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mo-
  hammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy-
  ata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,
  Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli,
  Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux,
  Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao,
  Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li,
  Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott,
  Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Sa-
  tadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lind-
  say, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang
  Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen
  Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho,


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser,
  Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Tim-
  othy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan,
  Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu,
  Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xi-
  aocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao,
  Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin
  Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick,
  Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.

Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos
  Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for
  methods that learn from human feedback, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.
  14387.

Hao Fu, Yao; Peng and Tushar Khot. How does gpt obtain its ability? tracing emergent abilities
  of language models to their sources. Yao Fu’s Notion, Dec 2022. URL https://yaofu.
  notion.site/b9a57ac0fcf74f30a1ab9e3e36fa1dc1?pvs=25.

Jinlan Fu, See-Kiong Ng, Zhengbao Jiang, and Pengfei Liu. Gptscore: Evaluate as you desire, 2023.

Yifu Gao, Yongquan He, Zhigang Kan, Yi Han, Linbo Qiao, and Dongsheng Li. Learning joint
  structural and temporal contextualized knowledge embeddings for temporal knowledge graph
  completion. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp. 417–
  430, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.28.

Gemini-Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut,
  Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M. Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, David Silver, Melvin Johnson,
  Ioannis Antonoglou, Julian Schrittwieser, Amelia Glaese, Jilin Chen, Emily Pitler, Timothy Lilli-
  crap, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, James Molloy, Michael Isard, Paul R. Barham, Tom Hen-
  nigan, Benjamin Lee, Fabio Viola, Malcolm Reynolds, Yuanzhong Xu, Ryan Doherty, Eli Collins,
  Clemens Meyer, Eliza Rutherford, Erica Moreira, Kareem Ayoub, Megha Goel, Jack Krawczyk,
  Cosmo Du, Ed Chi, Heng-Tze Cheng, Eric Ni, Purvi Shah, Patrick Kane, Betty Chan, Manaal
  Faruqui, Aliaksei Severyn, Hanzhao Lin, YaGuang Li, Yong Cheng, Abe Ittycheriah, Mahdis
  Mahdieh, Mia Chen, Pei Sun, Dustin Tran, Sumit Bagri, Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Jeremiah
  Liu, Andras Orban, Fabian Güra, Hao Zhou, Xinying Song, Aurelien Boffy, Harish Ganapa-
  thy, Steven Zheng, HyunJeong Choe, Ágoston Weisz, Tao Zhu, Yifeng Lu, Siddharth Gopal,
  Jarrod Kahn, Maciej Kula, Jeff Pitman, Rushin Shah, Emanuel Taropa, Majd Al Merey, Mar-
  tin Baeuml, Zhifeng Chen, Laurent El Shafey, Yujing Zhang, Olcan Sercinoglu, George Tucker,
  Enrique Piqueras, Maxim Krikun, Iain Barr, Nikolay Savinov, Ivo Danihelka, Becca Roelofs,
  Anaı̈s White, Anders Andreassen, Tamara von Glehn, Lakshman Yagati, Mehran Kazemi, Lu-
  cas Gonzalez, Misha Khalman, Jakub Sygnowski, Alexandre Frechette, Charlotte Smith, Laura
  Culp, Lev Proleev, Yi Luan, Xi Chen, James Lottes, Nathan Schucher, Federico Lebron, Alban
  Rrustemi, Natalie Clay, Phil Crone, Tomas Kocisky, Jeffrey Zhao, Bartek Perz, Dian Yu, Heidi
  Howard, Adam Bloniarz, Jack W. Rae, Han Lu, Laurent Sifre, Marcello Maggioni, Fred Alcober,
  Dan Garrette, Megan Barnes, Shantanu Thakoor, Jacob Austin, Gabriel Barth-Maron, William
  Wong, Rishabh Joshi, Rahma Chaabouni, Deeni Fatiha, Arun Ahuja, Gaurav Singh Tomar, Evan
  Senter, Martin Chadwick, Ilya Kornakov, Nithya Attaluri, Iñaki Iturrate, Ruibo Liu, Yunxuan Li,
  Sarah Cogan, Jeremy Chen, Chao Jia, Chenjie Gu, Qiao Zhang, Jordan Grimstad, Ale Jakse Hart-
  man, Xavier Garcia, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Jacob Devlin, Michael Laskin, Diego
  de Las Casas, Dasha Valter, Connie Tao, Lorenzo Blanco, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, David Re-
  itter, Mianna Chen, Jenny Brennan, Clara Rivera, Sergey Brin, Shariq Iqbal, Gabriela Surita, Jane
  Labanowski, Abhi Rao, Stephanie Winkler, Emilio Parisotto, Yiming Gu, Kate Olszewska, Ravi
  Addanki, Antoine Miech, Annie Louis, Denis Teplyashin, Geoff Brown, Elliot Catt, Jan Bala-
  guer, Jackie Xiang, Pidong Wang, Zoe Ashwood, Anton Briukhov, Albert Webson, Sanjay Gana-
  pathy, Smit Sanghavi, Ajay Kannan, Ming-Wei Chang, Axel Stjerngren, Josip Djolonga, Yuting
  Sun, Ankur Bapna, Matthew Aitchison, Pedram Pejman, Henryk Michalewski, Tianhe Yu, Cindy
  Wang, Juliette Love, Junwhan Ahn, Dawn Bloxwich, Kehang Han, Peter Humphreys, Thibault

                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Sellam, James Bradbury, Varun Godbole, Sina Samangooei, Bogdan Damoc, Alex Kaskasoli,
  Sébastien M. R. Arnold, Vijay Vasudevan, Shubham Agrawal, Jason Riesa, Dmitry Lepikhin,
  Richard Tanburn, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Hyeontaek Lim, Sarah Hodkinson, Pranav Shyam, Johan
  Ferret, Steven Hand, Ankush Garg, Tom Le Paine, Jian Li, Yujia Li, Minh Giang, Alexander
  Neitz, Zaheer Abbas, Sarah York, Machel Reid, Elizabeth Cole, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Dipan-
  jan Das, Dominika Rogozińska, Vitaliy Nikolaev, Pablo Sprechmann, Zachary Nado, Lukas Zilka,
  Flavien Prost, Luheng He, Marianne Monteiro, Gaurav Mishra, Chris Welty, Josh Newlan, Dawei
  Jia, Miltiadis Allamanis, Clara Huiyi Hu, Raoul de Liedekerke, Justin Gilmer, Carl Saroufim,
  Shruti Rijhwani, Shaobo Hou, Disha Shrivastava, Anirudh Baddepudi, Alex Goldin, Adnan
  Ozturel, Albin Cassirer, Yunhan Xu, Daniel Sohn, Devendra Sachan, Reinald Kim Amplayo,
  Craig Swanson, Dessie Petrova, Shashi Narayan, Arthur Guez, Siddhartha Brahma, Jessica Lan-
  don, Miteyan Patel, Ruizhe Zhao, Kevin Villela, Luyu Wang, Wenhao Jia, Matthew Rahtz, Mai
  Giménez, Legg Yeung, James Keeling, Petko Georgiev, Diana Mincu, Boxi Wu, Salem Haykal,
  Rachel Saputro, Kiran Vodrahalli, James Qin, Zeynep Cankara, Abhanshu Sharma, Nick Fer-
  nando, Will Hawkins, Behnam Neyshabur, Solomon Kim, Adrian Hutter, Priyanka Agrawal, Alex
  Castro-Ros, George van den Driessche, Tao Wang, Fan Yang, Shuo yiin Chang, Paul Komarek,
  Ross McIlroy, Mario Lučić, Guodong Zhang, Wael Farhan, Michael Sharman, Paul Natsev, Paul
  Michel, Yamini Bansal, Siyuan Qiao, Kris Cao, Siamak Shakeri, Christina Butterfield, Justin
  Chung, Paul Kishan Rubenstein, Shivani Agrawal, Arthur Mensch, Kedar Soparkar, Karel Lenc,
  Timothy Chung, Aedan Pope, Loren Maggiore, Jackie Kay, Priya Jhakra, Shibo Wang, Joshua
  Maynez, Mary Phuong, Taylor Tobin, Andrea Tacchetti, Maja Trebacz, Kevin Robinson, Yash
  Katariya, Sebastian Riedel, Paige Bailey, Kefan Xiao, Nimesh Ghelani, Lora Aroyo, Ambrose
  Slone, Neil Houlsby, Xuehan Xiong, Zhen Yang, Elena Gribovskaya, Jonas Adler, Mateo Wirth,
  Lisa Lee, Music Li, Thais Kagohara, Jay Pavagadhi, Sophie Bridgers, Anna Bortsova, Sanjay
  Ghemawat, Zafarali Ahmed, Tianqi Liu, Richard Powell, Vijay Bolina, Mariko Iinuma, Polina
  Zablotskaia, James Besley, Da-Woon Chung, Timothy Dozat, Ramona Comanescu, Xiance Si,
  Jeremy Greer, Guolong Su, Martin Polacek, Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Simon Tokumine, Hexi-
  ang Hu, Elena Buchatskaya, Yingjie Miao, Mohamed Elhawaty, Aditya Siddhant, Nenad Toma-
  sev, Jinwei Xing, Christina Greer, Helen Miller, Shereen Ashraf, Aurko Roy, Zizhao Zhang, Ada
  Ma, Angelos Filos, Milos Besta, Rory Blevins, Ted Klimenko, Chih-Kuan Yeh, Soravit Chang-
  pinyo, Jiaqi Mu, Oscar Chang, Mantas Pajarskas, Carrie Muir, Vered Cohen, Charline Le Lan,
  Krishna Haridasan, Amit Marathe, Steven Hansen, Sholto Douglas, Rajkumar Samuel, Mingqiu
  Wang, Sophia Austin, Chang Lan, Jiepu Jiang, Justin Chiu, Jaime Alonso Lorenzo, Lars Lowe
  Sjösund, Sébastien Cevey, Zach Gleicher, Thi Avrahami, Anudhyan Boral, Hansa Srinivasan,
  Vittorio Selo, Rhys May, Konstantinos Aisopos, Léonard Hussenot, Livio Baldini Soares, Kate
  Baumli, Michael B. Chang, Adrià Recasens, Ben Caine, Alexander Pritzel, Filip Pavetic, Fabio
  Pardo, Anita Gergely, Justin Frye, Vinay Ramasesh, Dan Horgan, Kartikeya Badola, Nora Kass-
  ner, Subhrajit Roy, Ethan Dyer, Vı́ctor Campos Campos, Alex Tomala, Yunhao Tang, Dalia El
  Badawy, Elspeth White, Basil Mustafa, Oran Lang, Abhishek Jindal, Sharad Vikram, Zhitao
  Gong, Sergi Caelles, Ross Hemsley, Gregory Thornton, Fangxiaoyu Feng, Wojciech Stokowiec,
  Ce Zheng, Phoebe Thacker, Çağlar Ünlü, Zhishuai Zhang, Mohammad Saleh, James Svensson,
  Max Bileschi, Piyush Patil, Ankesh Anand, Roman Ring, Katerina Tsihlas, Arpi Vezer, Marco
  Selvi, Toby Shevlane, Mikel Rodriguez, Tom Kwiatkowski, Samira Daruki, Keran Rong, Allan
  Dafoe, Nicholas FitzGerald, Keren Gu-Lemberg, Mina Khan, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Marie Pel-
  lat, Vladimir Feinberg, James Cobon-Kerr, Tara Sainath, Maribeth Rauh, Sayed Hadi Hashemi,
  Richard Ives, Yana Hasson, Eric Noland, Yuan Cao, Nathan Byrd, Le Hou, Qingze Wang,
  Thibault Sottiaux, Michela Paganini, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Alexandre Moufarek, Samer Has-
  san, Kaushik Shivakumar, Joost van Amersfoort, Amol Mandhane, Pratik Joshi, Anirudh Goyal,
  Matthew Tung, Andrew Brock, Hannah Sheahan, Vedant Misra, Cheng Li, Nemanja Rakićević,
  Mostafa Dehghani, Fangyu Liu, Sid Mittal, Junhyuk Oh, Seb Noury, Eren Sezener, Fantine Huot,
  Matthew Lamm, Nicola De Cao, Charlie Chen, Sidharth Mudgal, Romina Stella, Kevin Brooks,
  Gautam Vasudevan, Chenxi Liu, Mainak Chain, Nivedita Melinkeri, Aaron Cohen, Venus Wang,
  Kristie Seymore, Sergey Zubkov, Rahul Goel, Summer Yue, Sai Krishnakumaran, Brian Albert,
  Nate Hurley, Motoki Sano, Anhad Mohananey, Jonah Joughin, Egor Filonov, Tomasz Kepa,
  Yomna Eldawy, Jiawern Lim, Rahul Rishi, Shirin Badiezadegan, Taylor Bos, Jerry Chang, Sanil
  Jain, Sri Gayatri Sundara Padmanabhan, Subha Puttagunta, Kalpesh Krishna, Leslie Baker, Nor-
  bert Kalb, Vamsi Bedapudi, Adam Kurzrok, Shuntong Lei, Anthony Yu, Oren Litvin, Xiang Zhou,
  Zhichun Wu, Sam Sobell, Andrea Siciliano, Alan Papir, Robby Neale, Jonas Bragagnolo, Tej
  Toor, Tina Chen, Valentin Anklin, Feiran Wang, Richie Feng, Milad Gholami, Kevin Ling, Lijuan


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Liu, Jules Walter, Hamid Moghaddam, Arun Kishore, Jakub Adamek, Tyler Mercado, Jonathan
  Mallinson, Siddhinita Wandekar, Stephen Cagle, Eran Ofek, Guillermo Garrido, Clemens Lom-
  briser, Maksim Mukha, Botu Sun, Hafeezul Rahman Mohammad, Josip Matak, Yadi Qian, Vikas
  Peswani, Pawel Janus, Quan Yuan, Leif Schelin, Oana David, Ankur Garg, Yifan He, Oleksii
  Duzhyi, Anton Älgmyr, Timothée Lottaz, Qi Li, Vikas Yadav, Luyao Xu, Alex Chinien, Rakesh
  Shivanna, Aleksandr Chuklin, Josie Li, Carrie Spadine, Travis Wolfe, Kareem Mohamed, Sub-
  habrata Das, Zihang Dai, Kyle He, Daniel von Dincklage, Shyam Upadhyay, Akanksha Mau-
  rya, Luyan Chi, Sebastian Krause, Khalid Salama, Pam G Rabinovitch, Pavan Kumar Reddy M,
  Aarush Selvan, Mikhail Dektiarev, Golnaz Ghiasi, Erdem Guven, Himanshu Gupta, Boyi Liu,
  Deepak Sharma, Idan Heimlich Shtacher, Shachi Paul, Oscar Akerlund, François-Xavier Aubet,
  Terry Huang, Chen Zhu, Eric Zhu, Elico Teixeira, Matthew Fritze, Francesco Bertolini, Liana-
  Eleonora Marinescu, Martin Bölle, Dominik Paulus, Khyatti Gupta, Tejasi Latkar, Max Chang,
  Jason Sanders, Roopa Wilson, Xuewei Wu, Yi-Xuan Tan, Lam Nguyen Thiet, Tulsee Doshi,
  Sid Lall, Swaroop Mishra, Wanming Chen, Thang Luong, Seth Benjamin, Jasmine Lee, Ewa
  Andrejczuk, Dominik Rabiej, Vipul Ranjan, Krzysztof Styrc, Pengcheng Yin, Jon Simon, Mal-
  colm Rose Harriott, Mudit Bansal, Alexei Robsky, Geoff Bacon, David Greene, Daniil Mirylenka,
  Chen Zhou, Obaid Sarvana, Abhimanyu Goyal, Samuel Andermatt, Patrick Siegler, Ben Horn,
  Assaf Israel, Francesco Pongetti, Chih-Wei ”Louis” Chen, Marco Selvatici, Pedro Silva, Kathie
  Wang, Jackson Tolins, Kelvin Guu, Roey Yogev, Xiaochen Cai, Alessandro Agostini, Maulik
  Shah, Hung Nguyen, Noah Ó Donnaile, Sébastien Pereira, Linda Friso, Adam Stambler, Adam
  Kurzrok, Chenkai Kuang, Yan Romanikhin, Mark Geller, ZJ Yan, Kane Jang, Cheng-Chun Lee,
  Wojciech Fica, Eric Malmi, Qijun Tan, Dan Banica, Daniel Balle, Ryan Pham, Yanping Huang,
  Diana Avram, Hongzhi Shi, Jasjot Singh, Chris Hidey, Niharika Ahuja, Pranab Saxena, Dan Doo-
  ley, Srividya Pranavi Potharaju, Eileen O’Neill, Anand Gokulchandran, Ryan Foley, Kai Zhao,
  Mike Dusenberry, Yuan Liu, Pulkit Mehta, Ragha Kotikalapudi, Chalence Safranek-Shrader, An-
  drew Goodman, Joshua Kessinger, Eran Globen, Prateek Kolhar, Chris Gorgolewski, Ali Ibrahim,
  Yang Song, Ali Eichenbaum, Thomas Brovelli, Sahitya Potluri, Preethi Lahoti, Cip Baetu, Ali
  Ghorbani, Charles Chen, Andy Crawford, Shalini Pal, Mukund Sridhar, Petru Gurita, Asier Mu-
  jika, Igor Petrovski, Pierre-Louis Cedoz, Chenmei Li, Shiyuan Chen, Niccolò Dal Santo, Sid-
  dharth Goyal, Jitesh Punjabi, Karthik Kappaganthu, Chester Kwak, Pallavi LV, Sarmishta Velury,
  Himadri Choudhury, Jamie Hall, Premal Shah, Ricardo Figueira, Matt Thomas, Minjie Lu, Ting
  Zhou, Chintu Kumar, Thomas Jurdi, Sharat Chikkerur, Yenai Ma, Adams Yu, Soo Kwak, Victor
  Ähdel, Sujeevan Rajayogam, Travis Choma, Fei Liu, Aditya Barua, Colin Ji, Ji Ho Park, Vincent
  Hellendoorn, Alex Bailey, Taylan Bilal, Huanjie Zhou, Mehrdad Khatir, Charles Sutton, Woj-
  ciech Rzadkowski, Fiona Macintosh, Konstantin Shagin, Paul Medina, Chen Liang, Jinjing Zhou,
  Pararth Shah, Yingying Bi, Attila Dankovics, Shipra Banga, Sabine Lehmann, Marissa Bredesen,
  Zifan Lin, John Eric Hoffmann, Jonathan Lai, Raynald Chung, Kai Yang, Nihal Balani, Arthur
  Bražinskas, Andrei Sozanschi, Matthew Hayes, Héctor Fernández Alcalde, Peter Makarov, Will
  Chen, Antonio Stella, Liselotte Snijders, Michael Mandl, Ante Kärrman, Paweł Nowak, Xinyi
  Wu, Alex Dyck, Krishnan Vaidyanathan, Raghavender R, Jessica Mallet, Mitch Rudominer, Eric
  Johnston, Sushil Mittal, Akhil Udathu, Janara Christensen, Vishal Verma, Zach Irving, Andreas
  Santucci, Gamaleldin Elsayed, Elnaz Davoodi, Marin Georgiev, Ian Tenney, Nan Hua, Geoffrey
  Cideron, Edouard Leurent, Mahmoud Alnahlawi, Ionut Georgescu, Nan Wei, Ivy Zheng, Dylan
  Scandinaro, Heinrich Jiang, Jasper Snoek, Mukund Sundararajan, Xuezhi Wang, Zack Ontiveros,
  Itay Karo, Jeremy Cole, Vinu Rajashekhar, Lara Tumeh, Eyal Ben-David, Rishub Jain, Jonathan
  Uesato, Romina Datta, Oskar Bunyan, Shimu Wu, John Zhang, Piotr Stanczyk, Ye Zhang, David
  Steiner, Subhajit Naskar, Michael Azzam, Matthew Johnson, Adam Paszke, Chung-Cheng Chiu,
  Jaume Sanchez Elias, Afroz Mohiuddin, Faizan Muhammad, Jin Miao, Andrew Lee, Nino Vieil-
  lard, Jane Park, Jiageng Zhang, Jeff Stanway, Drew Garmon, Abhijit Karmarkar, Zhe Dong, Jong
  Lee, Aviral Kumar, Luowei Zhou, Jonathan Evens, William Isaac, Geoffrey Irving, Edward Loper,
  Michael Fink, Isha Arkatkar, Nanxin Chen, Izhak Shafran, Ivan Petrychenko, Zhe Chen, John-
  son Jia, Anselm Levskaya, Zhenkai Zhu, Peter Grabowski, Yu Mao, Alberto Magni, Kaisheng
  Yao, Javier Snaider, Norman Casagrande, Evan Palmer, Paul Suganthan, Alfonso Castaño, Irene
  Giannoumis, Wooyeol Kim, Mikołaj Rybiński, Ashwin Sreevatsa, Jennifer Prendki, David So-
  ergel, Adrian Goedeckemeyer, Willi Gierke, Mohsen Jafari, Meenu Gaba, Jeremy Wiesner, Di-
  ana Gage Wright, Yawen Wei, Harsha Vashisht, Yana Kulizhskaya, Jay Hoover, Maigo Le, Lu Li,
  Chimezie Iwuanyanwu, Lu Liu, Kevin Ramirez, Andrey Khorlin, Albert Cui, Tian LIN, Mar-
  cus Wu, Ricardo Aguilar, Keith Pallo, Abhishek Chakladar, Ginger Perng, Elena Allica Abellan,
  Mingyang Zhang, Ishita Dasgupta, Nate Kushman, Ivo Penchev, Alena Repina, Xihui Wu, Tom


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  van der Weide, Priya Ponnapalli, Caroline Kaplan, Jiri Simsa, Shuangfeng Li, Olivier Dousse,
  Fan Yang, Jeff Piper, Nathan Ie, Rama Pasumarthi, Nathan Lintz, Anitha Vijayakumar, Daniel
  Andor, Pedro Valenzuela, Minnie Lui, Cosmin Paduraru, Daiyi Peng, Katherine Lee, Shuyuan
  Zhang, Somer Greene, Duc Dung Nguyen, Paula Kurylowicz, Cassidy Hardin, Lucas Dixon, Lili
  Janzer, Kiam Choo, Ziqiang Feng, Biao Zhang, Achintya Singhal, Dayou Du, Dan McKinnon,
  Natasha Antropova, Tolga Bolukbasi, Orgad Keller, David Reid, Daniel Finchelstein, Maria Abi
  Raad, Remi Crocker, Peter Hawkins, Robert Dadashi, Colin Gaffney, Ken Franko, Anna Bu-
  lanova, Rémi Leblond, Shirley Chung, Harry Askham, Luis C. Cobo, Kelvin Xu, Felix Fischer,
  Jun Xu, Christina Sorokin, Chris Alberti, Chu-Cheng Lin, Colin Evans, Alek Dimitriev, Han-
  nah Forbes, Dylan Banarse, Zora Tung, Mark Omernick, Colton Bishop, Rachel Sterneck, Rohan
  Jain, Jiawei Xia, Ehsan Amid, Francesco Piccinno, Xingyu Wang, Praseem Banzal, Daniel J.
  Mankowitz, Alex Polozov, Victoria Krakovna, Sasha Brown, MohammadHossein Bateni, Den-
  nis Duan, Vlad Firoiu, Meghana Thotakuri, Tom Natan, Matthieu Geist, Ser tan Girgin, Hui Li,
  Jiayu Ye, Ofir Roval, Reiko Tojo, Michael Kwong, James Lee-Thorp, Christopher Yew, Danila
  Sinopalnikov, Sabela Ramos, John Mellor, Abhishek Sharma, Kathy Wu, David Miller, Nico-
  las Sonnerat, Denis Vnukov, Rory Greig, Jennifer Beattie, Emily Caveness, Libin Bai, Julian
  Eisenschlos, Alex Korchemniy, Tomy Tsai, Mimi Jasarevic, Weize Kong, Phuong Dao, Zeyu
  Zheng, Frederick Liu, Fan Yang, Rui Zhu, Tian Huey Teh, Jason Sanmiya, Evgeny Gladchenko,
  Nejc Trdin, Daniel Toyama, Evan Rosen, Sasan Tavakkol, Linting Xue, Chen Elkind, Oliver
  Woodman, John Carpenter, George Papamakarios, Rupert Kemp, Sushant Kafle, Tanya Grunina,
  Rishika Sinha, Alice Talbert, Diane Wu, Denese Owusu-Afriyie, Cosmo Du, Chloe Thornton,
  Jordi Pont-Tuset, Pradyumna Narayana, Jing Li, Saaber Fatehi, John Wieting, Omar Ajmeri, Be-
  nigno Uria, Yeongil Ko, Laura Knight, Amélie Héliou, Ning Niu, Shane Gu, Chenxi Pang, Yeqing
  Li, Nir Levine, Ariel Stolovich, Rebeca Santamaria-Fernandez, Sonam Goenka, Wenny Yustalim,
  Robin Strudel, Ali Elqursh, Charlie Deck, Hyo Lee, Zonglin Li, Kyle Levin, Raphael Hoffmann,
  Dan Holtmann-Rice, Olivier Bachem, Sho Arora, Christy Koh, Soheil Hassas Yeganeh, Siim
  Põder, Mukarram Tariq, Yanhua Sun, Lucian Ionita, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, Pouya Tafti, Zhiyu
  Liu, Anmol Gulati, Jasmine Liu, Xinyu Ye, Bart Chrzaszcz, Lily Wang, Nikhil Sethi, Tianrun
  Li, Ben Brown, Shreya Singh, Wei Fan, Aaron Parisi, Joe Stanton, Vinod Koverkathu, Christo-
  pher A. Choquette-Choo, Yunjie Li, TJ Lu, Abe Ittycheriah, Prakash Shroff, Mani Varadarajan,
  Sanaz Bahargam, Rob Willoughby, David Gaddy, Guillaume Desjardins, Marco Cornero, Brona
  Robenek, Bhavishya Mittal, Ben Albrecht, Ashish Shenoy, Fedor Moiseev, Henrik Jacobsson,
  Alireza Ghaffarkhah, Morgane Rivière, Alanna Walton, Clément Crepy, Alicia Parrish, Zongwei
  Zhou, Clement Farabet, Carey Radebaugh, Praveen Srinivasan, Claudia van der Salm, Andreas
  Fidjeland, Salvatore Scellato, Eri Latorre-Chimoto, Hanna Klimczak-Plucińska, David Bridson,
  Dario de Cesare, Tom Hudson, Piermaria Mendolicchio, Lexi Walker, Alex Morris, Matthew
  Mauger, Alexey Guseynov, Alison Reid, Seth Odoom, Lucia Loher, Victor Cotruta, Madhavi
  Yenugula, Dominik Grewe, Anastasia Petrushkina, Tom Duerig, Antonio Sanchez, Steve Yad-
  lowsky, Amy Shen, Amir Globerson, Lynette Webb, Sahil Dua, Dong Li, Surya Bhupatiraju, Dan
  Hurt, Haroon Qureshi, Ananth Agarwal, Tomer Shani, Matan Eyal, Anuj Khare, Shreyas Ram-
  mohan Belle, Lei Wang, Chetan Tekur, Mihir Sanjay Kale, Jinliang Wei, Ruoxin Sang, Brennan
  Saeta, Tyler Liechty, Yi Sun, Yao Zhao, Stephan Lee, Pandu Nayak, Doug Fritz, Manish Reddy
  Vuyyuru, John Aslanides, Nidhi Vyas, Martin Wicke, Xiao Ma, Evgenii Eltyshev, Nina Martin,
  Hardie Cate, James Manyika, Keyvan Amiri, Yelin Kim, Xi Xiong, Kai Kang, Florian Luisier,
  Nilesh Tripuraneni, David Madras, Mandy Guo, Austin Waters, Oliver Wang, Joshua Ainslie,
  Jason Baldridge, Han Zhang, Garima Pruthi, Jakob Bauer, Feng Yang, Riham Mansour, Jason
  Gelman, Yang Xu, George Polovets, Ji Liu, Honglong Cai, Warren Chen, XiangHai Sheng,
  Emily Xue, Sherjil Ozair, Christof Angermueller, Xiaowei Li, Anoop Sinha, Weiren Wang, Julia
  Wiesinger, Emmanouil Koukoumidis, Yuan Tian, Anand Iyer, Madhu Gurumurthy, Mark Gold-
  enson, Parashar Shah, MK Blake, Hongkun Yu, Anthony Urbanowicz, Jennimaria Palomaki,
  Chrisantha Fernando, Ken Durden, Harsh Mehta, Nikola Momchev, Elahe Rahimtoroghi, Maria
  Georgaki, Amit Raul, Sebastian Ruder, Morgan Redshaw, Jinhyuk Lee, Denny Zhou, Komal
  Jalan, Dinghua Li, Blake Hechtman, Parker Schuh, Milad Nasr, Kieran Milan, Vladimir Miku-
  lik, Juliana Franco, Tim Green, Nam Nguyen, Joe Kelley, Aroma Mahendru, Andrea Hu, Joshua
  Howland, Ben Vargas, Jeffrey Hui, Kshitij Bansal, Vikram Rao, Rakesh Ghiya, Emma Wang,
  Ke Ye, Jean Michel Sarr, Melanie Moranski Preston, Madeleine Elish, Steve Li, Aakash Kaku,
  Jigar Gupta, Ice Pasupat, Da-Cheng Juan, Milan Someswar, Tejvi M., Xinyun Chen, Aida Amini,
  Alex Fabrikant, Eric Chu, Xuanyi Dong, Amruta Muthal, Senaka Buthpitiya, Sarthak Jauhari, Nan
  Hua, Urvashi Khandelwal, Ayal Hitron, Jie Ren, Larissa Rinaldi, Shahar Drath, Avigail Dabush,


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Nan-Jiang Jiang, Harshal Godhia, Uli Sachs, Anthony Chen, Yicheng Fan, Hagai Taitelbaum,
  Hila Noga, Zhuyun Dai, James Wang, Chen Liang, Jenny Hamer, Chun-Sung Ferng, Chenel
  Elkind, Aviel Atias, Paulina Lee, Vı́t Listı́k, Mathias Carlen, Jan van de Kerkhof, Marcin Pikus,
  Krunoslav Zaher, Paul Müller, Sasha Zykova, Richard Stefanec, Vitaly Gatsko, Christoph Hirn-
  schall, Ashwin Sethi, Xingyu Federico Xu, Chetan Ahuja, Beth Tsai, Anca Stefanoiu, Bo Feng,
  Keshav Dhandhania, Manish Katyal, Akshay Gupta, Atharva Parulekar, Divya Pitta, Jing Zhao,
  Vivaan Bhatia, Yashodha Bhavnani, Omar Alhadlaq, Xiaolin Li, Peter Danenberg, Dennis Tu,
  Alex Pine, Vera Filippova, Abhipso Ghosh, Ben Limonchik, Bhargava Urala, Chaitanya Krishna
  Lanka, Derik Clive, Yi Sun, Edward Li, Hao Wu, Kevin Hongtongsak, Ianna Li, Kalind Thakkar,
  Kuanysh Omarov, Kushal Majmundar, Michael Alverson, Michael Kucharski, Mohak Patel, Mu-
  dit Jain, Maksim Zabelin, Paolo Pelagatti, Rohan Kohli, Saurabh Kumar, Joseph Kim, Swetha
  Sankar, Vineet Shah, Lakshmi Ramachandruni, Xiangkai Zeng, Ben Bariach, Laura Weidinger,
  Amar Subramanya, Sissie Hsiao, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Adam Sadovsky, Quoc
  Le, Trevor Strohman, Yonghui Wu, Slav Petrov, Jeffrey Dean, and Oriol Vinyals. Gemini: A
  family of highly capable multimodal models, 2024.
Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep sparse rectifier neural networks. In
  Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp.
  315–323, 2011.
Dirk Groeneveld, Iz Beltagy, Pete Walsh, Akshita Bhagia, Rodney Kinney, Oyvind Tafjord,
  Ananya Harsh Jha, Hamish Ivison, Ian Magnusson, Yizhong Wang, et al. Olmo: Accelerating the
  science of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00838, 2024.
Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth
  Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, et al. Textbooks are
  all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11644, 2023.
Srinivasan Iyer, Xi Victoria Lin, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Todor Mihaylov, Daniel Simig, Ping Yu,
  Kurt Shuster, Tianlu Wang, Qing Liu, Punit Singh Koura, et al. Opt-iml: Scaling language model
  instruction meta learning through the lens of generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.12017,
  2022.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. TriviaQA: A large scale dis-
 tantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
 nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
 1601–1611, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/P17-1147. URL https://aclanthology.org/P17-1147.
Norman P. Jouppi, Cliff Young, Nishant Patil, David A. Patterson, Gaurav Agrawal, Raminder
  Bajwa, Sarah Bates, Suresh Bhatia, Nan Boden, Al Borchers, Rick Boyle, Pierre-luc Cantin,
  Clifford Chao, Chris Clark, Jeremy Coriell, Mike Daley, Matt Dau, Jeffrey Dean, Ben Gelb,
  Tara Vazir Ghaemmaghami, Rajendra Gottipati, William Gulland, Robert Hagmann, C. Richard
  Ho, Doug Hogberg, John Hu, Robert Hundt, Dan Hurt, Julian Ibarz, Aaron Jaffey, Alek Jaworski,
  Alexander Kaplan, Harshit Khaitan, Daniel Killebrew, Andy Koch, Naveen Kumar, Steve Lacy,
  James Laudon, James Law, Diemthu Le, Chris Leary, Zhuyuan Liu, Kyle Lucke, Alan Lundin,
  Gordon MacKean, Adriana Maggiore, Maire Mahony, Kieran Miller, Rahul Nagarajan, Ravi
  Narayanaswami, Ray Ni, Kathy Nix, Thomas Norrie, Mark Omernick, Narayana Penukonda,
  Andy Phelps, Jonathan Ross, Matt Ross, Amir Salek, Emad Samadiani, Chris Severn, Gregory
  Sizikov, Matthew Snelham, Jed Souter, Dan Steinberg, Andy Swing, Mercedes Tan, Gregory
  Thorson, Bo Tian, Horia Toma, Erick Tuttle, Vijay Vasudevan, Richard Walter, Walter Wang,
  Eric Wilcox, and Doe Hyun Yoon. In-Datacenter Performance Analysis of a Tensor Processing
  Unit. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture,
  ISCA, 2017.
Najoung Kim, Sebastian Schuster, and Shubham Toshniwal. Code pretraining improves entity track-
  ing abilities of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.21068, 2024.
Denis Kocetkov, Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Jia Li, Chenghao Mou, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis,
  Yacine Jernite, Margaret Mitchell, Sean Hughes, Thomas Wolf, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Leandro von
  Werra, and Harm de Vries. The stack: 3 tb of permissively licensed source code. Preprint, 2022.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion
  Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav
  Petrov. Natural questions: A benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:453–466, 2019. doi: 10.1162/tacl\ a\ 00276. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00276.
Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, and Kristina Toutanova. Latent retrieval for weakly supervised
  open domain question answering. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 6086–6096, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1612. URL https://www.aclweb.org/
  anthology/P19-1612.
Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou,
  Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. Starcoder: may the source be with
  you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161, 2023a.
Yuanzhi Li, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee.
  Textbooks are all you need ii: phi-1.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05463, 2023b.
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian
  Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, et al. Holistic evaluation of language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09110, 2022.
Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. G-eval: Nlg
  evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment, 2023.
Shayne Longpre, Gregory Yauney, Emily Reif, Katherine Lee, Adam Roberts, Barret Zoph, Denny
  Zhou, Jason Wei, Kevin Robinson, David Mimno, and Daphne Ippolito. A pretrainer’s guide to
  training data: Measuring the effects of data age, domain coverage, quality, & toxicity. arXiv,
  abs/2305.13169, 2023.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization, 2019. URL https:
   //arxiv.org/abs/1711.05101.
Anton Lozhkov, Loubna Ben Allal, Leandro von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. Fineweb-edu, May 2024.
  URL https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceFW/fineweb-edu.
Yingwei Ma, Yue Liu, Yue Yu, Yuanliang Zhang, Yu Jiang, Changjian Wang, and Shanshan Li. At
  which training stage does code data help llms reasoning? arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16298, 2023.
Aman Madaan, Dheeraj Rajagopal, Niket Tandon, Yiming Yang, and Antoine Bosselut. Condi-
 tional set generation using seq2seq models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
 Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 4874–4896, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, De-
 cember 2022a. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.
 org/2022.emnlp-main.324.
Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Yiming Yang, and Graham Neubig. Language models of
 code are few-shot commonsense learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07128, 2022b.
Max Marion, Ahmet Üstün, Luiza Pozzobon, Alex Wang, Marzieh Fadaee, and Sara Hooker. When
 less is more: Investigating data pruning for pretraining llms at scale, 2023. URL https://
 arxiv.org/abs/2309.04564.
Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Nathanael Chambers, Xiaodong He, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Batra, Lucy Van-
  derwende, Pushmeet Kohli, and James Allen. A corpus and cloze evaluation for deeper under-
  standing of commonsense stories. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp.
  839–849, San Diego, California, June 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/N16-1098. URL https://aclanthology.org/N16-1098.
Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander M Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Aleksandra Piktus, Noua-
  mane Tazi, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin Raffel. Scaling data-constrained language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16264, 2023a.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander M. Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Aleksandra Piktus, Noua-
  mane Tazi, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin Raffel. Scaling data-constrained language
  models, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16264.
Niklas Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, Lintang Sutawika, Adam Roberts, Stella Biderman, Teven
  Le Scao, M Saiful Bari, Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Hailey Schoelkopf, Xiangru Tang,
  Dragomir Radev, Alham Fikri Aji, Khalid Almubarak, Samuel Albanie, Zaid Alyafeai, Albert
  Webson, Edward Raff, and Colin Raffel. Crosslingual generalization through multitask fine-
  tuning. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the
  61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
  pers), pp. 15991–16111, Toronto, Canada, July 2023c. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.891. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  acl-long.891.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Jupinder Parmar, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Joseph Jennings, Mostofa Patwary, Sandeep Subramanian,
  Dan Su, Chen Zhu, Deepak Narayanan, Aastha Jhunjhunwala, Ayush Dattagupta, Vibhu Jawa,
  Jiwei Liu, Ameya Mahabaleshwarkar, Osvald Nitski, Annika Brundyn, James Maki, Miguel
  Martinez, Jiaxuan You, John Kamalu, Patrick LeGresley, Denys Fridman, Jared Casper, Ash-
  wath Aithal, Oleksii Kuchaiev, Mohammad Shoeybi, Jonathan Cohen, and Bryan Catanzaro.
  Nemotron-4 15b technical report, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.16819.
Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Alessandro Cappelli,
  Hamza Alobeidli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The refinedweb
  dataset for falcon llm: Outperforming curated corpora with web data, and web data only, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models:
  Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.
Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford, Tom Hennigan,
  Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George van den Driessche, Lisa Anne Hendricks,
  Maribeth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl, Sumanth Dathathri, Saffron
  Huang, Jonathan Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia Creswell, Nat McAleese, Amy Wu,
  Erich Elsen, Siddhant Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Budden, Esme Sutherland, Karen
  Simonyan, Michela Paganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lorraine Li, Adhiguna Kun-
  coro, Aida Nematzadeh, Elena Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato, Angeliki Lazaridou, Arthur Men-
  sch, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Nikolai Grigorev, Doug Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux,
  Mantas Pajarskas, Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong, Daniel Toyama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Yu-
  jia Li, Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor Babuschkin, Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Au-
  relia Guy, Chris Jones, James Bradbury, Matthew Johnson, Blake Hechtman, Laura Weidinger,
  Iason Gabriel, William Isaac, Ed Lockhart, Simon Osindero, Laura Rimell, Chris Dyer, Oriol
  Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub, Jeff Stanway, Lorrayne Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
  and Geoffrey Irving. Scaling language models: Methods, analysis & insights from training go-
  pher, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.11446.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. arXiv e-prints, 2019.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. arXiv e-prints, abs/1910.10683, 2020.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yasaman Razeghi, Hamish Ivison, Sameer Singh, and Yanai Elazar. Backtracking mathematical
  reasoning of language models to the pretraining data. In The Second Tiny Papers Track at ICLR
  2024.

Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. Winogrande: An adver-
  sarial winograd schema challenge at scale, 2019.

Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan LeBras, and Yejin Choi. Socialiqa: Common-
 sense reasoning about social interactions. arXiv, abs/1904.09728, 2019.

Minjoon Seo, Tom Kwiatkowski, Ankur Parikh, Ali Farhadi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Phrase-
 indexed question answering: A new challenge for scalable document comprehension. In Pro-
 ceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
 559–564, Brussels, Belgium, October-November 2018. Association for Computational Linguis-
 tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1052. URL https://aclanthology.org/D18-1052.

Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li,
  Yu Wu, and Daya Guo. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.

Noam Shazeer. Glu variants improve transformer, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2002.05202.

Luı́sa Shimabucoro, Sebastian Ruder, Julia Kreutzer, Marzieh Fadaee, and Sara Hooker. Llm see,
  llm do: Guiding data generation to target non-differentiable objectives, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2407.01490.

Shivalika Singh, Freddie Vargus, Daniel Dsouza, Börje F. Karlsson, Abinaya Mahendiran, Wei-Yin
  Ko, Herumb Shandilya, Jay Patel, Deividas Mataciunas, Laura OMahony, Mike Zhang, Ramith
  Hettiarachchi, Joseph Wilson, Marina Machado, Luisa Souza Moura, Dominik Krzemiński,
  Hakimeh Fadaei, Irem Ergün, Ifeoma Okoh, Aisha Alaagib, Oshan Mudannayake, Zaid Alyafeai,
  Vu Minh Chien, Sebastian Ruder, Surya Guthikonda, Emad A. Alghamdi, Sebastian Gehrmann,
  Niklas Muennighoff, Max Bartolo, Julia Kreutzer, Ahmet Üstün, Marzieh Fadaee, and Sara
  Hooker. Aya dataset: An open-access collection for multilingual instruction tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.06619, 2024.

Daria Soboleva, Faisal Al-Khateeb, Robert Myers, Jacob R Steeves, Joel Hestness, and Nolan Dey.
  SlimPajama: A 627B token cleaned and deduplicated version of RedPajama, 2023. URL https:
  //huggingface.co/datasets/cerebras/SlimPajama-627B.

Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu,
  Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly
  capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
  arXiv, abs/2307.09288, 2023.

Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
  Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language
  understanding systems, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.00537.


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language
  Model. https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, May 2021.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. In
  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 13484–13508, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.754.
Johannes Welbl, Nelson F Liu, and Matt Gardner. Crowdsourcing multiple choice science questions.
  pp. 94–106, September 2017. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-4413. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/W17-4413.
Wikimedia. Wikimedia downloads. URL https://dumps.wikimedia.org.
BigScience Workshop, :, Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilić,
  Daniel Hesslow, Roman Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé,
  Jonathan Tow, Alexander M. Rush, Stella Biderman, Albert Webson, Pawan Sasanka Ammana-
  manchi, Thomas Wang, Benoı̂t Sagot, Niklas Muennighoff, Albert Villanova del Moral, Olatunji
  Ruwase, Rachel Bawden, Stas Bekman, Angelina McMillan-Major, Iz Beltagy, Huu Nguyen, Lu-
  cile Saulnier, Samson Tan, Pedro Ortiz Suarez, Victor Sanh, Hugo Laurençon, Yacine Jernite,
  Julien Launay, Margaret Mitchell, Colin Raffel, Aaron Gokaslan, Adi Simhi, Aitor Soroa, Al-
  ham Fikri Aji, Amit Alfassy, Anna Rogers, Ariel Kreisberg Nitzav, Canwen Xu, Chenghao Mou,
  Chris Emezue, Christopher Klamm, Colin Leong, Daniel van Strien, David Ifeoluwa Adelani,
  Dragomir Radev, Eduardo González Ponferrada, Efrat Levkovizh, Ethan Kim, Eyal Bar Natan,
  Francesco De Toni, Gérard Dupont, Germán Kruszewski, Giada Pistilli, Hady Elsahar, Hamza
  Benyamina, Hieu Tran, Ian Yu, Idris Abdulmumin, Isaac Johnson, Itziar Gonzalez-Dios, Javier
  de la Rosa, Jenny Chim, Jesse Dodge, Jian Zhu, Jonathan Chang, Jörg Frohberg, Joseph Tobing,
  Joydeep Bhattacharjee, Khalid Almubarak, Kimbo Chen, Kyle Lo, Leandro Von Werra, Leon
  Weber, Long Phan, Loubna Ben allal, Ludovic Tanguy, Manan Dey, Manuel Romero Muñoz,
  Maraim Masoud, Marı́a Grandury, Mario Šaško, Max Huang, Maximin Coavoux, Mayank Singh,
  Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Minh Chien Vu, Mohammad A. Jauhar, Mustafa Ghaleb, Nishant Subra-
  mani, Nora Kassner, Nurulaqilla Khamis, Olivier Nguyen, Omar Espejel, Ona de Gibert, Paulo
  Villegas, Peter Henderson, Pierre Colombo, Priscilla Amuok, Quentin Lhoest, Rheza Harliman,
  Rishi Bommasani, Roberto Luis López, Rui Ribeiro, Salomey Osei, Sampo Pyysalo, Sebastian
  Nagel, Shamik Bose, Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad, Shanya Sharma, Shayne Longpre, So-
  maieh Nikpoor, Stanislav Silberberg, Suhas Pai, Sydney Zink, Tiago Timponi Torrent, Timo
  Schick, Tristan Thrush, Valentin Danchev, Vassilina Nikoulina, Veronika Laippala, Violette Lep-
  ercq, Vrinda Prabhu, Zaid Alyafeai, Zeerak Talat, Arun Raja, Benjamin Heinzerling, Chenglei Si,
  Davut Emre Taşar, Elizabeth Salesky, Sabrina J. Mielke, Wilson Y. Lee, Abheesht Sharma, An-
  drea Santilli, Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Debajyoti Datta, Eliza Szczechla, Gunjan Chh-
  ablani, Han Wang, Harshit Pandey, Hendrik Strobelt, Jason Alan Fries, Jos Rozen, Leo Gao,
  Lintang Sutawika, M Saiful Bari, Maged S. Al-shaibani, Matteo Manica, Nihal Nayak, Ryan Tee-
  han, Samuel Albanie, Sheng Shen, Srulik Ben-David, Stephen H. Bach, Taewoon Kim, Tali Bers,
  Thibault Fevry, Trishala Neeraj, Urmish Thakker, Vikas Raunak, Xiangru Tang, Zheng-Xin Yong,
  Zhiqing Sun, Shaked Brody, Yallow Uri, Hadar Tojarieh, Adam Roberts, Hyung Won Chung,
  Jaesung Tae, Jason Phang, Ofir Press, Conglong Li, Deepak Narayanan, Hatim Bourfoune, Jared
  Casper, Jeff Rasley, Max Ryabinin, Mayank Mishra, Minjia Zhang, Mohammad Shoeybi, Myr-
  iam Peyrounette, Nicolas Patry, Nouamane Tazi, Omar Sanseviero, Patrick von Platen, Pierre
  Cornette, Pierre François Lavallée, Rémi Lacroix, Samyam Rajbhandari, Sanchit Gandhi, Shaden
  Smith, Stéphane Requena, Suraj Patil, Tim Dettmers, Ahmed Baruwa, Amanpreet Singh, Anas-
  tasia Cheveleva, Anne-Laure Ligozat, Arjun Subramonian, Aurélie Névéol, Charles Lovering,
  Dan Garrette, Deepak Tunuguntla, Ehud Reiter, Ekaterina Taktasheva, Ekaterina Voloshina, Eli
  Bogdanov, Genta Indra Winata, Hailey Schoelkopf, Jan-Christoph Kalo, Jekaterina Novikova,
  Jessica Zosa Forde, Jordan Clive, Jungo Kasai, Ken Kawamura, Liam Hazan, Marine Carpuat,
  Miruna Clinciu, Najoung Kim, Newton Cheng, Oleg Serikov, Omer Antverg, Oskar van der Wal,
  Rui Zhang, Ruochen Zhang, Sebastian Gehrmann, Shachar Mirkin, Shani Pais, Tatiana Shav-
  rina, Thomas Scialom, Tian Yun, Tomasz Limisiewicz, Verena Rieser, Vitaly Protasov, Vladislav
  Mikhailov, Yada Pruksachatkun, Yonatan Belinkov, Zachary Bamberger, Zdeněk Kasner, Alice
  Rueda, Amanda Pestana, Amir Feizpour, Ammar Khan, Amy Faranak, Ana Santos, Anthony


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Hevia, Antigona Unldreaj, Arash Aghagol, Arezoo Abdollahi, Aycha Tammour, Azadeh Haji-
  Hosseini, Bahareh Behroozi, Benjamin Ajibade, Bharat Saxena, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Daniel
  McDuff, Danish Contractor, David Lansky, Davis David, Douwe Kiela, Duong A. Nguyen, Ed-
  ward Tan, Emi Baylor, Ezinwanne Ozoani, Fatima Mirza, Frankline Ononiwu, Habib Rezane-
  jad, Hessie Jones, Indrani Bhattacharya, Irene Solaiman, Irina Sedenko, Isar Nejadgholi, Jesse
  Passmore, Josh Seltzer, Julio Bonis Sanz, Livia Dutra, Mairon Samagaio, Maraim Elbadri, Mar-
  got Mieskes, Marissa Gerchick, Martha Akinlolu, Michael McKenna, Mike Qiu, Muhammed
  Ghauri, Mykola Burynok, Nafis Abrar, Nazneen Rajani, Nour Elkott, Nour Fahmy, Olanre-
  waju Samuel, Ran An, Rasmus Kromann, Ryan Hao, Samira Alizadeh, Sarmad Shubber, Silas
  Wang, Sourav Roy, Sylvain Viguier, Thanh Le, Tobi Oyebade, Trieu Le, Yoyo Yang, Zach
  Nguyen, Abhinav Ramesh Kashyap, Alfredo Palasciano, Alison Callahan, Anima Shukla, An-
  tonio Miranda-Escalada, Ayush Singh, Benjamin Beilharz, Bo Wang, Caio Brito, Chenxi Zhou,
  Chirag Jain, Chuxin Xu, Clémentine Fourrier, Daniel León Periñán, Daniel Molano, Dian Yu,
  Enrique Manjavacas, Fabio Barth, Florian Fuhrimann, Gabriel Altay, Giyaseddin Bayrak, Gully
  Burns, Helena U. Vrabec, Imane Bello, Ishani Dash, Jihyun Kang, John Giorgi, Jonas Golde,
  Jose David Posada, Karthik Rangasai Sivaraman, Lokesh Bulchandani, Lu Liu, Luisa Shinzato,
  Madeleine Hahn de Bykhovetz, Maiko Takeuchi, Marc Pàmies, Maria A Castillo, Marianna
  Nezhurina, Mario Sänger, Matthias Samwald, Michael Cullan, Michael Weinberg, Michiel De
  Wolf, Mina Mihaljcic, Minna Liu, Moritz Freidank, Myungsun Kang, Natasha Seelam, Nathan
  Dahlberg, Nicholas Michio Broad, Nikolaus Muellner, Pascale Fung, Patrick Haller, Ramya
  Chandrasekhar, Renata Eisenberg, Robert Martin, Rodrigo Canalli, Rosaline Su, Ruisi Su, Samuel
  Cahyawijaya, Samuele Garda, Shlok S Deshmukh, Shubhanshu Mishra, Sid Kiblawi, Simon Ott,
  Sinee Sang-aroonsiri, Srishti Kumar, Stefan Schweter, Sushil Bharati, Tanmay Laud, Théo Gi-
  gant, Tomoya Kainuma, Wojciech Kusa, Yanis Labrak, Yash Shailesh Bajaj, Yash Venkatraman,
  Yifan Xu, Yingxin Xu, Yu Xu, Zhe Tan, Zhongli Xie, Zifan Ye, Mathilde Bras, Younes Belkada,
  and Thomas Wolf. Bloom: A 176b-parameter open-access multilingual language model, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05100.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Hellaswag: Can a ma-
  chine really finish your sentence? arXiv, abs/1905.07830, 2019.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models, 2022.
Xinlu Zhang, Zhiyu Zoey Chen, Xi Ye, Xianjun Yang, Lichang Chen, William Yang Wang, and
  Linda Ruth Petzold. Unveiling the impact of coding data instruction fine-tuning on large language
  models reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20535, 2024.
Qihao Zhu, Daya Guo, Zhihong Shao, Dejian Yang, Peiyi Wang, Runxin Xu, Y Wu, Yukun Li,
  Huazuo Gao, Shirong Ma, et al. Deepseek-coder-v2: Breaking the barrier of closed-source models
  in code intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11931, 2024.
Ahmet Üstün, Viraat Aryabumi, Zheng-Xin Yong, Wei-Yin Ko, Daniel D’souza, Gbemileke
  Onilude, Neel Bhandari, Shivalika Singh, Hui-Lee Ooi, Amr Kayid, Freddie Vargus, Phil Blun-
  som, Shayne Longpre, Niklas Muennighoff, Marzieh Fadaee, Julia Kreutzer, and Sara Hooker.
  Aya model: An instruction finetuned open-access multilingual language model, 2024.


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS S TATEMENT AND L IMITATIONS
While we systematically study the impact of code data on downstream natural language tasks, we
do not study its impact on safety and bias. Additionally, given the nature of pre-training and the
number of ablations we have conducted we were limited by the scale of larger model sizes due to
prohibitive compute costs.

R EPRODUCIBILITY
We provide details about our data mixture (Section 2.1), data filtering (Appendix C.1, C.2, C.3),
evaluation (Section 2.2, Appendix A) and training (Section 2.3) setups. We believe these details
provide a clear picture on how to obtain our data setup, model ablations and evaluation results.

A     E VALUATION D ETAILS
We briefly describe the details of our evaluation benchmarks and the composite datasets used for
each category below:

      1. World knowledge. These benchmarks aim to measure world knowledge, testing knowl-
         edge memorization, retrieval, and question answering capability given context. We include
         Natural Questions Open (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), and TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017) as
         the datasets. We report the average exact match scores for both these benchmarks.
      2. Natural language reasoning. The Natural language (NL) reasoning suite consists of 11
         benchmarks that involve natural language based reasoning such as Question Answering
         (Clark et al., 2019; Seo et al., 2018; Welbl et al., 2017; Sap et al., 2019; Choi et al., 2018),
         natural language inference (NLI) (Wang et al., 2020; de Marneffe et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
         2020), sentence completion (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016; Zellers et al., 2019), co-reference
         resolution (Sakaguchi et al., 2019) and general intelligence (Clark et al., 2018). We include
         a full list of the constituent benchmarks in Table 1. We report the average accuracy scores
         across all benchmarks.
      3. Code. While our main focus is general performance, we also want to measure any changes
         to code generation performance. For code benchmarks, we focus on the function comple-
         tion task. We evaluate on HumanEval-Python (Chen et al., 2022) and MBPP (Austin et al.,
         2021). We report the average pass@1 scores of these benchmarks.


B     S UMMARY R ESULTS FOR P RE -T RAINING R ECIPES
Summary results are shown in Table 2.

C     C ODE - DATASETS FILTERING
C.1   Q UALITY FILTERS

In addition to the deduplication and quality filtering applied on the GitHub scrapes by Starcoder for
The Stack dataset (Li et al., 2023a), we apply filters to remove documents with greater than 1000
float numbers, with instances of the string 0x, that are lists of top-level domains, and with ’generated
by’ in the first 400 characters

C.2   P ROGRAMMING LANGUAGES PRESENT IN W EB - BASED C ODE DATASET

Programming languages included in our version of The Stack dataset are present in Table 3

C.3   M ARKUP - STYLE PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES PRESENT IN W EB - BASED C ODE DATASET

Markup-style languages included in our version of The Stack dataset are in Table 4


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Task                                    Dataset                                                             Metric
      W ORLD K NOWLEDGE TASKS
                                              TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017)                                  0-shot    Acc.
      Question Answering
                                              NaturalQuestionsOpen (Lee et al., 2019)                        0-shot    Acc.
      N ATURAL L ANGUAGE R EASONING
                                              BoolQ (Clark et al., 2019)                                     0-shot    Acc.
                                              PiQA (Seo et al., 2018)                                        0-shot    Acc.
      Question Answering
                                              SciQ (Welbl et al., 2017)                                      0-shot    Acc.
                                              SocialIQA (Sap et al., 2019)                                   0-shot    Acc.
                                              QUAC (Choi et al., 2018)                                       0-shot    Acc.
                                              SuperGLUE-CB (Wang et al., 2020; de Marneffe et al., 2019)     0-shot    Acc.
      Natural Language Inference
                                              SuperGLUE-COPA (Wang et al., 2020)                             0-shot    Acc.
                                              StoryCloze (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016)                         0-shot    Acc.
      Sentence Completion
                                              HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019)                               0-shot    Acc.
      Coreference Resolution                  Winogrande (Sakaguchi et al., 2019)                            0-shot    Acc.
      General Intelligence                    ARC-Easy (Clark et al., 2018)                                  0-shot    Acc.
      T EXT G ENERATION
      Open-Ended Generation                   Dolly-200 (English) (Singh et al., 2024)                       0-shot   win-rate
      C ODE G ENERATION
                                              HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021)                                  0-shot   pass@1
      Function completion
                                              MBPP (Austin et al., 2021)                                     0-shot   pass@1


Table 1: Datasets considered for evaluation: We conduct extensive evaluations across benchmarks
detailed above. These provide valuable proxies for performance in natural language reasoning,
world knowledge, open ended text generation, and code generation tasks.

                                                         Token Count            Natural Language
      Model Variant            Recipe                                                                   Code      Total Avg.
                                                        Text      Code     Reason.       Know.   Avg.
                               Pre-training             400B       -          49.0       9.5     29.2      0.4        19.6
      T EXT- ONLY
                               Cooldown                 +32B      +8B         54.1       11.1    32.6      4.4        23.2
                               Pre-training             200B      200B        51.8       8.1     30.0      9.0        23.0
      BALANCED - ONLY
                               Cooldown                 +32B      +8B         53.2       11.1    32.1      8.4        24.2
                               Pre-training Init.       100B      100B        52.0       7.4     29.6      7.8        22.4
      BALANCED → T EXT         Continue Pre-train.      +180B     +20B        53.0       9.9     31.5      4.8        22.6
                               Cooldown                 +32B      +8B         54.9       10.9    32.9      5.8        23.9
                               Pre-training Init.        -        200B        44.7       1.5     23.1      15.5       20.6
      C ODE → T EXT            Continue Pre-train.      +180B     +20B        53.3       9.5     31.4       4.1       22.3
                               Cooldown                 +32B      +8B         52.1       10.3    31.2       7.5       23.3

Table 2: Model variants with the corresponding pre-training recipes: Pre-training recipes in-
clude initial pre-training, continued pre-training, and cooldown phases. Balanced→Text achieves
the best NL performance while Balanced-only performs significantly better in code generation.


D    LLM JUDGE P ROMPT AND P REAMBLE FOR WIN - RATES

Preamble
You are a helpful following assistant whose goal is to select the
preferred
(least wrong) output for a given instruction.
Prompt
Which of the following answers is the best one for the given
instruction.
A good answer should follow these rules:
1) It should have correct reasoning,
2) It should answer the request in the instruction,
3) It should be factually correct and semantically comprehensible,
4) It should be grammatically correct and fluent.

Instruction:                instruction



                                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Language Name     Proportion of total code documents
                       java                             15.54
                       javascript                       15.29
                       php                              12.46
                       python                            9.60
                       c-sharp                           8.30
                       typescript                        7.92
                       c                                 6.63
                       cpp                               4.91
                       go                                3.49
                       ruby                              2.69
                       shell                             1.82
                       kotlin                            1.76
                       Swift                             1.52
                       Vue                               1.48
                       rust                              1.00
                       scala                             0.94
                       JSX                               0.83
                       sql                               0.74
                       dart                              0.72
                       makefile                          0.53
                       lua                               0.47
                       haskell                           0.45
                       smalltalk                         0.43
                       tex                               0.37
                       clojure                           0.10

          Table 3: Programming languages included in our version of The Stack dataset



                    Language Name           Proportion of total code documents
                    markdown                               54.23
                    yaml                                   10.77
                    json                                    9.97
                    html                                    8.57
                    css                                     6.86
                    SCSS                                    5.84
                    restructuredtext                        2.26
                    TOML                                    1.25
                    rmarkdown                               0.02
                    Sass                                    0.22

          Table 4: Markup-style languages included in our version of The Stack dataset



Answer (A): completion_a

Answer (B): completion_b

FIRST provide a concise comparison of the two answers which
explains
which answer you prefer and why.
SECOND, on a new line, state exactly one of
‘Preferred: Answer (A)’ or ‘Preferred: Answer (B)’ to indicate
your choice
of preferred response.

Your response should use the format:
Comparison: <concise comparison and explanation>
Preferred: <‘Answer (A)’ or ‘Answer (B)’>


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    G ENERATIVE WIN - RATES FOR IMPACT OF INITIALIZATION


    Figure 8: Impact of initialization on generative quality as judged by LLM-as-a-judge.


F   E VALUATION OF 470M COOLDOWN MODELS ON GSM8K


Figure 9: Evaluation of 470M cooldown models on GSM8K Including code in any stage of the
pre-training improves performance compared to the model where no code has been seen in any
of the training stages: pre-training, continual pre-training and cooldown. The most performant
model in this comparison has seen code in all stages including cooldown where it leads a significant
improvement (from 2.9 to 4.12, +42% relative gain).


                                                27
