Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P ROBLEM -PARAMETER -F REE F EDERATED L EARNING
 Wenjing Yan1 , Kai Zhang2 , Xiaolu Wang3 , Xuanyu Cao4ŌłŚ
 1
   The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
 3
   East China Normal University 4 Washington State University
 {wjyan}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {kzhangbn}@connect.ust.hk,
 {xiaoluwang}@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, {xuanyu.cao}@wsu.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

             Federated learning (FL) has garnered significant attention from academia and in-
             dustry in recent years due to its advantages in data privacy, scalability, and com-
             munication efficiency. However, current FL algorithms face a critical limitation:
             their performance heavily depends on meticulously tuned hyperparameters, par-
             ticularly the learning rates. This manual tuning process is challenging in feder-
             ated settings due to data heterogeneity and limited accessibility of local datasets.
             Consequently, the reliance on problem-specific parameters hinders the widespread
             adoption of FL and potentially compromises its performance in dynamic or diverse
             environments. To address this issue, we introduce PAdaMFed, a novel algorithm
             for nonconvex FL that carefully combines adaptive stepsize and momentum tech-
             niques. PAdaMFed offers two key advantages: 1) it operates autonomously with-
             out relying on problem-specific parameters, and 2) it manages data heterogeneity
             and partial participation without requiring heterogeneity bounds. Despite these
             benefits, PAdaMFed provides several strong theoretical guarantees: 1) it achieves
             state-of-the-art convergence rates with a sample complexity of O( ŌłÆ4 ) and com-
             munication complexity of O( ŌłÆ3 ) to obtain an accuracy of kŌłćf (╬Ė)k Ōēż  , even
             using constant learning rates; 2) these complexities can be improved to the best-
             known O( ŌłÆ3 ) for sampling and O( ŌłÆ2 ) for communication when incorporating
             variance reduction; 3) it exhibits linear speedup with respect to the number of local
             update steps and participating clients at each global round. These attributes make
             PAdaMFed highly scalable and adaptable for various real-world FL applications.
             Extensive empirical evidence validates the efficacy of our approach.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a promising paradigm for machine learning, allowing mul-
tiple clients to collaboratively train a model without sharing raw data. Since its introduction by
McMahan et al. (2017), FL has garnered substantial attention from both academia and industry. Ma-
jor conferences such as NeurIPS, ICML, and ICLR have witnessed a proliferation of FL-related re-
search, addressing critical challenges including communication efficiency (Chen et al., 2021; Sattler
et al., 2019), privacy preservation (Wei et al., 2020; Mothukuri et al., 2021), heterogeneity manage-
ment Li et al. (2020); Karimireddy et al. (2020b); Wang et al. (2020), and partial and asynchronous
participation (Wang et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2023).
Despite significant advancements, current FL algorithms face a critical limitation: their performance
heavily depends on meticulously tuned hyperparameters, particularly the learning rates. This tun-
ing process typically requires extensive computational resources and problem-specific knowledge,
such as smoothness parameters, heterogeneity bounds, stochastic gradient variances, and initial op-
timality gaps. For instance, MIME (Karimireddy et al., 2020a) relies on smoothness constants and
data heterogeneity bounds for stepsize determination, FedProx (Li et al., 2020) requires careful ad-
justment of a proximal term based on data heterogeneity, and FedDyn (Acar et al., 2021) demands
tuning of a regularization parameter contingent on problem characteristics. Furthermore, algorithms
such as FedADT (Gao et al., 2023) and FedAMS (Chen et al., 2020) necessitate problem-specific
    ŌłŚ
        Corresponding Author.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


parameters to establish minimum communication rounds, which must exceed thresholds associated
with smoothness constants and other problem characteristics.
This reliance on problem-specific parameters poses several critical challenges. First, it impedes the
widespread adoption of FL by complicating deployment and requiring expertise for hyperparameter
tuning (Mostafa, 2019; Deng et al., 2020). Second, it potentially compromises the performance of
FL in dynamic or diverse environments where data distributions may evolve (Reddi et al., 2020;
Koloskova et al., 2020). Last, accurately estimating these parameters is often infeasible due to the
distributed nature of data and the inherent privacy constraints of FL (Konec╠īny╠Ć et al., 2016).
Recent research has attempted to address this issue through adaptive stepsize methods. FedOpt
(Reddi et al., 2020) incorporates adaptive optimization techniques like AdaGrad, Adam, and Yogi
into FL, demonstrating improved convergence compared to FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017). Fed-
Nova (Wang et al., 2020) introduces a normalization technique that effectively mitigates objective
inconsistency caused by partial client participation and data heterogeneity. FedBN (Li et al., 2021)
employed local batch normalization to alleviate feature shift before averaging models, outperform-
ing both classical FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) and FedProx (Li et al., 2020) for non-IID data.
While these approaches show promise, they still require careful tuning of global learning rates.
Momentum is a technique that mitigates data heterogeneity and accelerates gradient descent by
maintaining a velocity vector of gradient history. Recent studies have investigated the combination
of adaptive methods with momentum to leverage both advantages. Hsu et al. (2019) proposed Fe-
dAvgM, which incorporates a server-side momentum term into the FedAvg algorithm, demonstrating
enhanced convergence rates and robustness against data heterogeneity. Wang et al. (2019) developed
SlowMo, a momentum-based method that employs two nested loops to facilitate faster convergence
in distributed optimization. FedAMS (Chen et al., 2020) utilizes adaptive moment methods on both
the server and client sides to address data heterogeneity. MIME (Karimireddy et al., 2020a) com-
bines client and server momentum to enhance convergence. Wu et al. (2023) introduced FAFED,
a momentum-based variance reduction scheme integrated with an adaptive matrix, achieving the
best-known sample and communication complexity when utilizing diminishing stepsizes. Never-
theless, these methods still necessitate fine-tuning multiple hyperparameters, limiting their practical
applicability.
A very recent contribution, FedSPS (Sohom Mukherjee, 2024), claims to be the first fully locally
adaptive method for FL with minimal hyperparameter tuning. While promising, this approach relies
on stringent assumptions of bounded gradients and bounded data heterogeneity. Moreover, it fails to
converge to optima with constant stepsizes and requires adjustment of a maximum stepsize threshold
based on the smoothness parameter, maintaining a degree of hyperparameter dependence. Therefore,
there is a critical need for more robust and adaptive FL algorithms capable of operating effectively
across diverse scenarios without relying on problem-specific parameters.

1.1   M AIN C ONTRIBUTIONS

This paper addresses these critical limitations of FL by proposing a novel approach that eliminates
the need for problem-specific hyperparameter tuning while effectively handling arbitrary heteroge-
neous data. Our method is based on a careful combination of adaptive stepsize and momentum
techniques. The adaptive stepsize mechanism dynamically adjusts local learning rates against client
update heterogeneity, while the momentum component provides stability under partial participation
and accelerates convergence in the nonconvex landscape. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first algorithm to achieve such parameter-agnostic adaptation in nonconvex FL with a state-of-the-art
convergence guarantee. Our main contributions are summarized as follows.

1) We introduce PAdaMFed, a problem-specific Parameter Agnostic algorithm for nonconvex FL
   based on adaptive stepsizes and client-side Momentum. PAdaMFed offers several significant
   advantages:
      ŌĆó Independent of problem-specific parameters: PAdaMFed operates autonomously without
        relying on any problem-specific parameters such as smoothness constants or stochastic gra-
        dient variance. All stepsizes in our approach are explicitly determined by system-defined
        constants, including the number of participating clients, local updates, and communication
        rounds.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      ŌĆó Robustness to arbitrary heterogeneous data: PAdaMFed inherently manages data hetero-
         geneity without requiring any heterogeneity bounds among clients while accommodating
         partial client participation. This feature enhances its scalability and adaptability in real-
         world scenarios where client data can be highly diverse and unpredictable, and full partici-
         pation may not always be feasible due to resource constraints or device availability.
2) We provide a rigorous theoretical analysis of PAdaMFed, demonstrating its state-of-the-art per-
   formance:
      ŌĆó PAdaMFed achieves a sample complexity of O( ŌłÆ4 ) and communication complexity of
         O( ŌłÆ3 ) to obtain a kŌłćf (╬Ė)k Ōēż   accuracy for nonconvex FL problems, even using constant
         learning rates.
      ŌĆó The complexities are further improved to the best-known sample complexity of O( ŌłÆ3 ) and
         communication complexity of O( ŌłÆ2 ) when incorporating variance reduction.
      ŌĆó PAdaMFed exhibits linear speedup with respect to the numbers of local update steps and
         participating clients in each global round.
   Notably, these theoretical results are obtained under minimal assumptions, requiring only L-
   smoothness of loss functions and unbiased stochastic gradients with bounded within-client vari-
   ance. This represents a significant advancement over existing FL algorithms, which typically
   necessitate constraints such as data heterogeneity bounds (Li et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023), di-
   minishing stepsizes (Wu et al., 2023; Sohom Mukherjee, 2024), or fail to achieve the best-known
   convergence rates (Liang et al., 2019; Alghunaim, 2024).
3) We conduct empirical evaluations to validate our theoretical findings and the efficacy of our
   algorithms. Our methods are compared against several established baselines, including FedAvg
   (McMahan et al., 2017), SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020b), and SCAFFOLD-M (Cheng
   et al., 2024) . Extensive numerical evidence demonstrates the superiority of our approaches in
   not only runtime efficiency but also stepsize robustness.

2    P ROBLEM S ETUP
We consider an FL system where N clients collaboratively train a common learning model ╬Ė Ōłł Rd
under the coordination of a parameter server. Let ╬Ši represent a random sample of client i drawn
from its local data distribution Di . The loss function associated with client i is given by fi (╬Ė) :=
E╬Ši Ōł╝Di [F (╬Ė; ╬Ši )], where F (╬Ė; ╬Ši ) is the stochastic loss of client i over sample ╬Ši . The objective of
the FL system is to minimize the global loss function across all clients, defined as:
                                    PN
             min╬ĖŌłłRd f (╬Ė) := N1 i=1 fi (╬Ė) where fi (╬Ė) := E╬Ši Ōł╝Di [F (╬Ė; ╬Ši )] .
In a federated setting, clients collaboratively train a global model, but the raw data of each client is
never shared with the server and other clients.
Denote by k ┬Ę k the `2 norm. We make the following standard assumptions.
Assumption 1 (Sample-Wise Smoothness). Each sample-wise loss function F (╬Ė; ╬Ši ) is L-smooth,
i.e., kŌłćF (╬Ė; ╬Ši ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (╬┤; ╬Ši )k Ōēż Lk╬Ė ŌłÆ ╬┤k for all ╬Ė, ╬┤ Ōłł Rd , i Ōłł {1, . . . , n}, and ╬Ši Ōł╝ Di .
The Sample-Wise Smoothness Assumption 1 implies the following standard smoothness condition.
Assumption 2 (Standard Smoothness). There exists L > 0, such that each loss function fi is L-
smooth, i.e., kŌłćfi (╬Ė) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (╬┤)k Ōēż Lk╬Ė ŌłÆ ╬┤k for all ╬Ė, ╬┤ Ōłł Rd and i Ōłł {1, . . . , N }.
We emphasize that our original PAdaMFed algorithm is based on the Standard Smoothness As-
sumption 2. The slightly more stringent Assumption 1 is required when using variance reduction to
further accelerate convergence.
Assumption 3 (Stochastic Gradient). There exists Žā Ōēź 0 such that for any ╬Ė Ōłł Rd and i Ōłł
                                                                            2
{1, . . . , N }, E╬Ši [ŌłćF (╬Ė; ╬Ši )] = Ōłćfi (╬Ė) and E╬Ši kŌłćF (╬Ė; ╬Ši ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (╬Ė)k Ōēż Žā 2 , where ╬Ši Ōł╝ Di .
Assumption 3 ensures that the stochastic gradient ŌłćF (╬Ė; ╬Ši ) is unbiased and has bounded within-
client variance, which is standard in stochastic optimization.
We consider nonconvex FL problems with data heterogeneity among clients, where the local data
distributions Di 6= Dj for any i 6= j. When addressing heterogeneous data, most existing ap-
proaches, such as SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020b), FedProx (Li et al., 2020), FedAMS


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(Chen et al., 2020), and MIME (Karimireddy et al., 2020a), require an upper bound on gradient
dissimilarity, i.e., there exist constants B, Žāh2 > 0 such that

                     1
                         PN                2                     2
                     N     i=1 kŌłćfi (╬Ė)k       Ōēż B kŌłćf (╬Ė)k + Žāh2 for all ╬Ė Ōłł Rd .                  (1)

This assumption simplifies the mathematical analysis of those FL approaches and ensures their al-
gorithmic performance. However, it may not hold in scenarios where data across clients exhibit
significant and unpredictable variations, thus compromising the robustness of FL.
Additionally, existing FL algorithms typically rely on problem-specific parameters to determine their
stepsizes, including the smoothness constant L, gradient variance Žā 2 , and heterogeneity bounds B
and Žāi2 . The smoothness constant, which characterizes the Lipschitz continuity of gradients, is
generally a global property requiring knowledge of the entire dataset. Similarly, quantifying data
heterogeneity across clients necessitates a comprehensive understanding of the differences between
local data distributions. However, in FL settings where raw data sharing is prohibited and only
model updates are exchanged, obtaining precise measurements of these parameters is computation-
ally prohibitive and may compromise FLŌĆÖs privacy guarantees.
In the subsequent section, we present an algorithm that is independent of problem-specific parame-
ters and capable of handling arbitrarily heterogeneous data, thereby eliminating the requirement of
the heterogeneity bound (1).


3     A LGORITHM D EVELOPMENT


Algorithm 1 PAdaMFed: A Problem-Parameter-Agnostic Algorithm for Nonconvex FL

                                                                               0 ŌłÆ1,k
                                                             PKŌłÆ1
 1: Require: initial model ╬Ė 0 , control variates cŌłÆ1
                                                    i  =  1
                                                          K     k=0   ŌłćF     ╬Ė  ; ╬Š i   for any i, cŌłÆ1 =
             ŌłÆ1                 ŌłÆ1
     1
                                   = cŌłÆ1 , global learning rate ╬│, local learning rate ╬Ę, and momentum
       P
    N     i ci , momentum g
    parameter ╬▓
 2: for t = 0, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , T ŌłÆ 1 do
 3:    Central Server: Uniformly sample clients St ŌŖå {1, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , N } with |St | = S
 4:    for each client i Ōłł St in parallel do
 5:      Initialize local model ╬Ėit,0 = ╬Ė t
 6:      for k = 0, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , K ŌłÆ 1 do
 7:          Compute git,k = ╬▓ ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1  i   + ctŌłÆ1 + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)g tŌłÆ1
                                                         g t,k
 8:        Update local model ╬Ėit,k+1 = ╬Ėit,k ŌłÆ ╬Ę git,k
                                                 k i k
 9:      end for
                                        PKŌłÆ1            t,k t,k
10:                                   1
         Update control variate cti = K  k=0 ŌłćF ╬Ėi ; ╬Ši           ( set cti = ctŌłÆ1
                                                                               i   for i Ōłł
                                                                                         / St )
11:      Upload ╬Ėit,K and cti to central server
12:    end for
       Central server:
                                                        t,K
       Aggregate local updates g t = ╬ĘSK1           t
                                            P
13:                                           iŌłłSt ╬Ė ŌłÆ ╬Ėi
14:   Update global model ╬Ė t+1 = ╬Ė t ŌłÆ ╬│g t P
      Aggregate control variate ct = ctŌłÆ1 + N1 iŌłłSt cti ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

15:                                                          i
      Aggregate momentum g t = ╬▓ S1 iŌłłSt cti ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

                                                           + ctŌłÆ1 + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)g tŌłÆ1
                                       P
16:                                                    i
17:   Download ╬Ė t+1 , ╬▓ct + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)g t to all clients
18: end for


In this section, we propose PAdaMFed, a problem-parameter-agnostic algorithm for nonconvex FL
based on adaptive stepsizes and client-side momentum. PAdaMFed is designed to operate indepen-
dently of any problem-specific parameters, handle arbitrarily heterogeneous data, and accommodate
partial client participation.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1   A LGORITHM D EVELOPMENT OF PA DA MF ED

Our approach builds upon the well-established SCAFFOLD algorithm (Karimireddy et al., 2020b),
which was designed to address ŌĆ£client driftŌĆØ in FL, where local models significantly deviate from
the global model due to partial participation and data heterogeneity. The core concept of SCAF-
FOLD is the utilization of control variates to correct the drift between client updates and the global
model. Specifically, the server maintains a global control variate, denoted ct , to represent the av-
erage model update direction, while each client maintains a local control variate, denoted by cti for
all i Ōłł {1, . . . , N }, to track individual update directions. Client updates are subsequently adjusted
using the difference between local and global control variates. SCAFFOLD demonstrates faster and
more stable convergence compared to the seminal FedAvg algorithm (McMahan et al., 2017).
In this paper, we extend the original SCAFFOLD framework by incorporating client-side momentum
and local adaptive stepsizes, as outlined in Algorithm 1. Specifically, in Step 7 of Algorithm 1, the
local descent direction of client i at global round t and local step k is computed as:

                    git,k = ╬▓ ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1 i   + ctŌłÆ1 + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)g tŌłÆ1 .

In this expression, the term ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k represents the stochastic gradient at the current local
model ╬Ėit,k with the sample ╬Šit,k . The term ctŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1i     adjusts the difference between the global
and local control variates, helping to mitigate client drift. The term g tŌłÆ1 denotes the current global
momentum, essential for stabilizing and accelerating the convergence across clients.
                                                                                                   g t,k
In Step 8 of Algorithm 1, the local model for each client i is updated by: ╬Ėit,k+1 = ╬Ėit,k ŌłÆ ╬Ę git,k .
                                                                                                  k i k
Here, an adaptive stepsize ╬Ę/kgit,k k is utilized by normalizing the descent direction vector git,k . This
normalization guarantees that the progresses from all clients have a uniform magnitude, preventing
the disproportionate impact of any individual client on the global model update. It also provides us
the convenience on quantifying the distance between consecutive models in our theoretical analysis,
maintaining that ╬Ėit,k+1 ŌłÆ ╬Ėit,k = ╬Ę git,k /kgit,k k = ╬Ę for all i, k, t.
                             PKŌłÆ1
                           1                   t,k t,k
Additionally, since cti = K     k=0 ŌłćF ╬Ėi ; ╬Ši           for all i, the momentum update in Step 16 of
Algorithm 1 can be expressed as:
                   P          P
                                    KŌłÆ1           t,k t,k
         g t = ╬▓ S1 iŌłłSt K    1
                                    k=0 ŌłćF ╬Ėi ; ╬Ši          ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1
                                                                 i     + ctŌłÆ1 + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)g tŌłÆ1 .         (2)

This equation accumulates the descent directions across clients and iterations that we have g t =
P       t,k        t
   i,k gi . With g , the optimization trajectories at each client are smoothed by the descent di-
rections of other clients, enhancing the robustness of the optimization process against variability
in local updates caused by data heterogeneity. Notably, our PAdaMFed algorithm maintains the
communication workload of the SCAFFOLD for both uplink and downlink.

3.2   ACCELERATING PA DA MF ED WITH VARIANCE R EDUCTION

Variance reduction is an effective technique to accelerate convergence and enhance the stability of
FL, particularly when dealing with heterogeneous data and limited client participation. In this sub-
section, we enhance PAdaMFed by integrating a variance reduction component into each clientŌĆÖs de-
scent direction, resulting in our PAdaMFed-VR algorithm. The detailed procedures of PAdaMFed-
VR are provided in Appendix B.
PAdaMFed-VR differs from PAdaMFed primarily in its computation of the local gradient. Specifi-
cally, Step 7 of Algorithm 1 is replaced with:

         git,k = ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k + ╬▓ ctŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ citŌłÆ1 + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓) g tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ; ╬Šit,k ,



where ŌłćF ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ; ╬Šit,k represents the variance reduction component. Our variance reduction de-
sign follows the principle of STORM (Cutkosky & Orabona, 2019) to make more efficient sample
utilization. For each local update, the sample ╬Šit,k is used twice: 1) to compute the gradient based on


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the current local model ╬Ėit,k ; and 2) to evaluate the gradient at the previous global model ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 . This
dual usage of each sample mitigates the influence of within-client gradient noise, enabling more
accurate estimation of gradient directions.

4     T HEORETICAL R ESULTS AND C OMPARISONS WITH P RIOR W ORK
4.1    T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

Theorem 1. Suppose that Assumptions 2 and 3 hold. Let the local and global learning rates
                                                                                     q of
                                              1/4
PAdaMFed be ╬Ę = K ŌłÜ   1
                        T
                          and ╬│ = (SK)
                                    T 3/4
                                           , respectively, the momentum parameter be ╬▓ = SK  T ,
      t
and {╬Ė }tŌēź0 be the iterates generated by Algorithm 1. Then, it holds for all T Ōēź 1 that
                 T ŌłÆ1                                        ŌłÜ        ŌłÜ         !
               1 X              t
                                             Ōłå + L + Žā + LŽā             SKŽā + L
                       E Ōłćf ╬Ė       ŌēżO                     1       +     ŌłÜ         ,
               T t=0                               (SKT ) 4                T

where Ōłå := f ╬Ė 0 ŌłÆ min╬Ė f (╬Ė).
Theorem 2. Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 3 hold. Let the local and global learning rates of
                                              1/3
PAdaMFed-VR be ╬Ę = KT      1
                              and ╬│ = (SK)T 2/3
                                                  , respectively, the momentum parameter be ╬▓ =
(SK)1/3
  T 2/3
        , and {╬Ė t }tŌēź0 be the iterates generated by Algorithm 2. Then, it holds for all T Ōēź 1 that
                        T ŌłÆ1                                                           1
                                                                                           !
                     1 X                             Ōłå+L+Žā              (L + Žā)(SK) 3
                           E Ōłćf ╬Ė t Ōēż O

                                                                1   +           2              .
                     T t=0                             (SKT ) 3               T3
Remark 1. According    to Theorem 1, PAdaMFed converges to an  -stationary point 1 in expectation
            1                                                                         1

within O SK 4 communication rounds. This convergence rate is improved to O SK           3   when in-
corporating variance reduction, as shown in Theorem 2. Furthermore, both algorithms demonstrate
linear speedup with respect to the number of participating clients S and local update steps K.
                                                            1
Remark 2. In PAdaMFed, setting SK = O(T 3 ) yields a sampleŌłÜcomplexity2 of O( ŌłÆ4 ) with
communication complexity O( ŌłÆ3 ). Similarly, by setting SK = O( T ), PAdaMFed-VR achieves
the best-known sample complexity of O( ŌłÆ3 ) with a communication complexity of O( ŌłÆ2 ) to find an
 -stationary point (Wu et al., 2023).
Remark 3. In traditional FL, selecting optimal stepsizes theoretically requires knowledge of
problem-specific parameters, which are often unavailable. Consequently, in real-world FL sce-
narios, stepsizes must be tuned empiricallyŌĆöa process that is labor-intensive, time-consuming,
and sometimes even impractical. In our PAdaMFed and PAdaMFed-VR, the stepsizes are explic-
itly determined by system-defined constants (the numbers of participating clients S, local update
steps K, and communication rounds T ), without requiring any problem-specific parameters. This
hyperparameter-independent nature simplifies implementation, enhances robustness, and facilitates
the deployment of our algorithm across diverse FL applications.

4.2   P ROOF S KETCH

Our theoretical proof starts from the L-smoothness property of the loss function f (╬Ė), which yields
the following inequality:
                                                                                             2
                                                                 ╬│ P           t,k
                                                                                         + ╬│ 2L .

   f ╬Ė t+1 ŌłÆ f (╬Ė t ) Ōēż 2╬│ kŌłćf (╬Ė t ) ŌłÆ g t k ŌłÆ ╬│ kŌłćf (╬Ė t )k + SK    iŌłłSt ,k gi ŌłÆ g
                                                                                       t


  1
    A point ╬Ė is said to be  -stationary if kŌłćf (╬Ė)k Ōēż  . Note that for any  -stationary point defined using
kŌłćf (╬Ė)k2 , one can derive the corresponding guarantee for kŌłćf (╬Ė)k based on the following relationship:
                                                                                v
      T ŌłÆ1                     T ŌłÆ1                      T ŌłÆ1                   u T ŌłÆ1
    1 X              t       1 X     p                1  X    p                 u1 X
            EkŌłćf (╬Ė )k =            E kŌłćf (╬Ė )k Ōēż
                                              t   2            EkŌłćf (╬Ė )k Ōēż t
                                                                        t  2              EkŌłćf (╬Ė t )k2
    T t=1                   T t=1                     T t=1                        T t=1
where the first and second inequalities utilize JensenŌĆÖs inequality as the square root function is concave. There-
fore, we can align our results with the metric of T1 Tt=1 kŌłćf (╬Ė t )k2 by taking square root on both sides of
                                                      P
their convergence bounds.
    2
      Total number of samples across clients, local updates, and communication.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                   PT ŌłÆ1
To establish an upper bound for T1 t=0 EhkŌłćf (╬Ė t )k, we musti quantify two key terms:
1
  PT ŌłÆ1          t    t      1
                               PT ŌłÆ1 1    P          t,k  t
T   t=0 E kŌłćf (╬Ė ) ŌłÆ g k and T   t=0 SK E  iŌłłSt ,k gi ŌłÆ g     .

The momentum g t is a recursive variable that accumulates values from previous rounds. By
                                           t                                    t     t
plugging into the expression
                             tŌłÆ1
                                   of g (provided in (2)) into kŌłćf t(╬Ė ) ŌłÆt g k and introducing
the auxiliary   term   f   ╬Ė      ,  we   can  recursively  express  kŌłćf  (╬Ė ) ŌłÆ  g k   by its predecessor
         tŌłÆ1       tŌłÆ1
  Ōłćf ╬Ė         ŌłÆg        , scaled by a contraction coefficient (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓). This substitution also intro-
duces additional terms associated with stochastic gradients and control variates. Through meticu-
                                                               PT ŌłÆ1
lous control of all intermediate terms, we prove that T1 t=0 E kŌłćf (╬Ė t ) ŌłÆ g t k is upper bounded
                 1                                           1
by O((SKT )ŌłÆ 4 ) for PAdaMFed and by O((SKT )ŌłÆ 3 ) for PAdaMFed-VR.
              hP                        i
                             t,k     t
The term E       iŌłłSt ,k gi ŌłÆ g           represents gradient dissimilarity across clients. While the het-
erogeneity bound (1) could readily control this term, our objective           is to eliminate dependence
on such bounds. Instead, we relax this term to E Ōłćfi ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ citŌłÆ1 , along with other con-


trollable terms, by substituting the expressions for git,k and g t . Returning to our treatment
of E kŌłćf (╬Ė t ) ŌłÆ g t k, we exploit the recursive property of the control hvariate ctŌłÆ1       i     to boundi
           tŌłÆ1
                     tŌłÆ1                                                            P             t,k     t
E Ōłćfi ╬Ė          ŌłÆ ci       . This, in turn, allows us to establish a bound for E     iŌłłSt ,k   g i   ŌłÆ g    .

Combining the above processes leads to our analytical results. For comprehensive proofs, please
refer to Appendix A for Theorem 1 and Appendix B for Theorem 2.
Intuition on the Algorithmic Features: The efficacy of PAdaMFed stems from the synergistic in-
tegration of three indispensable components: local gradient normalization, client-side momentum,
and control variates. 1) Gradient normalization serves as an adaptive learning rate scheme, auto-
matically adjusting stepsizes based on the local optimization landscape. This design automatically
allows larger steps in regions with small gradients (where more aggressive exploration is beneficial)
and smaller steps in steep regions (where careful progress is needed). 2) Client-side momentum
helps accelerate convergence while maintaining stability. First, it helps overcome local irregularities
in the loss landscape by accumulating gradients over clients and iterations. Second, it accelerates
progress in directions of consistent gradient agreement. 3) Furthermore, control variates align lo-
cal updates with the global objective, reducing variance in gradient estimates and ensuring more
consistent updates across heterogeneous client data. Collectively, these techniques ensure that the
stepsizes are independent of problem-specific parameters such as smoothness constants and data
heterogeneity bounds, simplifying the tuning process and enhancing robustness across diverse FL
environments. Notably, our algorithms also eliminate the requirement of data heterogeneity bounds,
further broadening their applicability.

4.3    C OMPARISONS WITH P RIOR W ORK

We compare PAdaMFed and PAdaMFed-VR with several representative algorithms for solving FL
problems with heterogeneous data, as listed in Table 1.
Comparisons of PAdaMFed with Prior FL Algorithms: The SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al.,
2020b) algorithm requires the smoothness
                                  1         parameter
                                                        L for stepsize tuning. However, its communi-
                                  K 3 L
cation complexity, given by O S           4   , is suboptimal. MIME (Karimireddy et al., 2020a) im-
                                1
                                     K
proves this complexity to O SK 4 by incorporating server-level momentum. Nevertheless, MIME
requires large-batch local gradients per round, and its learning rates depend on multiple problem
parameters, including initial optimality gap Ōłå and heterogeneity bound Žāh2 , which are challenging
to estimate.
FedSPS (Sohom Mukherjee, 2024) incorporates stochastic  Polyak step-sizes into local client up-
                                                        1
dates, achieving a communication complexity of O N K      4  in full participation scenarios. How-
ever, its analysis relies on the assumption of bounded data heterogeneity. Moreover, its stepsize
tuning requires knowledge of the lower bounds of all loss functions, i.e., `ŌłŚi for all i, in addition to
the smoothness parameter L, leading to significant problem-parameter dependence.
SCAFFOLD-M (Cheng et al., 2024) employs similar client-side momentum as PAdaMFed, remov-
ing the need for bounded data heterogeneity. However, SCAFFOLD-MŌĆÖs stepsizes depend on sev-


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparisons of algorithms for solving FL problems with heterogeneous data.
(Shorthand notation: Add. Assump. = Additional assumptions aside from Assumptions 1ŌĆō3, BDH
= Bounded data heterogeneity define in (1), BG = Bounded gradient that kŌłćfi (╬Ė)k Ōēż G, ŌłĆi, ╬Ė,
                                                               2
BHD = Bounded hessian dissimilarity that Ōłć2 fi (╬Ė) ŌłÆ Ōłć2 f (╬Ė) Ōēż ╬┤, ŌłĆi, ╬Ė)

                                                                                                                  Stepsize-Related    Communication
             Algorithms           Add. Assump.                Stepsize Restrictions
                                                                                                                 Problem-Parameters       Complexity

                                                              ŌłÜ                                      2                                         1
       SCAFFOLD

                                                                            1                   S    3                                         N    3    L
                                         ŌĆō               ╬│=       S, ╬Ę Ōēż 24╬│KL                  N
                                                                                                                          L           O        S        K 4
 (Karimireddy et al., 2020b)

          MIme                                                                     2 + Žā2
                                                              q
                                                                    ŌłåS                                                                             1
                                    BDH, BHD            ╬Ę=                 , G╠ā = Žāh                                L, Ōłå, Žā 2 , Žāh
                                                                                                                                 2        O       SK 4
 (Karimireddy et al., 2020a)                                      LG╠āT K 2             K
                                                                   (                          )
                                                                           t,k t,k
                                                                        F ╬Ėi ;╬Ši    ŌłÆ`ŌłŚ
                                                    ╬Ęit,k = min
                                                                                       i
                                                                                        2 , ╬Ęb 1
          FedSPS
                                                                              t,k t,k                                                               1
                                       BDH                             c ŌłćF ╬Ėi ;╬Ši                                    L, `ŌłŚi , ŌłĆi      O          N K 4
    Sohom Mukherjee (2024)                                           1      1
                                                           ╬Ęb Ōēż min 2cL , 25LK
                                                                    q           q
                                                                                   LŌłåS 2 2
                                                   ╬▓ = min 1, S2 , LŌłåSK  2
                                                                       Žā T
                                                                              ,    G0 N
           SCAFFOLD-M

                                                                N3                                                                                 1
                                         ŌĆō                                            ŌłÜ                             L, Ōłå, Žā 2 , G0        O       SK 4
         (Cheng et al., 2024)                          ╬▓
                                                   ╬│ = L , ╬ĘKL . min     1
                                                                           ,    1      S
                                                                                  1 , N
                                                                       ŌłÜ
                                                                                     S      ╬▓K 4
                                                          q                       1
             PAdaMFed

                                                              SK             (SK) 4                      1                                         1
                                         ŌĆō           ╬▓=        T
                                                                 ,╬│ =           3        ,╬Ę =            ŌłÜ                ŌĆō               O       SK 4
             (This paper)                                                      T4                   K        T


        Variance Reduction
                                                                             2
             FAFED

                                    BDH, BG                   ╬Ęt ŌłØ N 31 , ╬▓t ŌłØ ╬Ęt2                                        L               O        1
                                                                                                                                                  SK 3
          (Wu et al., 2023)                                             Lt 3
                                                                                         2          1

                                                                       S         KLŌłå        3
                                                       ╬▓ = min         N
                                                                         ,       Žā2 T
                                                                                                ,S3
        SCAFFOLD-M-VR                                                 ŌłÜ
                                                           ╬│L = min                                                   L, Ōłå, Žā 2        O           ŌłÜ1
        (Cheng et al., 2024)
                                         ŌĆō                         q1,  ╬▓S   1                                                                 S    K 4
                                                                     ╬▓    ╬▓  4
                                                        ╬ĘKL . min    S
                                                                       , SK
                                                                   1                    1
           PAdaMFed-VR

                                                           (SK) 3                (SK) 3            1                                               1
                                         ŌĆō           ╬▓=       2        ,╬│ =        2        , ╬Ę = KT                      ŌĆō               O       SK 3
            (This paper)                                     T3                   T3

    1
        `ŌłŚi Ōēż inf ╬Ši ŌłłDi ,╬Ė F (╬Ė; ╬Ši ) for any i, and c is a constant to balance adaptivity and accuracy.
    2              PN                0   2
        G0 := N1      i=1 Ōłćfi (╬Ė )         .


eral problem-specific parameters, including the smoothness parameter L, initial optimal gap Ōłå, and
stochastic gradient variance Žā 2 , resulting in laborious stepsize tuning. In contrast, PAdaMFed is
completely independent of problem-specific parameters while achieving start-of-the-art communi-
cation complexity.
Comparisons of PAdaMFed-VR with Prior Variance-Reduced FL Algorithms: FAFED (Wu
et al., 2023) employing a momentum-based variance reduction with an adaptive matrix, achieving
the best-known O( ŌłÆ3 ) sample complexity and O( ŌłÆ2 ) communication complexity through the use
of diminishing stepsizes. However, FAFED requires stringent assumptions of bounded gradients and
bounded data heterogeneity. Moreover, its learning rates are subject to several complex constraints
and rely on problem-parameter-based algorithm tuning. SCAFFOLD-M-VR (Cheng et al., 2024)
is a variance-reduced SCAFFOLD-M algorithm and, similarly, requires careful step size tuning
based on multiple problem-dependent parameters. Nevertheless, it fails to achieve the best-known
complexity established in the literature.

5         N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present experiments on two real-world datasets: EMNIST (Cohen et al., 2017)
and CIFAR-10 (Li et al., 2017). We evaluate the proposed algorithms against several baselines,


                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     (a) i.i.d                                          (b) non-i.i.d

  Figure 1: Test accuracy versus the number of communication rounds on the EMNIST dataset.


                     (a) i.i.d                                          (b) non-i.i.d

               Figure 2: Test accuracy versus learning rate on the EMNIST dataset.


including FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017), SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020b), SCAFFOLD-
M (Cheng et al., 2024). Additionally, experiments are conducted under both i.i.d. and non-i.i.d. data
distributions. Due to space limitations, the detailed experimental setup and additional simulation
results are provided in Appendix C.
Figure 1 illustrates the test accuracy of various algorithms versus the number of communication
rounds on the EMNIST dataset, with subfigure 1a representing i.i.d. data and subfigure 1b depicting
non-i.i.d. data. The stepsizes for our algorithms, PAdaMFed and PAdaMFed-VR, are determined
based on the theoretical guidance provided in Theorem 1 and Theorem 2, respectively. For fair com-
parisons, the hyperparameters of other algorithms in Figure 1 are optimized through grid search to
achieve their best performance. The results demonstrate that our proposed methods significantly out-
perform all baseline algorithmsŌĆöFedAvg, SCAFFOLD, and SCAFFOLD-MŌĆöin both convergence
speed and test accuracy. Notably, although SCAFFOLD-M employs a similar momentum technique,
it converges more slowly than PAdaMFed and achieves lower accuracy, validating the efficacy of our
adaptive stepsize design. Building upon these advantages, the incorporation of variance reduction
further enhances our methodsŌĆÖ superiority through more efficient sample utilization. Moreover, the
results on non-i.i.d. data in subfigure 1b demonstrate even greater performance margins than the
i.i.d. case, highlighting the advantages of our algorithms.
Figure 2 compares the test accuracy of various algorithms versus the learning rate on the EMNIST
dataset. All algorithms were evaluated over 400 communication rounds to ensure a fair comparison.
We observe that our algorithm demonstrates superior robustness to stepsize selection, maintaining
stable performance across a significantly wider range of learning rates compared to baseline meth-
ods. Specifically, it achieves test accuracy exceeding 0.8 across the stepsize range [3 ├Ś 10ŌłÆ3 , 10ŌłÆ1 ]


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for i.i.d. data distributions (subfigure 2a) and above 0.7 for the same stepsize range under non-i.i.d.
conditions (subfigure 2b). In contrast, baseline algorithms exhibit substantially narrower regions of
stable performance, empirically validating our methodŌĆÖs enhanced stepsize robustness.


6   C ONCLUSIONS

This paper proposed a novel training approach, PAdaMFed, for nonconvex federated learning (FL)
that eliminates dependency on problem-specific parameters and enables automatic generalization
across diverse FL environments. PAdaMFed also removes the need for data heterogeneity bounds
and accommodates partial client participation, further broadening its applicability. We provided
rigorous theoretical analysis for PAdaMFed, demonstrating its state-of-the-art convergence under
minimal assumptions, including the L-smoothness of loss functions and unbiased stochastic gradi-
ents with bounded within-client variance. Furthermore, we enhanced this convergence rate by in-
corporating variance reduction, achieving the best-known O( ŌłÆ3 ) sampling complexity and O( ŌłÆ2 )
communication complexity. Extensive numerical experiments demonstrated that our algorithms out-
perform existing representative FL approaches in both runtime efficiency and stepsize robustness.


R EFERENCES
Durmus Alp Emre Acar, Yue Zhao, Ramon Matas Navarro, Matthew Mattina, Paul N Whatmough,
  and Venkatesh Saligrama. Federated learning based on dynamic regularization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.04263, 2021.

Sulaiman A Alghunaim. Local exact-diffusion for decentralized optimization and learning. IEEE
  Transactions on Automatic Control, 2024.

Mingzhe Chen, Nir Shlezinger, H Vincent Poor, Yonina C Eldar, and Shuguang Cui.
 Communication-efficient federated learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
 118(17):e2024789118, 2021.

Xiangyi Chen, Xiaoyun Li, and Ping Li. Toward communication efficient adaptive gradient method.
  In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM-IMS on Foundations of Data Science Conference, pp. 119ŌĆō128,
  2020.

Ziheng Cheng, Xinmeng Huang, and Kun Yuan. Momentum benefits non-iid federated learning
  simply and provably. The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations., 2024.

Gregory Cohen, Saeed Afshar, Jonathan Tapson, and Andre Van Schaik. Emnist: Extending mnist
  to handwritten letters. In 2017 international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN), pp.
  2921ŌĆō2926. IEEE, 2017.

Ashok Cutkosky and Francesco Orabona. Momentum-based variance reduction in non-convex SGD.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Yuyang Deng, Mohammad Mahdi Kamani, and Mehrdad Mahdavi. Adaptive personalized federated
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13461, 2020.

John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and
  stochastic optimization. Journal of machine learning research, 12(7), 2011.

Huimin Gao, Qingtao Wu, Xuhui Zhao, Junlong Zhu, and Mingchuan Zhang. Fedadt: An adaptive
  method based on derivative term for federated learning. Sensors, 23(13):6034, 2023.

Geoffrey Hinton. Neural networks for machine learning, lecture 6a, 2012. URL http://
  www.cs.toronto.edu/╦£tijmen/csc321/slides/lecture_slides_lec6.pdf.
  Coursera.

Tzu-Ming Harry Hsu, Hang Qi, and Matthew Brown. Measuring the effects of non-identical data
  distribution for federated visual classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06335, 2019.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Martin Jaggi, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J Reddi, Sebas-
  tian U Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Mime: Mimicking centralized stochastic algorithms
  in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.03606, 2020a.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 5132ŌĆō5143. PMLR, 2020b.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Anastasia Koloskova, Nicolas Loizou, Sadra Boreiri, Martin Jaggi, and Sebastian Stich. A unified
  theory of decentralized SGD with changing topology and local updates. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 5381ŌĆō5393. PMLR, 2020.
Jakub Konec╠īny╠Ć, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter Richta╠ürik, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and
  Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1610.05492, 2016.
Hongmin Li, Hanchao Liu, Xiangyang Ji, Guoqi Li, and Luping Shi. Cifar10-dvs: an event-stream
  dataset for object classification. Frontiers in neuroscience, 11:309, 2017.
Jiaxiang Li, Xuxing Chen, Shiqian Ma, and Mingyi Hong. Problem-parameter-free decentralized
   nonconvex stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08821, 2024.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. Proceedings of Machine learning and sys-
  tems, 2:429ŌĆō450, 2020.
Xiaoxiao Li, Meirui Jiang, Xiaofei Zhang, Michael Kamp, and Qi Dou. Fedbn: Federated learning
  on non-iid features via local batch normalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.07623, 2021.
Xianfeng Liang, Shuheng Shen, Jingchang Liu, Zhen Pan, Enhong Chen, and Yifei Cheng. Variance
  reduced local SGD with lower communication complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.12844,
  2019.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273ŌĆō1282. PMLR, 2017.
Hesham Mostafa. Robust federated learning through representation matching and adaptive hyper-
  parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.13075, 2019.
Viraaji Mothukuri, Reza M Parizi, Seyedamin Pouriyeh, Yan Huang, Ali Dehghantanha, and Gautam
  Srivastava. A survey on security and privacy of federated learning. Future Generation Computer
  Systems, 115:619ŌĆō640, 2021.
Sashank Reddi, Zachary Charles, Manzil Zaheer, Zachary Garrett, Keith Rush, Jakub Konec╠īny╠Ć,
  Sanjiv Kumar, and H Brendan McMahan. Adaptive federated optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2003.00295, 2020.
Felix Sattler, Simon Wiedemann, Klaus-Robert Mu╠łller, and Wojciech Samek. Robust and
  communication-efficient federated learning from non-iid data. IEEE transactions on neural net-
  works and learning systems, 31(9):3400ŌĆō3413, 2019.
Sebastian U. Stich Sohom Mukherjee, Nicolas Loizou. Locally adaptive federated learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.06306, 2024.
Jianyu Wang, Vinayak Tantia, Nicolas Ballas, and Michael Rabbat.                   Slowmo: Im-
   proving communication-efficient distributed SGD with slow momentum.              arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1910.00643, 2019.
Jianyu Wang, Qinghua Liu, Hao Liang, Gauri Joshi, and H Vincent Poor. Tackling the objective
   inconsistency problem in heterogeneous federated optimization. Advances in neural information
   processing systems, 33:7611ŌĆō7623, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiaolu Wang, Yuchang Sun, Hoi-To Wai, and Jun Zhang. Dual-delayed asynchronous sgd for arbi-
  trarily heterogeneous data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16966, 2024.
Kang Wei, Jun Li, Ming Ding, Chuan Ma, Howard H Yang, Farhad Farokhi, Shi Jin, Tony QS Quek,
  and H Vincent Poor. Federated learning with differential privacy: Algorithms and performance
  analysis. IEEE transactions on information forensics and security, 15:3454ŌĆō3469, 2020.
Xidong Wu, Feihu Huang, Zhengmian Hu, and Heng Huang. Faster adaptive federated learning.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 37, pp. 10379ŌĆō10387,
  2023.
Chenhao Xu, Youyang Qu, Yong Xiang, and Longxiang Gao. Asynchronous federated learning on
  heterogeneous devices: A survey. Computer Science Review, 50:100595, 2023.
Jing Xu, Sen Wang, Liwei Wang, and Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. Fedcm: Federated learning with
   client-level momentum. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10874, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     R ELATED W ORKS

Adaptive Stepsize Methods: Adaptive stepsize methods have gained significant attention in opti-
mization literature due to their ability to automatically adjust learning rates based on the geometry
of the objective function. These methods, such as Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014), AdaGrad (Duchi
et al., 2011), and RMSProp Hinton (2012), have demonstrated remarkable success in various ma-
chine learning tasks, particularly in handling sparse gradients and non-stationary objectives. In the
context of FL, adaptive stepsizes offer several advantages. First, they eliminate the need for manual
tuning of learning rates, which is especially beneficial in federated settings where global knowledge
of the objective functionŌĆÖs properties is limited. Second, adaptive methods can potentially mitigate
the impact of data heterogeneity by allowing different update rates for different model parameters,
effectively accounting for varying gradient statistics across clients.
FedOpt (Reddi et al., 2020) introduced adaptive optimization techniques like AdaGrad, Adam, and
Yogi into FL, demonstrating improved convergence properties compared to the traditional FedAvg
algorithm. Wang et al. (2020) proposed FedNova, which normalizes and scales local updates to mit-
igate objective inconsistency caused by partial client participation and data heterogeneity. FedBN
(Li et al., 2021) employed local batch normalization to alleviate feature shift before averaging mod-
els, outperforming both classical FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) and FedProx (Li et al., 2020) for
non-IID data. While these approaches demonstrated the advantages of adaptive methods for easing
parameter tuning, none provides theoretical guarantees, and careful tuning of global learning rates
remains essential.
Momentum: Momentum, on the other hand, is a technique that accelerates gradient descent by
accumulating a velocity vector in directions of persistent reduction in the objective across iterations.
In nonconvex optimization, momentum has been shown to help escape saddle points more effi-
ciently and potentially reach better local optima (Cutkosky & Orabona, 2019). The incorporation of
momentum in FL algorithms can provide several benefits. It can help smooth out the impact of het-
erogeneous updates from different clients, potentially leading to more stable and faster convergence.
Moreover, momentum can aid in overcoming the challenges posed by partial client participation by
maintaining a consistent optimization trajectory even when client participation varies across rounds.
Hsu et al. (2019) proposed FedAvgM, which adds a server-side momentum term to the FedAvg
algorithm, demonstrating improved convergence rates and robustness to data heterogeneity. Wang
et al. (2019) developed SlowMo, a momentum-based method using two nested loops to achieve
faster convergence in distributed optimization. Both FedCM (Xu et al., 2021) and Cheng et al.
(2024) investigated the integration of client-side momentum in FedAvg to effectively tackle client
heterogeneity and partial participation in FL.
Combination of Adaptive Stepsizes and Momentum: Recent works have explored combining
adaptive methods and momentum in FL. FedAMS (Chen et al., 2020) implements a local AMS-
Grad scheme for FL, demonstrating fast convergence with low communication cost. MIme (Karim-
ireddy et al., 2020a) combines control variates with server-level momentum at every local update
to mimic centralized methods running on IID data, outperforming centralized methods but requir-
ing a large-batch local gradient per round for each client. Wu et al. (2023) introduced FAFED,
a momentum-based variance reduction scheme integrated with an adaptive matrix, attaining the
best-known sample and communication complexity when using diminishing stepsizes. While these
methods demonstrate improved performance, they still require careful tuning of global learning
rates.
A recent contribution, FedSPS (Sohom Mukherjee, 2024), claims to be the first fully locally adaptive
method for FL with minimal hyperparameter tuning. While promising, this approach relies on
stringent assumptions of bounded data heterogeneity and gradients. Moreover, it fails to converge
to optima with constant stepsizes and requires adjustment of a maximum stepsize threshold based
on the smoothness parameter, thus retaining some hyperparameter dependence. The limitations of
existing approaches underscore the critical need for more robust, adaptive FL algorithms capable of
operating effectively across diverse scenarios without extensive parameter tuning.
This paper makes a significant advancement by proposing a novel algorithm, PAdaMFed, that com-
pletely eliminates dependency on problem-specific parameters. All stepsizes in our approach are ex-
plicitly determined by the number of participating clients, local updates, and communication rounds.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To the best of our knowledge, this is the first algorithm that achieves such problem-parameter inde-
pendence in FL. Moreover, our algorithm inherently manages data heterogeneity and partial client
participation without requiring any heterogeneity bound among clients, which is also nontrivial.
Data heterogeneity has been extensively studied in FL. However, existing algorithms either depend
on bounded data heterogeneity (e.g., FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017), SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy
et al., 2020b), FedProx (Li et al., 2020), and MIme (Karimireddy et al., 2020a)) or fall short of
achieving state-of-the-art convergence rates (e.g., VRL-SGD (Liang et al., 2019) and LED (Alghu-
naim, 2024)). Recently, Cheng et al. (2024) demonstrated that momentum can eliminate the data
heterogeneity constraint in the FedAvg and SCAFFOLD algorithms while achieving state-of-the-art
convergence results. Wang et al. (2024) introduced DuDe-ASGD for asynchronous FL, which can
effectively handle arbitrarily heterogeneous data by leveraging stale stochastic gradients. However,
their algorithms require carefully designed stepsizes based on hyperparameters. In contrast, our al-
gorithm accommodates arbitrary data heterogeneity while achieving complete problem-parameter
independence.
A notable concurrent work by (Li et al., 2024) also explores problem-parameter-free algorithms in
the context of decentralized non-convex optimization. While both studies target problem-parameter-
free optimization, our work addresses the unique challenges inherent to federated learning settings.
The fundamental distinction lies in our treatment of client driftŌĆöa critical phenomenon arising from
multiple local updates and data heterogeneity in federated environments. Our key technical contri-
butions beyond (Li et al., 2024) are twofold: 1) The development of a novel framework integrating
control variates with momentum to mitigate client drift, requiring sophisticated theoretical analysis
due to their complex interactions; 2) The successful elimination of explicit heterogeneity bounds,
which were previously considered essential in federated learning literature.

A    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF PA DA MF ED
Our analysis is based on the following useful lemmas.
Lemma 1. For any t, we have
               1 X t,k             2   1               1 X t,k       1
                       ╬Ėi ŌłÆ ╬Ė t Ōēż ╬Ę 2 K 2 and              ╬Ėi ŌłÆ ╬Ė t Ōēż ╬ĘK.
             NK                        3              NK             2
                     i,k                                                       i,k


Proof. From the update rule of local model, for any i, k and t, we have

                                                                     git,k
                                     ╬Ėit,k+1 ŌłÆ ╬Ėit,k = ╬Ę                           Ōēż ╬Ę.
                                                                     git,k

Then,
                                                                2
                           2       kŌłÆ1
                                   X                                     kŌłÆ1
                                                                         X                          2
             ╬Ėit,k ŌłÆ ╬Ė t       =         ╬Ėit,j+1 ŌłÆ ╬Ėit,j            Ōēżk            ╬Ėit,j+1 ŌłÆ ╬Ėit,j       Ōēż ╬Ę2 k2 .
                                   j=0                                   j=0

Summing the above inequality over i and k yields
                                               KŌłÆ1
            1 X t,k     2  ╬Ę2 X 2  ╬Ę2                   1
                ╬Ėi ŌłÆ ╬Ė t Ōēż     k Ōēż    (K ŌłÆ 1)K(2K ŌłÆ 1) Ōēż ╬Ę 2 K 2 .
           NK              K       6K                   3
                  i,k                           k=0

Similarly, we have
                                                                                   12        KŌłÆ1
             1 X t,k         1 X                                             2              ╬Ę X    1
                 ╬Ėi ŌłÆ ╬Ė t =                                 ╬Ėit,k ŌłÆ ╬Ė t                 Ōēż       k Ōēż ╬ĘK.
            NK              NK                                                              K      2
                   i,k                            i,k                                         k=0


These inequalities in Lemma 1 are frequently used in our analysis.


                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                         PN
Lemma 2. Given vectors Žē1 , ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , ŽēN Ōłł Rd and Žē = N1 i=1 Žēi , if we sample S ŌŖé {1, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , N }
uniformly randomly such that |S| = S, then it holds that
                        ’Ż«                ’Ż╣
                                       2                  N
                            1 X                        1 X           2
                      E’Ż░            Žēi ’Ż╗ Ōēż kŽēk2 +            kŽēi ŌłÆ Žēk .
                           S                          SN i=1
                                      iŌłłS


Proof. Letting 1{i Ōłł S} be the indicator for the event i Ōłł S , we prove this lemma by direct
calculation as follows:
                                                     2
          ’Ż«               ’Ż╣    ’Ż«                       ’Ż╣
                        2            N
              1                   1
                                         Žēi 1{i Ōłł S} ’Ż╗
                X                   X
        E’Ż░          Žēi ’Ż╗ = E ’Ż░
              S                   S i=1
                iŌłłS
                                  ’Ż«’Ż½                                               ’ŻČ’Ż╣
                              1
                                          kŽēi k 1{i Ōłł S} + 2     Žēi> Žēj 1{i, j Ōłł S}’ŻĖ’Ż╗
                                     X          2
                                                             X
                            = 2 E ’Ż░’ŻŁ
                             S         i                     i<j
                                     N
                                  1 X        2  1 S(S ŌłÆ 1) X >
                               =        kŽēi k + 2          2   Žē Žēj
                                 SN i=1        S N (N ŌłÆ 1) i<j i
                                                                    2
                                                           ’Ż½                     ’ŻČ
                                     N                        N        N
                                  1 X        2  1 S(S ŌłÆ 1) ’ŻŁ X        X        2
                               =        kŽēi k + 2                Žēi ŌłÆ     kŽēi k ’ŻĖ
                                 SN i=1        S N (N ŌłÆ 1)   i=1      i=1
                                                N
                                     N ŌłÆS 1 X           2  N (S ŌłÆ 1)
                               =                   kŽēi k +           kŽēk2
                                    S(N ŌłÆ 1) N i=1         S(N ŌłÆ 1)
                                             N
                                  N ŌłÆS 1 X              2
                               =                kŽēi ŌłÆ Žēk + kŽēk2
                                 S(N ŌłÆ 1) N i=1
                                              N
                                     1 X           2
                               Ōēż           kŽēi ŌłÆ Žēk + kŽēk2 ,
                                    SN i=1
                                               ŌłÆS
where the last inequality uses the fact that N
                                             N ŌłÆ1 Ōēż 1 for any nonempty set S.


From the L-smoothness of f (┬Ę) in Assumption 2, we have
   f ╬Ė t+1 ŌłÆ f ╬Ė t


              > t+1           L t+1             2
    Ōēż Ōłćf ╬Ė t     ╬Ė    ŌłÆ ╬Ėt +         ╬Ė   ŌłÆ ╬Ėt
                    ’Ż½             2     ’ŻČ
    (a)             >
                         ’ŻŁ 1
                                     X            git,k ’ŻĖ ╬│ 2 L
     Ōēż ŌłÆ╬│Ōłćf ╬Ė t                                          +
                          SK                      git,k     2
                                    iŌłłSt ,k
                                    ’Ż½                       ’ŻČ                     ’Ż½             ’ŻČ
                                                  X g t,k                          X g t,k          2
                   t          t >   ’ŻŁ 1                  i                  t >1           i    ’ŻĖ+ ╬│ L

    = ŌłÆ╬│ Ōłćf ╬Ė            ŌłÆg                                 ’ŻĖ     ŌłÆ╬│ g     ’ŻŁ
                                     SK                 git,k                 SK           t,k      2
                                              iŌłłSt ,k                             iŌłłSt ,k gi
                                                  ’Ż½                           ’ŻČ
                 t                       t >      ’ŻŁ 1
                                                         X        git,k   gt ’ŻĖ               ╬│2L
                       ŌłÆ gt ŌłÆ ╬│ g                                                ŌłÆ ╬│ gt +

    Ōēż ╬│ Ōłćf ╬Ė                                                            ŌłÆ t
                                                   SK             g t,k  kg k                  2
                                                        iŌłłSt ,k     i

    (b)                                                                  1 X          git,k        gt    ╬│2L
     Ōēż 2╬│ Ōłćf ╬Ė t ŌłÆ g t ŌłÆ ╬│ Ōłćf ╬Ė t + ╬│ g t

                                                                                              ŌłÆ     t
                                                                                                       +
                                                                        SK            git,k       kg k    2
                                                                            iŌłłSt ,k

    (c)                              ╬│ X                  ╬│2L
     Ōēż 2╬│ Ōłćf ╬Ė t ŌłÆ g t ŌłÆ ╬│ Ōłćf ╬Ė t +      kgit,k ŌłÆ g t k +

                                                              ,                                                (A1)
                                    SK                     2
                                                                  iŌłłSt ,k



                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            ╬│ P         git,k
where (a) uses the inequality that ╬Ė t+1 ŌłÆ ╬Ė t       =     SK  iŌłłSt ,k kg t,k k                 Ōēż ╬│, (b) is based on
                                                                                    i
         t          t                 t   t
╬│ kŌłćf (╬Ė )k ŌłÆ ╬│ kg k Ōēż ╬│ kŌłćf (╬Ė ) ŌłÆ g k and (c) is from the following relation:
                                                             ’Ż½                  ’ŻČ
                   1  X g t,k         g t
                                               kg t
                                                    k  X         g t,k
                                                                          g t,k
            gt                i
                                  ŌłÆ t      =                 ’ŻŁ i       ŌłÆ it ’ŻĖ
                 SK         g t,k    kg k      SK                g t,k    kg k
                        iŌłłSt ,k   i                             iŌłłSt ,k         i

                                                                              t,k
                                                      kg t k      X kg t k ŌłÆ gi
                                                 =                                                git,k
                                                      SK                   kg t k       git,k
                                                                iŌłłSt ,k


                                                   kg t k X               kg t k ŌłÆ git,k
                                                 Ōēż                                                  git,k
                                                   SK                      kg t k       git,k
                                                               iŌłłSt ,k

                                                       1 X
                                                 =                        g t ŌłÆ git,k
                                                      SK
                                                           iŌłłSt ,k
                                                    1 X
                                                 Ōēż                       git,k ŌłÆ g t .
                                                   SK
                                                           iŌłłSt ,k


Taking expectation on both sides of (A1), we obtain
                 ╬│E Ōłćf ╬Ė t ŌēżE f ╬Ė t ŌłÆ f ╬Ė t+1 + 2╬│E Ōłćf ╬Ė t ŌłÆ g t

                                             ’Ż«                  ’Ż╣
                                        ╬│      X                    ╬│2L
                                   +      E’Ż░        git,k ŌłÆ g t ’Ż╗ +     .
                                       SK                            2
                                              iŌłłSt ,k

Summing the above inequality over t and dividing it by ╬│T , we have
               T ŌłÆ1                                     ŌłÆ1
             1 X                1                  2 TX
                    E Ōłćf ╬Ė t Ōēż    E f ╬Ė0 ŌłÆ f ╬ĖT +          E Ōłćf ╬Ė t ŌłÆ g t

             T t=0             ╬│T                    T t=0
                                      T ŌłÆ1
                                             "            #
                                   1 X         X t,k
                                                        t     ╬│L
                               +           E     gi ŌłÆ g     +    .                                               (A2)
                                  SKT t=0                      2
                                                        iŌłłSt

                                                                          1
                                                                              PT ŌłÆ1
We  have the following results    on             the       terms          T     t=0       E kŌłćf (╬Ė t ) ŌłÆ g t k   and
 1
    PT ŌłÆ1 hP      t,k   t
                          i
SKT  t=0 E  iŌłłSt gi ŌłÆ g     in (A2).
                                                    PT ŌłÆ1
Lemma 3. Under Assumptions 2 and 3, the disparity T1 t=0 E kŌłćf (╬Ė t ) ŌłÆ g t k is upper bounded
by:
      T ŌłÆ1                                                   r                       r
    1 X          t
                     t      1    1             3Žā       ╬│L           10╬▓                30╬▓
           E Ōłćf ╬Ė ŌłÆ g Ōēż            ╬Ę╬▓KL + ŌłÜ           +    + 1+           ╬ĘKL + Žā
   T t=0                   ╬▓T 2                 SK       ╬▓            S                 SK
                                  s                    s   ŌłÜ
                                              4N 2

                                      ╬▓                   ╬Ę KLŽā
                           + 2╬│L          1+ 2 +            ŌłÜ    .
                                      S         S          2 S
Lemma     4. Under          Assumptions       2    and     3,      the   gradient   dissimilarity
 1
    PT ŌłÆ1 hP            t,k      t
                                   i
SKT   t=0 E    iŌłłSt   g i   ŌłÆ  g     is upper bounded  by:
               ’Ż«                       ’Ż╣
           T
      1 X ’Ż░ X               t,k     t ’Ż╗                 2                        2N
             E             gi ŌłÆ g        Ōēż2╬▓      1+ ŌłÜ        Žā + 2╬ĘKL + 1 +         ╬│L
    SKT t=1                                             K                         S
                 iŌłłSt ,k
                                                      ŌłÜ        r          !
                                               8N ╬▓     2Žā        2S
                                           +          ŌłÜ +             ╬ĘKL .
                                                ST       K       3N


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The proof of Lemma 3 is presented in subsection A.1 and the proof of Lemma 4 is presented in
subsection A.2.
Set ╬▓ = ŌłÜ╬▓0T , ╬│ = ╬│03 and ╬Ę = K ŌłÜ
                                 1
                                   T
                                     . From Lemma 3, we know that
                   T4
               T ŌłÆ1
            1  X
                  E Ōłćf ╬Ė t ŌłÆ g t

            T t=0
                                                     s              s
                 1      ╬▓0 L      3Žā        ╬│0 L         10╬▓0 L        30╬▓0
            Ōēż ŌłÜ              +ŌłÜ          +      1 +    1+ ŌłÜ ŌłÜ +Žā         ŌłÜ
               ╬▓0 T     2T         SK      ╬▓0 T 4        S T T        SK T
                      s                    s
                 2╬│0 L ╬▓0           4N 2           LŽā
              +                1+ 2 +             ŌłÜ
                   T     S           S          2 SKT
                                               s          s
                  3Žā          ╬│0 L      L           30╬▓0      LŽā
            . ŌłÜ           +       1 + ŌłÜ    +Žā         ŌłÜ +    ŌłÜ    .                             (A3)
               ╬▓0 SKT        ╬▓0 T 4      T        SK T      2 SKT
Similarly, from Lemma 4, we know that
                   ’Ż«                  ’Ż╣
             T ŌłÆ1
        1    X       X
                  E’Ż░      git,k ŌłÆ g t ’Ż╗
     SKT t=0
                    iŌłłSt ,k
                                                                         ŌłÜ    r      !
       2╬▓0            2              2L       2N ╬│0 L      8N ╬▓0           2Žā   2S L
      ŌēżŌłÜ          1+ ŌłÜ            Žā+ ŌłÜ   + 1+        3   +     3         ŌłÜ +      ŌłÜ
         T             K               T       S   T 4     ST 2            K    3N T
         2╬▓0 Žā      4╬▓0 Žā
      . ŌłÜ +ŌłÜ              .                                                                      (A4)
            T         KT
Define the initial optimality gap Ōłå := f ╬Ė 0 ŌłÆ f ŌłŚ . Then, f ╬Ė 0 ŌłÆ f ╬Ė T Ōēż f ╬Ė 0 ŌłÆ f ŌłŚ = Ōłå.

Plugging (A3) and (A4) into (A2), we have
                                                                                        s
              T ŌłÆ1
           1 X                         Ōłå            6Žā          2╬│  0 L     2L             30╬▓0
                   E Ōłćf ╬Ė t .

                                          1 +      ŌłÜ        +         1 + ŌłÜ     + 2Žā          ŌłÜ
           T t=0                     ╬│0 T 4     ╬▓0 SKT         ╬▓0 T   4      T            SK T
                                          ŌłÜ
                                             2LŽā       2╬▓0 Žā       4╬▓0 Žā     ╬│0 L
                                     +            1 + ŌłÜ      +ŌłÜ           +     3 .
                                        (SKT ) 4         T           KT      2T 4
                 1            ŌłÜ
Let ╬│0 = (SK) 4 and ╬▓0 = SK. Then, we have
                    T ŌłÆ1                                         ŌłÜ         ŌłÜ              !
                 1 X              t
                                                 Ōłå + L + Žā + LŽā               SKŽā + L
                         E Ōłćf ╬Ė         ŌēżO                     1         +      ŌłÜ           .
                 T t=0                                (SKT ) 4                    T
                        1               ŌłÜ
                                                               ŌłÆ 14
By setting SK Ōēż O T 3 , we have ŌłÜSK        T
                                                ŌłØ O   (SKT   )        and thus
                            T ŌłÆ1                                           ŌłÜ !
                          1 X                            Ōłå  +  L   +  Žā +    LŽā
                                 E Ōłćf ╬Ė t Ōēż O

                                                                         1          .
                          T t=0                                (SKT )    4


A.1   P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

The proof of Lemma 3 utilizes the following result.
                                                         2
Lemma 5. For any i, t, define Žåti := E kŌłćfi (╬Ė t ) ŌłÆ cti k . Under Assumptions 2 and 3, we have
            2                                 2t           2
                                                           N 2 2 Žā2

           2Žā       2S 2 2 2              S                                 1 2 2 2
    Žåti Ōēż       +       ╬Ę K L         1ŌłÆ           +4          ╬│ L  +    +    ╬Ę K  L     , ŌłĆi.
            K      3N                    4N                 S2         K    3

Proof. Since for any t, the S elements in St are uniformly sampled from {1, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , N }, we have
                          ( tŌłÆ1                                             S
                     t
                   ci =
                             ci                      with probability1 ŌłÆ N
                              1
                                P          t,k t,k                      S
                              K   k ŌłćF ╬Ėi ; ╬Ši         with probability N .


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Using YoungŌĆÖs inequality repeatedly, we have

            S

                                               S      1 X                                    2
   t                        t       tŌłÆ1 2                            t            t,k t,k

 Žåi = 1 ŌłÆ        E Ōłćfi ╬Ė ŌłÆ ci               + E               Ōłćfi ╬Ė ŌłÆ ŌłćF ╬Ėi ; ╬Ši
           N                                   N      K
                                                          k
                                                                                                   !
                                                              S 2Žā 2        2L2 X

            S                                                                                    2
                            t              tŌłÆ1      tŌłÆ1 2                               t,k    t

     Ōēż 1ŌłÆ        E Ōłćfi ╬Ė Ōłō Ōłćfi ╬Ė                 ŌłÆ ci       +             +         E ╬Ėi ŌłÆ ╬Ė
           N                                                  N     K        K
                                                                                 k
                                                                    2S Žā 2

            S               S        tŌłÆ1           2N       2 2                 1 2 2 2
     Ōēż 1ŌłÆ        E 1+              Žåi + 1 +               ╬│ L +               + ╬Ę K L
           N               2N                       S               N K         3
                                                2
            S              2N 2 2 2S Žā                 1
     Ōēż 1ŌłÆ         ŽåtŌłÆ1
                    i   +       ╬│ L +               + ╬Ę 2 K 2 L2
           2N               S              N K         3
                 t                               2                   X tŌłÆ1            Žä
            S         0    2N 2 2 2S Žā                  1 2 2 2                   S
     Ōēż 1ŌłÆ          Žåi +          ╬│ L +               + ╬Ę K L                 1ŌłÆ
           2N                S              N K         3              Žä =0
                                                                                 2N
                 t           2
                              N 2 2 Žā2

            S                                      1
     Ōēż 1ŌłÆ          Žå0i + 4       2
                                   ╬│ L +         + ╬Ę 2 K 2 L2 .
           2N                  S             K     3

       ŌłÆ1   1
               P  KŌłÆ1           0   ŌłÆ1,k
Since ci = K      k=0 ŌłćF ╬Ė ; ╬Ši            , we have

                  S

                                          2     S                 1 X                       2
                                                                                0,k 0,k
    Žå0i = 1 ŌłÆ         E Ōłćfi ╬Ė 0 ŌłÆ cŌłÆ1                       0

                                       i    +     E  Ōłćfi  ╬Ė     ŌłÆ        ŌłćF   ╬Ė i  ; ╬Š i
                 N                             N                  K
                                                                     k
                    S Žā2                                 Žā2

                                2S                   2
           Ōēż 1ŌłÆ              +       L2 E ╬Ė 0 ŌłÆ ╬Ėi0,k +
                    N K         N                        K
                         2
                    S Žā         2S 2 2 2
           Ōēż 1+              +      ╬Ę K L
                    N K         3N
              2Žā 2    2S 2 2 2
           Ōēż       +      ╬Ę K L .
               K      3N
Then, we have
               2                                 t      2
                                                        N 2 2 Žā2

         t     2Žā       2S 2 2 2            S                             1 2 2 2
       Žåi Ōēż         +      ╬Ę K L       1ŌłÆ          +4       ╬│ L +       + ╬Ę K L
                K      3N                  2N           S2           K    3
               2                                 2t      2             2

               2Žā       2S 2 2 2            S            N 2 2 Žā           1 2 2 2
           Ōēż        +      ╬Ę K L       1ŌłÆ           +4        ╬│ L  +     +   ╬Ę  K    L     ,
                K      3N                  4N            S2          K     3
                               S          S 2

where we use the relation 1 ŌłÆ 2N  Ōēż 1 ŌłÆ 4N     .

Define E t := Ōłćf (╬Ė t ) ŌłÆ g t and ut := Ōłćf (╬Ė t ) ŌłÆ Ōłćf ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 . From the update rule of momentum
g t , we have
                                      ’Ż½                                                            ’ŻČ
                                                            1   X
E t =(1 ŌłÆ ╬▓) Ōłćf ╬Ė t ŌłÆ g tŌłÆ1 + ╬▓ ’ŻŁŌłćf ╬Ė t ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ                         ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ citŌłÆ1 ’ŻĖ

                                                           SK
                                                               iŌłłSt ,k
                                      |                           {z                               }
                                                                           :=v t
               tŌłÆ1                t      t
   =(1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)E         + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)u + ╬▓v
                     t
                     X                          t
                                                X
   =(1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)t E 0 +          uŽä (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)t+1ŌłÆŽä +          ╬▓v Žä (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)tŌłÆŽä .
                     Žä =1                       Žä =1
                                                                                    1
Based on the triangle inequality of `2 norm and the concavity of the square root (┬Ę) 2 , we have
                                                            ’Ż½                              ’ŻČ1
                                                                                          2 2
                               X t                                Xt
 E E t Ōēż(1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)t E E 0 +            E kuŽä k (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)t+1ŌłÆŽä + ’ŻŁE         ╬▓v Žä (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)tŌłÆŽä ’ŻĖ . (A5)
                                  Žä =1                                     Žä =1



                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                0 ŌłÆ1,k
                    PKŌłÆ1
Since cŌłÆ1  1
                                         for any i, cŌłÆ1 = N1 i cŌłÆ1        ŌłÆ1
                                                                             = cŌłÆ1 , we have
                                                            P
       i  =K         k=0 ŌłćF   ╬Ė  ; ╬Š i                          i , and g


                                1 X                    ╬▓ X
E E 0 = E Ōłćf ╬Ė 0 ŌłÆ                  ŌłćF ╬Ė 0 ; ╬ŠiŌłÆ1,k +        ŌłćF ╬Ėi0 ; ╬ŠiŌłÆ1,k ŌłÆ ŌłćF ╬Ėi0,k ; ╬Ši0,k

                               NK                     SK
                                          i,k                                  iŌłłS0 ,k


           Žā        ╬▓ X
                               ŌłćF ╬Ėi0 ; ╬ŠiŌłÆ1,k Ōłō Ōłćfi ╬Ėi0 Ōłō Ōłćfi ╬Ėi0,k ŌłÆ ŌłćF ╬Ėi0,k ; ╬Ši0,k

        ŌēżŌłÜ    +E
           NK     SK
                      iŌłłS0 ,k
                               ’Ż«                             ’Ż╣
           Žā     ╬▓Žā      ╬▓ ’Ż░ X                                     ╬▓Žā
                                        Ōłćfi ╬Ė 0 ŌłÆ Ōłćfi ╬Ėi0,k ’Ż╗ + ŌłÜ

        ŌēżŌłÜ    +ŌłÜ     +       E
           NK    SK     SK                                          SK
                                                     iŌłłS0 ,k

              ╬▓L X                       3Žā
        Ōēż               E ╬Ėi0,k ŌłÆ ╬Ė 0 + ŌłÜ
              NK                          SK
                    i,k
              1         3Žā
        Ōēż       ╬Ę╬▓KL + ŌłÜ    ,                                                                                   (A6)
              2          SK


where the last inequality uses the results in Lemma 1.
Additionally, for any t, we have


                                                                                    1 X git,k
    ut = Ōłćf ╬Ė t+1 ŌłÆ Ōłćf ╬Ė t Ōēż L ╬Ė t+1 ŌłÆ ╬Ė t Ōēż ╬│L

                                                                                                t,k
                                                                                                    Ōēż ╬│L.       (A7)
                                                                                   SK
                                                                                      iŌłłSt ,k kgi k


To proceed, we handle the last term in (A5). First, we have


       t                          2       t
       X                                  X
                Žä        tŌłÆŽä
   E          ╬▓v (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)              =          ╬▓ 2 Ekv Žä k2 (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)2(tŌłÆŽä )
       Žä =1                               Žä =1
                                                      X
                                          +                         E ╬▓v Žä1 (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)tŌłÆŽä1 , ╬▓v Žä2 (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)tŌłÆŽä2 .   (A8)
                                              1ŌēżŽä1 ,Žä2 Ōēżt,Žä1 6=Žä2



Let F 0 6= Ōłģ and Fit,k := Žā({╬Ėit,j }0ŌēżjŌēżk Ōł¬ F t ) and F t+1 := Žā(Ōł¬i Fit,K ) for all t Ōēź 0, where
Žā() indicates the Žā-algebra. Let E[┬Ę|F t ] represent the expectation conditioned on the filtration F t
with respect to the random variables {╬Šit,k }1ŌēżiŌēżN,0Ōēżk<K in the t-th iteration. Let E╬Št,k [┬Ę] represent
                                                                                                      i

the expectation taking over the random sample ╬Šit,k . Similarly, let ESt [┬Ę] represent the expectation
taking over the uniformly sampled client set St . The set St is independent across different t. Then,
for any t, we have


        E[v t |F t ] = E{╬Št,k }                t
                                         ,St [v ]
                           i      ŌłĆi,k
                                          ’Ż«                                            ’Ż╣
                                    ’Ż░Ōłćf ╬Ė ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ 1
                                                       X
                                                      t
                                                             ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

                    = E{╬Št,k }                                                   i
                                                                                       ’Ż╗
                         i     ŌłĆi,k                 NK
                                                       i,k
                                     1 X
                    = Ōłćf ╬Ė t ŌłÆ            Ōłćfi ╬Ėit,k ,

                                    NK
                                                    i,k



                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                          PN
where the last equality is based on Assumption 3 and the fact that N1 i=1 cti = ct for any t. Then,
for any 0 Ōēż t1 < t2 Ōēż T ŌłÆ 1, we have
 E v t1 , v t2
  = E v t1 , E v t2 |F t2

      *                                                                                          +
           1 X                t1

                                              t1 ,k
                                                       1 X
                                                                         t2

                                                                                        t2 ,k

  =E                    Ōłćfi ╬Ė ŌłÆ Ōłćfi ╬Ėi                 ,           Ōłćfi ╬Ė ŌłÆ Ōłćfi ╬Ėi
          SK                                             NK
                iŌłłSt ,k                                        i,k
      *                                                                                                   +
           1 X
                              t1 ,k

                                                 t1 ,k t1 ,k
                                                                1 X
                                                                                  t2

                                                                                                  t2 ,k

  +E                    Ōłćfi ╬Ėi        ŌłÆ ŌłćF ╬Ėi ; ╬Ši              ,         Ōłćfi ╬Ė ŌłÆ Ōłćfi ╬Ėi
         SK                                                       NK
                iŌłłSt ,k                                              i,k
      *        "                      #                                          +
                 1 X tŌłÆ1                   1  X
                             ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1                   Ōłćfi ╬Ė t2 ŌłÆ Ōłćfi ╬Ėit2 ,k

  + E ESt               c        i      ,
                 S                        NK
                    iŌłłSt                           i,k

     L2 X                     2   L2 X                    2    Žā   L X t2 ,k
 Ōēż            E ╬Ėit1 ,k ŌłÆ ╬Ė t1 +          E ╬Ėit2 ,k ŌłÆ ╬Ė t2 + ŌłÜ           ╬Ėi ŌłÆ ╬Ė t 2
   2N K                          2N K                          SK NK
          i,k                         i,k                            i,k
                 ŌłÜ
   1            ╬Ę KLŽā
 Ōēż ╬Ę 2 K 2 L2 +     ŌłÜ     .                                                      (A9)
   3              2 S
Further, based on Lemma 2, we have
                                                                    2
      t 2                             1 X
                           t
                                          ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k

E v         ŌēżE Ōłćf ╬Ė                ŌłÆ
                                     NK
                                             i,k
                                                                                      !                         2
                  1 1 X   1 X                    1 X
                              ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ     ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k                         ctŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

                +       E                                                                 ŌłÆ    i
                  S N i   K                      N i
                            k
                    |                             {z                                                            }
                                                                        :=╬øt

                                       Žā2

                                             2             ╬øt
            Ōēż2 L E ╬Ė2          t
                                  +ŌłÆ ╬Ėit,k             +
                                     NK                    S
                              2
             2             2Žā     ╬øt
            Ōēż ╬Ę 2 K 2 L2 +      +    .
             3             NK     S
                                                                2
     1 X   1 X
╬øt Ōēż     E     ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1
                                   i
     N i   K
                               k
                                                                                                   2
      1 X   1 X
                ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k Ōłō Ōłćfi ╬Ėit,k Ōłō Ōłćfi ╬Ė t Ōłō Ōłćfi ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

    =     E                                                           i
      N i   K
                               k
      4Žā 2   4L2 X              2                   2  4 X                    2
                   E ╬Ėit,k ŌłÆ ╬Ė t + 4L2 E ╬Ė t ŌłÆ ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 +     E Ōłćfi ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

    Ōēż      +                                                              i
       K     NK                                        N i
                        i,k
            2
      4Žā      4                           4 X tŌłÆ1
    Ōēż      + ╬Ę 2 K 2 L2 + 4╬│ 2 L2 +               Žå ,
        K     3                          N i i
                                            2
where ŽåtŌłÆ1  := E Ōłćfi ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

         i                            i       . From Lemma 5, we know that, for any i,
               2                                     2(tŌłÆ1)       2
                                                                  N 2 2 Žā2

                2Žā     2S 2 2 2                   S                                 1 2 2 2
     ŽåtŌłÆ1
       i   Ōēż        +      ╬Ę  K    L        1 ŌłÆ             + 4      ╬│  L +      +    ╬Ę K L
                 K     3N                        4N               S2         K      3
                2                        2
             6Žā                     4N
           Ōēż      + 2╬Ę 2 K 2 L2 + 2 ╬│ 2 L2 .                                                 (A10)
              K                      S
Plugging the upper bound of ŽåtŌłÆ1i    into ╬øt yields
                                    2
                                                                     4N 2

                               28Žā         28 2 2 2         2 2
                        ╬øt Ōēż            + ╬Ę K L + 4╬│ L 1 + 2 .
                                  K         3                          S


                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then, we have

                                                                               30Žā 2   4╬│ 2 L2              4N 2

                                2            2 10
                     E vt           Ōēż          +           ╬Ę 2 K 2 L2 +              +               1+                .            (A11)
                                             3   S                             SK        S                   S2

Plugging (A9) and (A11) into (A8) gives

          t                                  2
          X
                     Žä              tŌłÆŽä
      E          ╬▓v (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)                      Ōēż╬▓Ekv Žä k2 + E hv Žä1 , v Žä2 i
          Žä =1
                                                                        30Žā 2 ╬▓   4╬▓╬│ 2 L2                               4N 2

                                                       2 10                2    2   2
                                                 Ōēż       +    ╬▓╬Ę K L +          +                                      1+ 2
                                                       3   S              SK        S                                     S
                                                                   ŌłÜ
                                                    1             ╬Ę KLŽā
                                                   + ╬Ę 2 K 2 L2 +   ŌłÜ   .
                                                    3              2 S

Since ╬▓ Ōēż 1, taking square root on both sides of the above inequality yields

                 ’Ż½                                         2
                                                               ’ŻČ 12
                         t
                         X
                 ’ŻŁE             ╬▓v Žä (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)tŌłÆŽä                ’ŻĖ
                         Žä =1
                     r                                 r            s           s ŌłÜ
                            10╬▓                            30╬▓       ╬▓   4N 2    ╬Ę KLŽā
                 Ōēż       1+     ╬ĘKL + Žā                        + 2╬│L   1+ 2 +      ŌłÜ   ,                                            (A12)
                             S                             SK        S    S       2 S
                                    ŌłÜ                  ŌłÜ           ŌłÜ
where we use the fact that               a+bŌēż              a+          b, for any a, b Ōēź 0.
Plugging (A6), (A7), and (A12) into (A5), we have

                                                 r               r
                 t        1          3Žā
                                     t       ╬│L      10╬▓           30╬▓
          EkE k Ōēż(1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)    ╬Ę╬▓KL + ŌłÜ       +    + 1+     ╬ĘKL + Žā
                          2           SK      ╬▓       S            SK
                        s                s ŌłÜ
                                4N 2

                         ╬▓                 ╬Ę KLŽā
                  + 2╬│L      1+ 2 +          ŌłÜ   .
                         S       S          2 S

Summing the above inequality over t yields

            T ŌłÆ1                                               r                r
          1 X              1            1         3Žā      ╬│L        10╬▓           30╬▓
                EkE t k Ōēż                 ╬Ę╬▓KL + ŌłÜ      +    + 1+       ╬ĘKL + Žā
          T t=0           ╬▓T            2          SK      ╬▓         S            SK
                                         s               s   ŌłÜ
                                                 4N 2

                                            ╬▓               ╬Ę KLŽā
                                    + 2╬│L     1+ 2 +          ŌłÜ   .
                                            S     S          2 S


A.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA 4

Recall that git,k = ╬▓ ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ citŌłÆ1 + ctŌłÆ1 + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)g tŌłÆ1 , and

                      1 X t,k
          gt =            gi
                     SK
                          iŌłłSt ,k
                                                 KŌłÆ1
                                                                                        !              !
                         1 X              1 X
             =╬▓                               ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1
                                                                  i                         +c   tŌłÆ1
                                                                                                           + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)g tŌłÆ1 .
                         S                K
                            iŌłłSt                 k=0



                                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then, we have
   ’Ż«                           ’Ż╣
       1    X
 E’Ż░                git,k ŌłÆ g t ’Ż╗
      SK
           iŌłłSt ,k
         ’Ż«                                                                                      ! ’Ż╣
                                                                    KŌłÆ1
             1 X                                   1 X            1 X
  = ╬▓E ’Ż░                 ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1
                                             i   ŌłÆ                    ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1
                                                                                          i
                                                                                                  ’Ż╗
           SK                                      S              K
               iŌłłSt ,k                                     iŌłłSt     k=0

       2╬▓ X
    Ōēż          E ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1
                                     i
      NK
           i,k
       2╬▓ X
               E ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k Ōłō Ōłćfi ╬Ėit,k Ōłō Ōłćfi ╬Ė t Ōłō Ōłćfi ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

    =                                                                  i
      NK
           i,k
         ’Ż½                                        ’ŻČ
                 L X t,k                               2╬▓ X
                       ╬Ėi ŌłÆ ╬Ė t + L ╬Ė t ŌłÆ ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ’ŻĖ +         E Ōłćfi ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

    Ōēż 2╬▓ ’ŻŁŽā +                                                              i
               NK                                      N i
                   i,k

               1                 2╬▓ X
                                       q
    Ōēż 2╬▓ Žā + ╬ĘKL + ╬│L +                  ŽåtŌłÆ1
                                          i   .
               2                 N i

From Lemma 5, we know that
              ŌłÜ      r          !        tŌłÆ1
                2Žā       2S           S           N       Žā   1
   q
       tŌłÆ1
      Žåi Ōēż ŌłÜ +              ╬ĘKL   1ŌłÆ         +2     ╬│L + ŌłÜ + ŌłÜ ╬ĘKL , ŌłĆi.
                K       3N           4N           S       K    3

Thus, we have
          ’Ż«                              ’Ż╣

             1 X                                      2                   2N
        E’Ż░                 git,k ŌłÆ g t   ’Ż╗ Ōēż2╬▓   1+  ŌłÜ     Žā + 2╬ĘKL + 1 +       ╬│L
            SK                                         K                    S
                 iŌłłSt ,k
                                                  ŌłÜ      r         !          tŌłÆ1
                                                    2Žā      2S            S
                                             + 2╬▓ ŌłÜ +          ╬ĘKL    1ŌłÆ          .
                                                    K       3N           4N

Summing the above inequality over t yields
                ’Ż«                    ’Ż╣
            T
      1 X ’Ż░ X              t,k     t ’Ż╗              2                   2N
              E           gi ŌłÆ g        Ōēż2╬▓     1+ ŌłÜ     Žā + 2╬ĘKL + 1 +     ╬│L
    SKT t=1                                          K                   S
                  iŌłłSt ,k
                                                   ŌłÜ      r        !
                                             8N ╬▓    2Žā      2S
                                           +       ŌłÜ +          ╬ĘKL .
                                              ST     K      3N


B       T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF PA DA MF ED WITH VARIANCE R EDUCTION

The analysis of PAdaMFed-VR is similar to that of PAdaMFed. We first present the following two
auxiliary Lemmas.
                                                     PT ŌłÆ1
Lemma 6. Under Assumptions 1 and 3, the disparity T1 t=0 E kŌłćf (╬Ė t ) ŌłÆ g t k is upper bounded
by:
        T ŌłÆ1                                                         r             r
      1 X           t
                         t     1     1            3Žā      ╬ĘKL             2           22╬▓
             E Ōłćf ╬Ė ŌłÆ g Ōēż              ╬ĘKL + ŌłÜ          +     + ╬│L             +Žā
      T t=0                   ╬▓T 2                SK       2╬▓           SK╬▓           SK
                                    s                         r
                                                  4N 2

                                        3╬▓                       6╬▓
                               + ╬│L          1 + 2 + ╬ĘKL             .
                                        S          S              S


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 PAdaMFed-VR: PAdaMFed with Variance Reduction

                                                                                  ŌłćF ╬Ė 0 ; ╬ŠiŌłÆ1,k for
                                                                         PKŌłÆ1
 1: Require: initial model ╬Ė 0 , ╬Ė ŌłÆ1 = ╬Ė 0 , control variates cŌłÆ1
                                                                i
                                                                     1
                                                                   = K      k=0
    any i, cŌłÆ1 = N1 i cŌłÆ1                     ŌłÆ1
                                                 = cŌłÆ1 , global learning rate ╬│, local learning rate ╬Ę,
                        P
                             i , momentum g
    and momentum parameter ╬▓
 2: for t = 0, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , T ŌłÆ 1 do
 3:   Central Server: Uniformly sample clients St ŌŖå {1, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , N } with |St | = S
 4:   for each client i Ōłł St in parallel do
 5:      Initialize local model ╬Ėit,0 = ╬Ė t and control variate cti = 0 (for i Ōłł
                                                                               / St , cti = ctŌłÆ1
                                                                                             i   )
 6:      for k = 0, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , K ŌłÆ 1 do
                           git,k              ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k     + ╬▓ ctŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

 7:         Compute                  =                                                i       + (1 ŌłÆ

                                       t,k
            ╬▓) g tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ; ╬Ši
                                                       g t,k
 8:        Update local model ╬Ėit,k+1 = ╬Ėit,k ŌłÆ ╬Ę git,k
                                                  k  i k
 9:        Update control variate ci = ci + K ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k
                                   t      t    1

10:     end for
11:     Upload ╬Ėit,K and cti to central server
12:   end for
      Central server:
                                                         t,K
      Aggregate local updates g t = ╬ĘSK1             t
                                            P
13:                                          iŌłłSt ╬Ė ŌłÆ ╬Ėi
14:   Update global model ╬Ė t+1 = ╬Ė t ŌłÆ ╬│g t P
      Aggregate control variate ct = ctŌłÆ1 + N1 iŌłłSt cti ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

15:                                                          i
      Aggregate momentum g t = ╬▓ S1 iŌłłSt cti ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

                                                           + ctŌłÆ1 + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)g tŌłÆ1
                                       P
16:                                                    i
17:   Download ╬Ė t+1 , ╬▓ct + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)g t to all clients
18: end for


Lemma     7. Under          Assumptions      1    and     3,      the   gradient   dissimilarity
 1
    PT ŌłÆ1 hP            t,k     t
                                  i
SKT   t=0 E    iŌłłSt gi ŌłÆ g          is upper bounded by:
               ’Ż«                      ’Ż╣
           T
      1 X ’Ż░ X               t,k    t ’Ż╗                2                         2N
             E             gi ŌłÆ g       Ōēż2╬▓      1+ ŌłÜ        Žā + 2╬ĘKL + 1 +         ╬│L
    SKT t=1                                            K                         S
                 iŌłłSt ,k
                                                     ŌłÜ        r          !
                                              8N ╬▓     2Žā        2S
                                          +          ŌłÜ +             ╬ĘKL + ╬ĘKL + 2╬│L.
                                               ST      K        3N

Set ╬▓ = ╬▓02 and ╬│ = ╬│02 . ╬Ę = KT   1
                                     . From Lemma 6, we know that
         T3           T3
    T ŌłÆ1                                                                    r                 r
  1 X             t
                          t        1      L      3Žā             L      ╬│0 L       2       Žā     22╬▓0
         E Ōłćf ╬Ė ŌłÆ g Ōēż                1       +ŌłÜ          +        1 +     1           + 1
  T t=0                         ╬▓0 T 3 2T         SK        2╬▓0 T 3    T3     SK╬▓0       T3     SK
                                        s                           r
                                                      4N 2

                                    ╬│0 L 3╬▓0                      L    6╬▓0
                                 +               1+ 2 + 4
                                     T      S          S         T3     S
                                                                 r               r
                                     3Žā           L         ╬│0 L     2        Žā     22╬▓0
                             . ŌłÜ           1 +        1 +      1           + 1           .       (A13)
                                ╬▓0 SKT 3        2╬▓0 T 3     T3     SK╬▓0      T3      SK
Similarly, from Lemma 7, we have
                 ’Ż«                      ’Ż╣
             T
       1 X ’Ż░ X               t,k     t ’Ż╗    2╬▓0            2         2L            2N ╬│0 L
               E            gi ŌłÆ g        Ōēż 2       1+ ŌłÜ         Žā+      + 1+               2
     SKT t=1                                T3              K        T              S    T3
                  iŌłłSt ,k
                                                        ŌłÜ         r        !
                                              8N ╬▓0        2Žā       2S L        L 2╬│0 L
                                            +      5     ŌłÜ +                 + +        2 .      (A14)
                                               ST 3        K        3N T        T     T3


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Plugging (A13) and (A14) into (A2), we have
           T ŌłÆ1                                             ŌłÜ            ŌłÜ
         1 X           t
                               Ōłå         6Žā        L       2 2╬│0 L     2Žā 22╬▓0
                E Ōłćf ╬Ė     .      1 +   ŌłÜ    1 +      1 + ŌłÜ        1 + ŌłÜ     1
         T t=0               ╬│0 T 3   ╬▓0 SKT 3   ╬▓0 T 3     SK╬▓0 T 3     SKT 3
                                           2╬▓0 Žā
                                        2╬│0 L
                                  2  + +   2 .
                                T3       T3
              1               1
Set ╬▓0 = (SK) 3 and ╬│0 = (SK) 3 , we have
               T ŌłÆ1                                                       ŌłÜ
             1 X                    Ōłå             6Žā         L          2 2╬│0 L
                    E Ōłćf ╬Ė t .

                                        1  +    ŌłÜ      1 +        1 +  ŌłÜ        1
             T t=0                ╬│0 T 3     ╬▓0 SKT 3      ╬▓0 T 3        SK╬▓0 T 3
                                          ŌłÜ
                                     2Žā 22╬▓0        2╬▓0 Žā 2╬│0 L
                                   + ŌłÜ         1 +    2  +      2
                                         SKT 3       T3      T3
                                                                      1
                                                                        !
                                        Ōłå + L + Žā (L + Žā)(SK) 3
                                ŌēżO               1  +         2           .
                                          (SKT ) 3          T3
                   ŌłÜ                    1                1

                      T , we have (SK)
                                        3
By setting SK Ōēż O                     2    ŌłØ O (SKT )ŌłÆ 3 and thus
                                                   T3
                                      T ŌłÆ1
                                    1 X                                        Ōłå+L+Žā
                                          E Ōłćf ╬Ė t Ōēż O

                                                                                        1          .
                                    T t=0                                      (SKT ) 3

B.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 6

Since E t := Ōłćf (╬Ė t ) ŌłÆ g t , we have
                     1 X                            ╬▓ X
 E t =Ōłćf ╬Ė t ŌłÆ                   ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k +             citŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

                  SK                                   S
                         iŌłłSt ,k                           iŌłłSt
                 ’Ż½                                                             ’ŻČ
                                                 1    X
                                                                         t,k

       ŌłÆ (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓) ’ŻŁg tŌłÆ1 Ōłō Ōłćf ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ                         ŌłćF ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ; ╬Ši ’ŻĖ

                                               SK
                                                     iŌłłSt ,k
                          1     X
     =(1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)E tŌłÆ1 +                    ŌłćF ╬Ė t ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k
                        SK
                               iŌłłSt ,k
                        |                          {z                        }
                                                            :=wt
            ’Ż½                                                                                    ’ŻČ
                                            1      X
                       t
                             ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ                           ŌłćF ╬Ė t ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

        + ╬▓ ’ŻŁŌłćf ╬Ė                                                                 i
                                                                                      ’ŻĖ
                                           SK
                                                  iŌłłSt ,k
            |                                        {z                                            }
                                                     vt
                                                   :=e
                   ’Ż½                                                                  ’ŻČ
                     1  X
                               ŌłćF ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ŌłćF ╬Ė t ; ╬Šit,k + Ōłćf ╬Ė t ŌłÆ Ōłćf ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ’ŻĖ

        + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓) ’ŻŁ
                    SK
                       iŌłłSt ,k
                  |                                 {z                                }
                                                                             et
                                                                           :=u
                        t
                        X                               t
                                                        X                                   t
                                                                                            X
      =(1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)t E 0 +          wŽä (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)tŌłÆŽä +                   e Žä (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)t+1ŌłÆŽä +
                                                                 u                                  eŽä (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)tŌłÆŽä .
                                                                                                   ╬▓v
                        Žä =1                            Žä =1                                Žä =1
                                                                                    ’Ż½                                 2
                                                                                                                          ’ŻČ 21
                                           t
                                           X                                                t
                                                                                            X
      E E t Ōēż(1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)t E E 0 +                     E wt (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)tŌłÆŽä + ’ŻŁE                             e Žä (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)t+1ŌłÆŽä
                                                                                                   u                      ’ŻĖ
                                           Žä =1                                             Žä =1
                   ’Ż½                                        2
                                                                ’ŻČ 12
                             t
                             X
                 + ’ŻŁE                eŽä (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)tŌłÆŽä
                                    ╬▓v                          ’ŻĖ .                                                           (A15)
                             Žä =1



                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      0 ŌłÆ1,k
                                         PKŌłÆ1
Since ╬Ė ŌłÆ1 = ╬Ė 0 , cŌłÆ1   1
                                                               for any i, cŌłÆ1 = N1 i cŌłÆ1        ŌłÆ1
                                                                                                   = cŌłÆ1 ,
                                                                                  P
                    i  = K                 k=0 ŌłćF   ╬Ė  ; ╬Š i                          i , and g
we have
                                          1 X
   E E 0 =E Ōłćf ╬Ė 0 ŌłÆ                          ŌłćF ╬Ė 0 ; ╬ŠiŌłÆ1,k

                                         NK
                                                 i,k


                     1 X
                  +            ╬▓ŌłćF ╬Ėi0 ; ╬ŠiŌłÆ1,k + (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)ŌłćF ╬Ė 0 ; ╬Ši0,k ŌłÆ ŌłćF ╬Ėi0,k ; ╬Ši0,k
                   SK
                       iŌłłS0 ,k
                                         ’Ż«                               ’Ż╣
                   Žā         Žā     1 ’Ż░ X                                      Žā
                                                 Ōłćfi ╬Ė 0 ŌłÆ Ōłćfi ╬Ėi0,k ’Ż╗ + ŌłÜ

                ŌēżŌłÜ     +ŌłÜ       +    E
                   NK        SK   SK                                         SK
                                                         iŌłłS0 ,k

                   L X                  3Žā
                Ōēż      E ╬Ėi0,k ŌłÆ ╬Ė 0 + ŌłÜ
                  NK                     SK
                          i,k
                 1       3Žā
                Ōēż ╬ĘKL + ŌłÜ    .                                                                                       (A16)
                 2        SK
Then, we have
                                                      L X                1
                                         wt Ōēż             E ╬Ėit,k ŌłÆ ╬Ė t Ōēż ╬ĘKL.                                       (A17)
                                                     SK                  2
                                                         iŌłłSt ,k

                      ut |F t ] = 0, then, for any 0 Ōēż t1 < t2 Ōēż T ŌłÆ 1, we have
Additionally, since E[e
                                           e t1 , u
                                         E u      e t2 = E u
                                                           e t1 , E[e
                                                                    ut2 |F t2 ] = 0.
From Lemma 2, for any t, we have
                                                                                                                 2
      t 2       1 X
                     ŌłćF ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ŌłćF ╬Ė t ; ╬Šit,k + Ōłćf ╬Ė t ŌłÆ Ōłćf ╬Ė tŌłÆ1

E u
  e         ŌēżE
               NK
                           i,k

                          N                                                                                                  2
                   1 X     1 X
                                ŌłćF ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ŌłćF ╬Ė t ; ╬Šit,k + Ōłćf ╬Ė t ŌłÆ Ōłćf ╬Ė tŌłÆ1

                +        E
                  SN i=1   K
                                           k
           L2                2  L2             2
        Ōēż         ╬Ė t ŌłÆ ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 +    ╬Ė t ŌłÆ ╬Ė tŌłÆ1
          NK                    SK
          2╬│ 2 L2
        Ōēż         .
           SK
Then, we have
                          t                              2       t
                          X
                                     Žä           t+1ŌłÆŽä
                                                                 X                               2╬│ 2 L2
                      E             e (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)
                                    u                        =            uŽä k2 (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)t+1ŌłÆŽä Ōēż
                                                                        Eke                              .           (A18)
                          Žä =1                                   Žä =1
                                                                                                 SK╬▓
                   v t |F t ] = 0, for any 0 Ōēż t1 < t2 Ōēż T ŌłÆ 1, we have
Similarly, since E[e
                                           et1 , v
                                         E v     et2 = E v
                                                         et1 , E[e
                                                                 v t2 |F t2 ] = 0.
From Lemma 2, for any t, we have
                                                                         2                                              2
                                                                                     N
                                       1 X                                        1 X 1 X
    t 2                     t
                                           ŌłćF ╬Ė t ; ╬Šit,k                                 ŌłćF ╬Ė t ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

  v k Ōēż E Ōłćf ╬Ė
Eke                                 ŌłÆ                                        +                              i
                                      NK                                         SN i=1 K
                                               i,k                                          k

                       N                                                                                     2
              Žā2    1 X 1 X
                            ŌłćF ╬Ė t ; ╬Šit,k Ōłō Ōłćfi ╬Ė t Ōłō Ōłćfi ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1

            Ōēż    +                                                  i
              NK   SN i=1 K
                                                 k
                  2             2       N
                Žā    3Žā  3         3 1 X tŌłÆ1
            Ōēż      +    + ╬│ 2 L2 +        Žå .
                NK   SK  S         S N i=1 i


                                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                         2                        2
By (A10), ŽåtŌłÆ1
           i   Ōēż 6Žā      2 2 2    4N    2 2
                  K + 2╬Ę K L + S 2 ╬│ L . Then, we have

                            22Žā 2   3╬│ 2 L2      4N 2

                       t 2                              6
                      vk Ōēż
                    Eke           +           1 + 2 + ╬Ę 2 K 2 L2 .
                            SK        S           S     S

             t                       2          t
             X                                  X
       E             eŽä (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)tŌłÆŽä
                    ╬▓v                   Ōēż ╬▓2            v Žä k2 (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)t+1ŌłÆŽä
                                                       Eke
             Žä =1                               Žä =1
                                                   2
                                                    3╬▓╬│ 2 L2                4N 2

                                             22╬▓Žā                                          6╬▓ 2 2 2
                                         Ōēż        +                    1+              +     ╬Ę K L .   (A19)
                                              SK      S                      S2            S
Plugging (A16), (A17), (A18), and (A19) into (A15) yields
                                                               r        r
                t          t    1          3Žā       ╬ĘKL           2       22╬▓
           EkE k Ōēż(1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)         ╬ĘKL + ŌłÜ        +         + ╬│L      +Žā
                                2           SK        2╬▓         SK╬▓      SK
                          s                           r
                                       4N 2

                             3╬▓                         6╬▓
                    + ╬│L            1 + 2 + ╬ĘKL            .
                              S         S                S

Summing the above inequality over t yields
                 T ŌłÆ1                                          r        r
             1 X              1     1         3Žā      ╬ĘKL         2       22╬▓
                   EkE t k Ōēż          ╬ĘKL + ŌłÜ       +     + ╬│L       +Žā
             T t=0           ╬▓T     2         SK       2╬▓        SK╬▓      SK
                                   s                      r
                                              4N 2

                                       3╬▓                   6╬▓
                               + ╬│L        1 + 2 + ╬ĘKL         .
                                       S       S            S

B.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA 7

With variance reduction, we have git,k = ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ╬▓ citŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1 + (1 ŌłÆ


╬▓) g tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 ; ╬Šit,k . Since g t = SK
                                           1           t,k
                                             P
                                              iŌłłSt ,k gi , we have
  "                   #
   1 X t,k        t
E          gi ŌłÆ g
  SK
     iŌłłSt
   2 X
Ōēż         E ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ╬▓ctŌłÆ1
                                   i   ŌłÆ (1 ŌłÆ  ╬▓)ŌłćF   ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 t,k
                                                           ; ╬Š i
  NK
      i,k
   2 X
Ōēż          ╬▓E ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1i   +  (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)E  ŌłćF     ╬Ė  t,k t,k
                                                                i  ; ╬Š i     ŌłÆ ŌłćF  ╬Ė tŌłÆ1 t,k
                                                                                        ; ╬Š i
  NK
      i,k
                                                   ’Ż½                                               ’ŻČ
  2╬▓ X
                    t,k t,k

                                 tŌłÆ1                    1  X             t,k    t        t     tŌłÆ1
Ōēż         E ŌłćF ╬Ėi ; ╬Ši        ŌłÆ ci     + 2L(1 ŌłÆ ╬▓) ’ŻŁ              E ╬Ėi ŌłÆ ╬Ė + E ╬Ė ŌłÆ ╬Ė               ’ŻĖ
  NK                                                 NK
           i,k                                                               i,k

  2╬▓ X
Ōēż      E ŌłćF ╬Ėit,k ; ╬Šit,k ŌłÆ ctŌłÆ1
                             i   + ╬ĘKL + 2╬│L.
  NK
           i,k

From Section A.2, we know that

    2╬▓ X
                      t,k t,k

                                   tŌłÆ1            2                   2N
             E ŌłćF ╬Ėi ; ╬Ši       ŌłÆ ci   Ōēż2╬▓    1+ ŌłÜ     Žā + 2╬ĘKL + 1 +       ╬│L
   NK                                              K                   S
         i,k
                                                ŌłÜ       r        !          tŌłÆ1
                                                  2Žā      2S            S
                                           + 2╬▓ ŌłÜ +          ╬ĘKL    1ŌłÆ          .
                                                  K       3N           4N


                                                           26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     (a) i.i.d                                         (b) non-i.i.d

    Figure 3: Test accuracy versus the number of communication rounds on the CIFAR-10 dataset.


Then, we have
     "                   #
        1 X t,k        t                2                  2N
   E            gi ŌłÆ g     Ōēż 2╬▓    1+ ŌłÜ     Žā + 2╬ĘKL + 1 +     ╬│L
       SK                               K                   S
           iŌłłSt
                                   ŌłÜ      r        !         tŌłÆ1
                                     2Žā     2S            S
                             + 2╬▓ ŌłÜ +          ╬ĘKL    1ŌłÆ         + ╬ĘKL + 2╬│L.
                                     K      3N           4N

Summing the above inequality over t, we have
                ’Ż«                     ’Ż╣
            T
      1 X ’Ż░ X                                       2                   2N
              E           git,k ŌłÆ g t ’Ż╗ Ōēż2╬▓     1+ ŌłÜ     Žā + 2╬ĘKL + 1 +     ╬│L
    SKT t=1                                          K                   S
                  iŌłłSt ,k
                                                   ŌłÜ      r        !
                                             8N ╬▓    2Žā      2S
                                          +        ŌłÜ +          ╬ĘKL + ╬ĘKL + 2╬│L.
                                              ST     K      3N

C      A DDITIONAL N UMERICAL R ESULTS
Experimental Settings: We employ a convolutional neural network (CNN) with three convolu-
tional layers and two fully connected layers for the EMNIST dataset, and a ResNet-18 architecture
for CIFAR-10. The experimental framework involves 100 distributed clients with 10 clients partici-
pating randomly in each training round. We investigate both independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) and non-i.i.d. data distributions. For i.i.d. scenarios, we implement uniform random data
distribution across clients. To simulate realistic heterogeneity in non-i.i.d. settings, we apply a
Dirichlet distribution Dir(1) for EMNIST, Dir(0.5) for CIFAR-10. The hyperparameters of all base-
lines, including learning rates, are optimized through comprehensive grid search.

C.1     S IMULATIONS ON CIFAR-10 DATASET

Figure 3 presents the comparative analysis of test accuracy across different algorithms on the
CIFAR-10 dataset, with subfigures 3a and 3b illustrating the performance under i.i.d. and non-
i.i.d. data distributions, respectively. The observed patterns align with those demonstrated in Figure
1. Our proposed algorithms demonstrate superior performance compared to existing methods, in-
cluding FedAvg, SCAFFOLD, and SCAFFOLD-M, both in terms of convergence rate and final test
accuracy. Under non-i.i.d. conditions, while all algorithms exhibit increased performance volatility
and reduced accuracy, the relative performance hierarchy remains consistent with the i.i.d. scenario,
as shown in subfigure 3b.
Figure 4 illustrates the evolution of gradient norm kŌłćf (╬Ė t )k for various algorithms on the CIFAR-
10 dataset under both i.i.d. and non-i.i.d. data distributions. The results demonstrate that


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    (a) i.i.d                                         (b) non-i.i.d

 Figure 4: Gradient norm versus the number of communication rounds on the CIFAR-10 dataset.


                    (a) i.i.d                                         (b) non-i.i.d

 Figure 5: Ablation study versus the number of communication rounds on the CIFAR-10 dataset.


momentum-enhanced methods, specifically our proposed algorithm and SCAFFOLD-M, achieve
more rapid gradient norm reduction compared to their non-momentum counterparts.
We further carry out the ablation study by isolating the effects of momentum and gradient normaliza-
tion in Figure 5. The results demonstrate that incorporating SCAFFOLD with normalized gradient
leads to degraded performance due to the loss of gradient magnitude information. Therefore, the
momentum is essential in our algorithm design to maintain the descent direction by effectively ag-
gregating gradients across clients and iterations.


                                                28
