Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F ROM L AZY TO R ICH : E XACT L EARNING DYNAMICS
IN D EEP L INEAR N ETWORKS

 Clémentine C. J. Dominé1,† , Nicolas Anguita2,† , Alexandra M. Proca2 , Lukas Braun3 ,
 Daniel Kunin4 , Pedro A. M. Mediano2,5,‡ , Andrew M. Saxe1,6,7,‡
 1
   Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London, UK
 2
   Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
 3
   Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK
 4
   Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, USA
 5
   Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London, UK
 6
   Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, University College London, UK
 7
   CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar, CIFAR, Toronto, Canada
 † Co-first author
 ‡ Co-senior author.

 clementine.domine.20@ucl.ac.uk, na658@cam.ac.uk



                                            A BSTRACT

         Biological and artificial neural networks develop internal representations that en-
         able them to perform complex tasks. In artificial networks, the effectiveness of
         these models relies on their ability to build task-specific representations, a pro-
         cess influenced by interactions among datasets, architectures, initialization strate-
         gies, and optimization algorithms. Prior studies highlight that different initializa-
         tions can place networks in either a lazy regime, where representations remain
         static, or a rich (or feature-learning) regime, where representations evolve dy-
         namically. Here, we examine how initialization influences learning dynamics in
         deep linear neural networks, deriving exact solutions for ‘λ-balanced’ initializa-
         tions—defined by the relative scale of weights across layers. These solutions cap-
         ture the evolution of representations and the Neural Tangent Kernel across the
         spectrum from the rich to the lazy regimes. Our findings deepen the theoretical
         understanding of the impact of weight initialization on learning regimes, with im-
         plications for continual learning, reversal learning, and transfer learning, relevant
         to both neuroscience and practical applications.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Biological and artificial neural networks learn internal representations that enable complex tasks
such as categorization, reasoning, and decision-making. Both systems often develop similar repre-
sentations from comparable stimuli, suggesting shared information processing mechanisms (Yamins
et al., 2014). This similarity, though not fully understood, has drawn interest from neuroscience, AI,
and cognitive science (Haxby et al., 2001; Laakso & Cottrell, 2000; Morcos et al., 2018; Kornblith
et al., 2019; Moschella et al., 2022). The success of neural models relies on their ability to ex-
tract relevant features from data to build internal representations, a complex process that in machine
learning is defined by two regimes: lazy and rich (Saxe et al., 2014; Pennington et al., 2017; Chizat
et al., 2019; Bahri et al., 2020).
Lazy regime. The lazy regime follows from a fundamental phenomenon in overparameterized neu-
ral networks: during training, these networks frequently remain near their linearized form, undergo-
ing minimal changes in the parameter space (Chizat et al., 2019). Consequently, they adopt learning
dynamics akin to kernel regression, characterized by the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) matrix and
exhibiting exponential learning behavior (Du et al., 2018; Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al., 2019; Allen-
Zhu et al., 2019a;b; Zou et al., 2020). This behavior, known as the lazy or kernel regime, typically
occurs in infinitely wide architectures and can be triggered by large variance initialization (Jacot


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: A minimal model of the rich and lazy regimes. A. We examine a deep and wide linear
network trained using gradient descent starting from an initialization characterized by a relative
scale parameter λ — which characterizes the difference in the weight covariance between the first
and second layers. B. Network output for an example task over training time, starting from a range
of relative scale values. The dynamics are influenced by the initialization. Solid lines represent
simulations, while dotted lines indicate the analytical solutions derived in this work. C. A network
with LeCun weight initialization (LeCun et al., 1998) in the infinite width limit becomes λ-balanced,
as W2T W2 − W1 W1T approaches the scaled identity matrix.


et al., 2018; Chizat et al., 2019). While the lazy regime offers valuable insights into how networks
converge to a global minimum, it does not fully account for the generalization capabilities of neural
networks trained with standard initializations. It is, therefore, widely believed that another regime,
driven by small or vanishing initializations, underpins some of the successes of neural networks.
Rich regime. In contrast, the rich feature-learning regime is characterized by a NTK that evolves
throughout training, accompanied by non-convex dynamics that navigate saddle points (Baldi &
Hornik, 1989; Saxe et al., 2014; 2019b; Jacot et al., 2021). This regime features sigmoidal learning
curves and simplicity biases, such as low-rankness (Li et al., 2020) or sparsity (Woodworth et al.,
2020). Numerous studies have shown that the absolute scale of initialization drives the rich regime,
which typically emerges at small initialization scales (Chizat et al., 2019; Geiger et al., 2020). How-
ever, even at small initialization scales, differences in weight magnitudes between layers can induce
the lazy learning regime (Azulay et al., 2021; Kunin et al., 2024) – highlighting the significance
of both absolute scale (initialization variance) and relative scale (difference in weight magnitude
between layers) in generating diverse learning dynamics (Atanasov et al., 2022). Beyond absolute
scale and relative scale, additional aspects of initialization can profoundly affect feature learning,
including the effective rank of the weight matrices Liu et al. (2023b), layer-specific initialization
variances Yang & Hu (2020); Luo et al. (2021); Yang et al. (2022), and the use of large learning
rates Lewkowycz et al. (2020); Ba et al. (2022); Zhu et al. (2023); Cui et al. (2024). These findings
illustrate the effect of initialization on inducing complex learning behavior through the resulting
dynamics. Here we develop a solvable model which captures these diverse phenomena.
Despite significant advances, these learning regimes and their characterization are not yet fully un-
derstood and would benefit from clearer theoretical predictions, particularly regarding the influence
of prior knowledge (initialization) on the learning regime. In this work, we address this gap by
deriving exact solutions for the learning dynamics in deep linear networks as a function of network
initialization, providing one of the few analytical models of the rich and lazy regimes in wide and
deep neural networks (Xu & Ziyin, 2024; Kunin et al., 2024; Tu et al., 2024). To illustrate the dra-
matic effect of initialization and the kind of phenomenon we build a theory for, we consider a two-
layer linear network parameterized by an encoding layer W1 and a decoding layer W2 (Fig.1A).
This network can be initialized with different relative scalings, such that W1 W1T ≻ W2T W2 ,
W1 W1T ≺ W2T W2 , or W1 W1T = W2T W2 , while maintaining the same absolute scale. As
shown in Fig.1B, the choice of relative scaling can result in drastically different learning trajecto-
ries and representations and the theory we develop over the course of this paper describes these
effects. Through these solutions, we aim to gain insights into the rich and lazy regimes, as well as
the transition between them during training, by examining the impact of relative scaling. As shown
in Fig.1C and further proved in Appendix A.3, initialization methods used in practice, such as Le-
Cun initialization in wide networks, approximate the relative scaling initialization explored in this
paper, making it relevant to machine learning community as further demonstrated by Kunin et al.
(2024). We consider applications relevant to machine learning and neuroscience, including continual
learning (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Zenke et al., 2017; Parisi et al., 2019), reversal learning (Erdeniz

                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


& Atalay, 2010) and transfer learning (Taylor & Stone, 2009; Thrun & Pratt, 2012; Lampinen &
Ganguli, 2018; Gerace et al., 2022).
Our contributions.
      • We derive explicit solutions for the gradient flow, internal representational similarity, and
        finite-width NTK in unequal-input-output two-layer deep linear networks, under a broad
        range of λ-balanced initialization conditions (Section 4).
      • We model the full range of learning dynamics from lazy to rich, showing that this transition
        is influenced by a complex interaction of architecture, relative scale, and absolute scale,
        extending beyond just initialization absolute scale (Section 5).
      • We present applications of these solutions relevant to both the neuroscience and machine
        learning communities, providing exact solutions for continual learning dynamics, reversal
        learning dynamics, and transfer learning (Section 6).

2   R ELATED W ORK
Linear networks. Our work builds upon a rich body of research on deep linear networks, which,
despite their simplicity, have proven to be valuable models for understanding more complex
neural networks (Baldi & Hornik, 1989; Fukumizu, 1998; Saxe et al., 2014). Previous research
has extensively analyzed convergence (Arora et al., 2018a; Du & Hu, 2019), generalization
properties (Lampinen & Ganguli, 2018; Poggio et al., 2018; Huh, 2020), and the implicit bias of
gradient descent (Arora et al., 2019a; Woodworth et al., 2020; Chizat & Bach, 2020; Kunin et al.,
2022) in linear networks. These studies have also revealed that deep linear networks have intricate
fixed point structures and nonlinear learning dynamics in parameter and function space, reminiscent
of phenomena observed in nonlinear networks (Arora et al., 2018b; Lampinen & Ganguli, 2018).
Seminal work by Saxe et al. (2014) laid the groundwork by providing exact solutions to gradient
flow dynamics under task-aligned initializations, demonstrating that the largest singular values
are learned first during training. This analysis has been extended to deep linear networks (Arora
et al., 2018b; 2019a; Ziyin et al., 2022) with more flexible initialization schemes (Gidel et al.,
2019; Tarmoun et al., 2021; Gissin et al., 2019). This work directly builds on the matrix Riccati
formulation proposed by Fukumizu (1998) and Braun et al. (2022) which extends these solutions
to wide networks. We extend and refine these results to obtain the dynamics for a wider class
of λ-balanced networks to more clearly demonstrate the impact of initialization on rich and lazy
learning regimes also developed in Tu et al. (2024) for a set of orthogonal initalizations. Our
work extends previous analyses (Xu & Ziyin, 2024; Kunin et al., 2024) of these regimes to wide
networks. Previous studies leveraged these solutions primarily to characterize convergence rates;
however, our work goes beyond this by providing a comprehensive characterization of the complete
dynamics of the system (Tarmoun et al., 2021).

Infinite-width networks. Recent advances in understanding the rich regime have largely stemmed
from examining how the initialization variance and layer-wise learning rates must scale in the
infinite-width limit to maintain consistent behavior in activations, gradients, and outputs. Several
studies have employed statistical mechanics tools to derive analytical solutions for the rich popula-
tion dynamics of two-layer nonlinear neural networks initialized using a mean-field parameterization
(Mei et al., 2018; Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2018; Sirignano & Spiliopou-
los, 2020; Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2022; Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2020). Other methods for
analyzing deep network dynamics include the NTK limit, where the network effectively performs
kernel regression without feature learning (Jacot et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019b).
Furthermore, these approaches typically require numerical integration or operate within a limited
learning regime, and are unable to describe the learning dynamics of hidden representations. In-
stead, our work provides explicit analytical solutions for the dynamics of the network and its NTK
in the finite-width case (Jacot et al., 2021; Xu & Ziyin, 2024; Kunin et al., 2024; Chizat et al., 2019).

3   P RELIMINARIES
Consider a supervised learning task where input vectors xn ∈ RNi , from a set of P training pairs
{(xn , yn )}P
            n=1 , need to be mapped to their corresponding target output vectors yn ∈ R
                                                                                        No
                                                                                           . We learn
this task with a two-layer linear network model that produces the output prediction
                                           ŷn = W2 W1 xn ,                                          (1)


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with weight matrices W1 ∈ RNh ×Ni and W2 ∈ RNo ×Nh , where Nh is the number of hidden
units. The network’s weights are optimized using full batch gradient descent with learning rate η
(or respectively time constant τ = η1 ) on the mean squared error loss L(ŷ, y) = 12 ||ŷ − y||2 ,
where ⟨·⟩ denotes the average over the dataset. Our objective is to describe the entire dynamics of
the network’s output and internal representations based on the input covariance and input-output
cross-covariance matrices of the dataset, defined as
                        P                                         P
                     1 X                                     1 X
             Σ̃xx =        xn xTn ∈ RNi ×Ni and Σ̃yx =               yn xTn ∈ RNo ×Ni ,         (2)
                    P n=1                                    P n=1
and the initialization W2 (0),W1 (0). We employ an approach first introduced in the foundational
work of Fukumizu (1998) and extended in recent work by Braun et al. (2022), which instead of
studying the parameters directly, considers the dynamics of a matrix of the important statistics. In
                                       T
particular, defining Q = W1 W2T ∈ R(Ni +No )×Nh , we consider the (Ni + No ) × (Ni + No )
matrix                                      T
                                           W1 W1 (t) W1T W2T (t)
                              QQT (t) =                                   ,                         (3)
                                            W2 W1 (t) W2 W2T (t)
which is divided into four quadrants with interpretable meanings, and where t ∈ R represents
training time. The approach monitors several key statistics collected in the matrix. The off-diagonal
blocks contain the network function Ŷ(t) = W2 W1 (t)X. The on-diagonal blocks capture the
correlation structure of the weight matrices, allowing for the calculation of the temporal evolution of
the network’s internal representations. This includes the representational similarity matrices (RSM)
of the neural representations within the hidden layer, as first defined by Braun et al. (2022),
                   RSMI = XT W1T W1 (t)X, RSMO = YT (W2 W2T (t))+ Y,                        (4)
where + denotes the pseudoinverse; and the network’s finite-width NTK (Jacot et al., 2018; Lee
et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019b)
                      NTK = INo ⊗ XT W1T W1 (t)X + W2 W2T (t) ⊗ XT X,                       (5)
where INo is the No × No identity matrix and ⊗ is the Kronecker product. Hence, the dynamics of
QQT describes the important aspects of network behaviour.

4   E XACT L EARNING DYNAMICS
We derive an exact solution for QQT offering insight into the learning dynamics, convergence
behavior, and generalization properties of two-layer linear networks with prior knowledge.

Assumptions. To derive these solutions we make the following assumptions:
       • A1 (Whitened input). The input data is whitened, i.e. Σ̃xx = I.
       • A2 (λ-Balanced). The network’s weight matrices are λ-balanced at the beginning of train-
         ing, i.e. W2T W2 (0) − W1 W1 (0)T = λI. If this condition holds at initialization, it will
         persist throughout training (Saxe et al., 2014; Arora et al., 2018a). For completeness, we
         prove this in Appendix A.
       • A3 (Dimensions). The hidden dimension of the network is defined as Nh = min(Ni , No ),
         ensuring the network is neither bottlenecked (Nh < min(Ni , No )) nor overparameterized
         (Nh > min(Ni , No )).
These assumptions are strictly weaker than prior works (Fukumizu, 1998; Braun et al., 2022;
Kunin et al., 2024; Xu & Ziyin, 2024). The main distinction between our work and prior
works is that both Fukumizu (1998) and Braun et al. (2022) assumed zero-balanced weights
(W1 (0)W1 (0)T = W2 (0)T W2 (0)), while we relax this assumption to λ-balanced. The zero-
balanced condition restricts the networks to a rich setting. We develop solutions to explore the
continuum between the rich and the lazy regime. While some works, such as Tarmoun et al. (2021),
have considered removing this constraint, their solutions remain in an unstable and mixed form.
Other studies, such as Xu & Ziyin (2024) and Kunin et al. (2024), have similarly relaxed the
balanced assumption but were limited to single-output neuron settings. See Appendix A.2 for a
further discussion on each of these works’ assumptions and their relationship to ours.

Lemmas and definitions. To derive exact solutions we start by presenting the main lemmas which
we prove in the appendix.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 4.1. Under assumptions 1 and 2, the gradient flow dynamics of QQT (t), with initalization
QQT (0) = Q(0)Q(0)T can be written as a differential matrix Riccati equation
                                                                          λ
          d       T           T        T           T 2                   − 2 INi (Σ̃yx )T
        τ (QQ ) = FQQ + QQ F − (QQ ) , where F =                                   λ          . (6)
          dt                                                               Σ̃yx    2 INo
As derived in Fukumizu (1998) and extended in Braun et al. (2022), whenever F is symmetric and
diagonalizable such that F = P ΛP T , where P is an orthonormal matrix and Λ is a diagonal
matrix, then the unique solution to this matrix Riccatti equation is given by
                                  "                      t
                                                              !           #−1
                T       F τt                 T      e2Λ τ − I      T                    t
           QQ (t) = e Q(0) I + Q(0) P                           P Q(0)         Q(0)T eF τ .     (7)
                                                       2Λ
In Appendix B.2 we prove that this equation is the unique solution to the initial value problem
derived in Lemma 4.1 for any value of Λ. However, as discussed in Braun et al. (2022), the solution
in this form is not very useable or interpretable due to the matrix inverse mixing the blocks of
QQT . Additionally, we need to diagonalize F . To do so we consider the compact singular value
decomposition SVD(Σ̃yx ) = ŨS̃ṼT . Here, Ũ ∈ RNo ×Nh denotes the left singular vectors, S̃ ∈
RNh ×Nh the square matrix with ordered, non-zero eigenvalues on its diagonal, and Ṽ ∈ RNi ×Nh
the corresponding right singular vectors. For unequal input-output dimensions (Ni ̸= No ), the right
and left singular vectors are not square. Accordingly, for the case Ni > Nh = No , we define
Ũ⊥ ∈ RNo ×|N o −Ni | as
                         a matrix containing orthogonal column vectors that complete the basis for
Ũ, i.e., make Ũ Ũ⊥ orthonormal, and Ṽ⊥ ∈ RNi ×|No −Ni | as a matrix of zeros. Conversely,
when Ni = Nh < No , then Ṽ⊥ is a matrix containing orthogonal column vectors that complete
the basis for Ṽ and Ũ⊥ is a matrix of zeros. Using this SVD structure we can now describe the
eigendecomposition of F.
Lemma 4.2. Under assumptions 3, the eigendecomposition of F = PΛPT is
                                                      √                    S˜λ
                                                                                         

             1 Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)
                                                                                0      0
                                                        2 Ṽ
                                                      √ ⊥ , Λ =  0 −S˜λ 0  , (8)
       P= √
              2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) −Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)        2Ũ⊥
                                                                            0   0    λ⊥
where the matrices S˜λ , λ⊥ , H̃, and G̃ are diagonal matrices defined as:
         r                                                            s
                    λ 2                      λ                          S˜λ − S̃           1
 S˜λ =       S̃ 2 +     I, λ⊥ = sgn(No − Ni ) I|No −Ni | , H̃ = sgn(λ)           , G̃ = p         . (9)
                    4                        2                          S˜λ + S̃         I + H̃ 2
Main theorem. Thanks to the eigendecomposition of F we can separate the solution provided in
equation 7 into four quadrants. Following an approach used in Braun et al. (2022), we will find it
useful to define the following variables of the initialization that will allow us to define the product
P T Q(0) more succinctly,
                   B = W2 (0)T Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) + W1 (0)Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) ∈ RNh ×Nh ,                (10)
                                T                                             Nh ×Nh
                   C = W2 (0) Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) − W1 (0)Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) ∈ R              ,          (11)
                                T                        Nh ×|No −Ni |
                  D = W2 (0) Ũ⊥ + W1 (0)Ṽ⊥ ∈ R                      .                   (12)
Using these variables of the initialization, this brings us to our main theorem:
Theorem 4.3. Under the assumptions of whitened inputs (1), λ-balanced weights (2), and no bot-
tleneck (3), the temporal dynamics of QQT are
                                   Z1 (t)A−1 (t)Z1T (t) Z1 (t)A−1 (t)Z2T (t)

                    QQT (t) =                                                    ,
                                   Z2 (t)A−1 (t)Z1T (t) Z2 (t)A−1 (t)Z2T (t)
with the time-dependent variables Z1 (t) ∈ RNi ×Nh , Z2 (t) ∈ RNo ×Nh , and A(t) ∈ RNh ×Nh :
              1               ˜ t        1                   ˜ t                t
    Z1 (t) = Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)eSλ τ B T − Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T + Ṽ⊥ eλ⊥ τ D T ,          (13)
              2                          2
              1               ˜ t        1                   ˜ t                t
    Z2 (t) = Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)eSλ τ B T + Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T + Ũ⊥ eλ⊥ τ D T ,          (14)
              2                 !        2                 !                        !
                         ˜ t                      ˜ t                         t
                     e2Sλ τ − I              e−2Sλ τ − I                 e λ⊥ τ − I
     A(t) = I + B                  BT − C                     CT + D                  DT .   (15)
                         4S˜λ                    4S˜λ                        λ⊥


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The proof of Theorem 4.3 is in Appendix B.
With this solution we can calculate the ex-
act temporal dynamics of the loss, network
function, RSMs and NTK (Fig. 2A, C) over
a range of λ-balanced initializations.
Implementation and simulation. One is-
sue with the expression we derived in The-
orem 4.3 is that it can be numerically unsta-
ble when simulating it for long time t ≫ 0
as it involves taking the inverse of terms
that involve exponentials that are diverging
with t. If we make the additional assump-
tion that B is invertible, then we can rear-
range this expression to only use exponen-
tials with negative coefficients, which we
derive in Appendix B.5. In the next sec-
tion we will discuss the significance of B
being invertible at initialization on the con-
vergence of the dynamics. Simulation de-
tails are in Appendix E.7.

5    R ICH AND L AZY L EARNING
Next, we use these solutions to gain a
deeper understanding of the transition be- Figure 2: A. The temporal dynamics of the numerical
tween the rich and lazy regimes by exam- simulation (colored lines) of the loss, network func-
ining the dynamics as a function of λ – the tion, correlation of input and output weights, and the
relative scale – as it varies between positive NTK (row 1-5 respectively) are exactly matched by
and negative infinity. We investigate four the analytical solution (black dotted lines) for λ =
key indicators of the learning regimes: the −2. B. λ = 0 Large initial weight values. C. λ = 2
dynamics of singular vectors, the structure initial weight values initialized as described in E.7.
and robustness of the representations, and the evolution of the NTK.
Dynamics of the singular values. Here we examine a λ-balanced linear network initialized with
task-aligned weights. Previous research (Saxe et al., 2019a) has demonstrated that initial weights
that are aligned with the task remain aligned throughout training, restricting the learning dynamics
to the singular values of the network. This setting offers a valuable opportunity to build intuition
about the impact of λ on the dynamics of learning regimes, extending beyond previous solutions
(Tarmoun et al., 2021; Varre et al., 2024).
Theorem 5.1. Under the assumptions of Theorem 4.3 and with a task-aligned initialization, as de-
fined in Saxe et al. (2013), the network function is given by the expression W2 W1 (t) = Ũ S(t)Ṽ T
where S(t) ∈ RNh ×Nh is a diagonal matrix of singular values with elements sα (t) that evolve
according to the equation,
                                sα (t) = sα (0) + γα (t; λ) (s̃α − sα (0)) ,                     (16)

where s̃α is the α singular value of S̃ and γα (t; λ) is a λ-dependent monotonic transition function
for each singular value that increases from γα (0; λ) = 0 to limt→∞ γα (t; λ) = 1 defined explicitly
in Appendix C.1. We find that under different limits of λ, the transition function converges pointwise
to the sigmoidal (λ → 0) and exponential (λ → ±∞) transition functions,
                                          t
                                     e2s̃α τ − 1                                        t
              lim γα (t; λ) →         t             ,        lim γα (t; λ) → 1 − e−|λ| τ .       (17)
             λ→0                e α τ − 1 + sαs̃(0)
                                 2s̃             α          λ→±∞


The proof for Theorem 5.1 can be found in Appendix C.1. As shown in Fig. 3B, as λ approaches
zero, the dynamics resemble sigmoidal learning curves that traverse between saddle points, charac-
teristic of the rich regime (Braun et al., 2022). In this regime the network learns the most salient
features first, which can be beneficial for generalization (Lampinen & Ganguli, 2018). Conversely,
as shown in Fig. 3A and C, as the magnitude of λ increases, the dynamics become exponential,
characteristic of the lazy regime. In this regime, all features are treated equally and the network’s


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Simulated and analytical dynamics of the singular values of the network function with
relative scale of A. λ = −2, B. λ = 0, or C. λ = 2, initialized as described in Appendix E.7.

dynamics resemble that of a shallow network. Notably, similar effects have been observed previ-
ously in the context of large absolute scales (Saxe et al., 2019a) independently of the relative scale.
Overall, our results highlight the critical influence the relative scale λ has in shaping the learning
dynamics, from sigmoidal to exponential, steering the network between the rich and lazy regimes.

The dynamics of the representations. We now consider how the representations of the individual
parameters W1 and W2 change through training. We note that under λ-balanced initializations there
is a simple structure which persists throughout training that allows us to recover the dynamics of the
parameters up to a time-dependent orthogonal transformation from the dynamics of QQT (t).
Theorem 5.2. Under assumptions 2, if the network function W2 W1 (t) = U (t)S(t)V T (t)
is full rank, then we can recover the parameters W2 (t) = U (t)S2 (t)RT (t) and W1 (t) =
              T                                                                        Nh ×Nh
          q (t) up to time-dependent orthogonal transformation R(t) ∈ R
R(t)S1 (t)V                                                                                   , where
                           2
Sλ (t) =      S 2 (t) + λ4 I and
                              1                                      1
     S1 (t) = Sλ (t) − λI 2 , 0max(0,Ni −No ) , S2 (t) = Sλ (t) + λI 2 ; 0max(0,No −Ni ) . (18)
                           2                                      2

The effective singular values Sλ of the corresponding weights are either up-weighted or down-
weighted depending on the magnitude and sign of λ, splitting the representation into two parts.
This division is reflected in the network’s internal representations. With our solution, QQT (t),
which captures the temporal dynamics of the similarity between hidden layer activations, we
can analyze the network’s internal representations in relation to the task. This allows us to
determine whether the network adopts a rich or lazy representation, depending on the value of
λ. Assuming convergence to the global minimum, which is guaranteed when the matrix B is
non-singular, the internal representation satisfies W1T W1 = ṼS̃21 ṼT and W2 W2T = ŨS̃22 ŨT
with W2 W1 = ŨS̃ṼT . Theorem C.3 in the Appendix provides a detailed proof of this limiting
behavior. To illustrate this, we consider a hierarchical semantic learning task1 , introduced in Saxe
et al. (2014); Braun et al. (2022), where living organisms are organized according to their features
(Fig. 4A). The representational similarity of the task’s inputs (ṼS̃ṼT ) reflects this hierarchical
structure (Fig.4A). Similarly, the representational similarity of the task’s target values (ŨS̃ŨT )
highlights the primary groupings of items. When training a two-layer network with relative scale
λ equal to zero and task-agnostic initialization (Mishkin & Matas, 2015), the input and output
representational similarity matrices (Fig.4B) match the task’s structure upon convergence. As
derived in Theorem C.4 the network is guaranteed to find a rich solution regardless of the absolute
scale , meaning W1T W1 = ṼS̃ṼT and W2 W2T = ŨS̃ŨT , as shown in Fig. 4C. Hence, the
network learns task-specific representations. We also show that as λ approaches either positive
or negative infinity, the network symmetrically transitions into the lazy regime. As demonstrated
in Theorem C.4 and illustrated in Fig. 4, the representations converge to an identity matrix for
both large positive and large negative values of λ— emerging in the output representations for
large positive λ and input representations for large negative λ. This convergence indicates that
the network adopts task-agnostic representations. Meanwhile, the other respective RSMs become
negligible, with scales proportional to 1/λ. Therefore, as shown in Theorem C.5, the NTK becomes
static and equivalent to the identity matrix in the limit as λ approaches infinity. However, the
downscaled representations of the network remain structured and task-specific. Intuitively, in this
1
    In this setting, the network has equal input and output dimensions


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: A. A semantic learning task with the SVD of the input-output correlation matrix of the
task. (top) U and V represent the singular vectors, and S contains the singular values. (bottom) The
respective RSMs as U SU ⊤ for the input and V SV ⊤ for the output task. B. Simulation results and
C. Theoretical input and output representation matrices after training, showing convergence when
initialized with values of λ equal to −2, 0, and 2, according to the initialization scheme described in
Appendix E.7. D. Final RSMs matrices after training converged when initialised from random large
weights. E. After convergence, the network’s sensitivity to input noise (top panel) is invariant to λ,
but the sensitivity to parameter noise increases as λ becomes smaller (or larger) than zero.


setup, the larger weights function as an identity-like projection, while the smaller weights adapt
and align to the task. However, due to their relative scale compared to the larger weights, their
contribution to the NTK remains negligible. This property could be beneficial if the weights are
later rescaled, such as during fine-tuning, potentially enhancing generalization and transfer learning,
as we will demonstrate in Section 6. We compare this to the scenario where both weights are
initialized with large Gaussian values, leading to lazy learning that maintains a fixed NTK but lacks
any structural representation, as illustrated in Fig. 4D. We further discuss the relationship between
the scale and the relative scale in appendix A.4. Furthermore, in the infinite-width regime, where
weights are initialized from a Gaussian distribution with large variance, averaging effects cause
both input and output representations to approximate identity matrices. In this scenario, the network
learns in the lazy regime with a fixed Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK). This behavior contrasts with
the dynamics observed in the current setting since both input and output representations are task
agnostic. Consequently, we propose a new lazy regime, which we refer to as the semi-structured
lazy regime. We note that these existing regimes preserve only the input or output representation,
resulting in a partial loss of structural information. In the nonlinear setting, this behavior is not
expected to hold, as an additional factor comes into play in the computation of the NTK: the
activation coefficients of the nonlinearity, as demonstrated in Kunin et al. (2024). In that case large
relative weight (large positive λ) leads to a rapid rich regime. All together, we find that initialization
will determine which layer in the network the task specification features resides in: layers initialized
with large values will be task-agnostic, while those initialized with small values will be task-specific.

Representation robustness and sensitivity to noise. Here we examine the relationship be-
tween the learning regime and the robustness of the learned representations to added noise
in the inputs and parameters. The expected post-convergence loss with added noise to the
inputs is determined by the norm of the network function (Braun et al., 2025), which in our
                                                                                              2
setting is independent of λ. Specifically, if we add zero-centered noise ξX with variance σX
                                                     2
                                                       P N h   2
to the inputs, then the expected loss is⟨L⟩ξX = σX       i=1 S̃i + c, where c is a constant that
depends solely on the statistics of the training data (Figure 4E, Appendix C.3). However, if
instead noise is added to the parameters, the expected loss scales quadratically with the norm
of the weight matrices (Braun et al., 2025), which in our setting depend on λ. In particu-
                                                                      2
lar, zero-centered parameter noise ξW1 and ξW2 with variance σW          results in an expected
                         1                   1                    1
loss of⟨L⟩ξW ,ξW = 2 Ni σW ||W2 ||F + 2 No σW ||W1 ||F + 2 Ni Nh No σ 4 + c, with norms
                               2        2         2         2
              1   2
              1
                PNh q 2                                          PNh q 2
       2
||W1 ||F = 2 i=1          4S̃i + λ2 + λ     and ||W2 ||2F = 12 i=1        4S̃i + λ2 − λ . This
implies that, under the assumption of equal input-output dimensions, networks initialized with
weights such that λ = 0, corresponding to the rich regime, converge to solutions that are most robust
to parameter noise (Figure 4E, Appendix C.3). In practice, parameter noise could be interpreted as


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: A. Schematic representations of the network architectures considered, from left to right:
funnel network, square network, and inverted-funnel network. B. The plot shows the NTK kernel
distance from initialization, as defined in Fort et al. (2020) across the three architecture depicted
schematically. C. The NTK kernel distance away from initialization over training time.
the noise occurring within the neurons of a biological network. Hence, a rich solution may enable a
more robust representation in such systems.

The impact of the architecture. Thus far, we have found that the magnitude of the relative scale
parameter λ determines the extent of rich and lazy learning. Here, we explore how a network’s
learning regime is also shaped by the interaction of its architecture and the sign of the relative
scale. We consider three types of network architectures, depicted in Fig. 5A: funnel networks, which
narrow from input to output (Ni > Nh = No ); inverted-funnel networks, which expand from input
to output (Ni = Nh < No ); and square networks, where input and output dimensions are equal
(Ni = Nh = No ). Our solution, QQT , captures the dynamics of the NTK across these different
network architectures. To examine the NTK’s evolution under varying λ initializations, we compute
the kernel distance from initialization, as defined in Fort et al. (2020). As shown in Fig. 5B, we
observe that funnel networks enter the lazy regime as λ → ∞, while inverted-funnel networks do
so as λ → −∞. The NTK remains static during the initial phase, rigorously confirming the rank
argument first introduced by Kunin et al. (2024) for the multi-output setting. In the opposite limits
of λ, these networks transition from a lazy regime to a rich regime. During this second alignment
phase, the NTK matrix undergoes changes, indicating an initial lazy phase followed by a delayed rich
phase. We further investigate and quantify this delayed rich regime, showing the NTK movement
over training in Fig. 5C. This behavior is also quantified in Theorem C.6, which describes the rate
of learning in this network. In Appendix A.4, we further explore the impact of the architecture as
a function of the absolute and relative scale. Intuitively, the delayed onset of the rich regime occurs
because no least-squares solution exists within the span of the network at initialization. In such
cases, the network enters a delayed rich phase, where λ tends toward infinity, with the magnitude
of λ determining the length of the delay. At first, the network exhibits lazy dynamics, striving
to approximate the solution. However, as constraints necessitate adjustments in its directions, the
network gradually transitions into the rich phase. For square networks this behavior is discussed
in Section 5. Across all architectures, as λ → 0, the networks consistently transition into the rich
regime. Altogether, we further characterize the delayed rich regime in wide networks.

6   A PPLICATIONS
In this section, we apply the exact solutions for the learning dynamics in deep linear networks de-
scribed in Section 4 to illustrate several phenomena relevant to machine learning and neuroscience.

Continual learning. Continual learning, as thoroughly reviewed by Parisi et al. (2019), has
long posed a significant challenge for neural network models in contrast to biological networks,
particularly due to the issue of catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Ratcliff, 1990;
French, 1999). Similarly to the framework presented by Braun et al. (2022), our approach describes
the exact solutions of the networks dynamics trained across a sequence of tasks describing the entire
continual learning process. As detailed in Appendix D.1, we demonstrate that, regardless of the
chosen value of λ, training on subsequent tasks can result in the overwriting of previously acquired
knowledge, leading to catastrophic forgetting.

Reversal learning. During reversal learning, previously acquired knowledge must be relearned,
necessitating the overcoming of an earlier established relationship between inputs and outputs. As
demonstrated in Braun et al. (2022), reversal learning theoretically does not succeed in deep linear
networks as the initalization aligns with the separatrix of a saddle point. While simulations show


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that the learning dynamics can escape the saddle point due to numerical imprecision, the process
is catastrophically slowed in its vicinity. However, when λ is non-zero, reversal learning dynamics
consistently succeed, as they avoid passing through the saddle point due to the initialization scheme.
This is both theoretically proven and numerically illustrated in Appendix D.2. We also present a
spectrum of reversal learning behaviors controlled by the relative scale λ, ranging from rich to
lazy learning regimes. This spectrum has the potential to explain the diverse dynamics observed in
animal behavior, offering insights into the learning regimes relevant toneuroscience experiments.

Transfer learning. We consider how different λ initializations influence generalization to a new
feature after being trained on an initial task. As detailed in Appendix D.3, we first train each
network on the hierarchical semantic learning task described in Fig. 4. We then add a new feature
to the dataset, and train the network specifically on the corresponding item while keeping the rest of
the network parameters unchanged. Afterwards, we evaluate the generalization to the other items.
We observe in Appendix Fig. D.3 that the hierarchical structure of the data is effectively transferred
to the new feature when the representation is task-specific and λ is zero. Conversely, when the
input feature representation is lazy (λ ≤ 0), meaning the hidden representation lacks adaptation, no
hierarchical generalization is observed. Strikingly, when λ is positive, the hierarchical structure in
the input weights remains small but structured, while the output weights exhibit a lazy representation
and the network generalizes hierarchically. Specifically Fig. D.3 shows that the generalization loss
on untrained items with the new feature decreases as a function of increasing λ. Therefore, as λ
increases, networks more effectively transfer the hierarchical structure of the network to the new
feature for untrained items, leading to an increase in generalization performance. This indicates that
the lazy regime structure (large λ values) can be beneficial for transfer learning.

Fine-tuning It is a common practice to pre- train neural networks on a large auxiliary task before
fine-tuning them on a downstream task with limited samples. Despite the widespread use of this ap-
proach, the dynamics and outcomes of this method remain poorly understood. Our study establishes
a theoretical basis for the success of fine-tuning, particularly how changes in λ-balancedness initial-
isation after pre-training affect performance on new datasets (see Appendix D.4). We consistently
find that finetuning performance improves and converges more quickly as networks are re-balanced
to larger values of λF T and, conversely, decreases as λF T approaches 0 as shown in Fig. D.4. Our
work examines the fine-tuning dynamics of two-layer linear networks. While simple, these architec-
tures are commonly utilized for fine-tuning large pre-trained language and vision models, notably
in Low-Rank Adapters (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022) as further discussed in Appendix D.4. While a
detailed exploration of fine-tuning performance in practice as a function of initialization lies beyond
the scope of this work, it remains an important direction for future research.

7   D ISCUSSION
We derive exact solutions to the learning dynamics of deep linear networks. While our findings ex-
tend the range of analytically describable two-layer linear network problems, they are still limited by
a set of assumptions. In particular, relaxing the assumptions that input covariance must be white and
that initialization must be λ-balanced could bring the analysis closer to practical applications in ma-
chine learning and neuroscience. Moving towards the nonlinear setting would also make the findings
more applicable in real-world scenarios. Despite these limitations, our solutions provide valuable
insights into network behavior. We examine the transition between the rich and lazy regimes by
analyzing the dynamics as a function of λ—the relative scale—across its full range from positive
to negative infinity. Our analysis demonstrates that the relative scale, λ, is pivotal in managing this
transition. Notably, we identify a structured lazy regime that promotes transfer learning. Building on
previous work (Kunin et al., 2024) that shows these findings extend to basic nonlinear settings and
practical scenarios, our theory suggests that further exploration of unbalanced initialization could
optimize efficient feature learning. We leave for future work, the extension of this initialization to
deep networks. Future work will focus on extending the application of the solution to the dynamics
of fine-tuning and linear autoencoders.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded in whole, or in part, by the Wellcome Trust [216386/Z/19/Z]. For the
purpose of Open Access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright licence to any Author
Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission. C.D. and A.S. were supported by the
Gatsby Charitable Foundation (GAT3755). Further, A.S. was supported by the Sainsbury Wellcome
Centre Core Grant (219627/Z/19/Z) and A.S. is a CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar in the Learning in
Machines & Brains program. A.M.P. was supported by the Imperial College London President’s
PhD Scholarship. L.B. was supported by the Woodward Scholarship awarded by Wadham College,
Oxford. and the Medical Research Council [MR/N013468/1]. D.K. thanks the Open Philanthropy
AI Fellowship for support. This research was funded in whole, or in part, by the Wellcome Trust
[216386/Z/19/Z].


R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Yingyu Liang. Learning and generalization in overparame-
  terized neural networks, going beyond two layers. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32, 2019a.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Zhao Song. A convergence theory for deep learning via over-
  parameterization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 242–252. PMLR, 2019b.
Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Noah Golowich, and Wei Hu. A convergence analysis of gradient
  descent for deep linear neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02281, 2018a.
Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, and Elad Hazan. On the optimization of deep networks: Implicit
  acceleration by overparameterization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  244–253. PMLR, 2018b.
Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Wei Hu, and Yuping Luo. Implicit regularization in deep matrix
  factorization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019a.
Sanjeev Arora, Simon S Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Ruosong Wang. On
  exact computation with an infinitely wide neural net. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019b.
Alexander Atanasov, Blake Bordelon, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Neural networks as kernel learners:
  The silent alignment effect. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Shahar Azulay, Edward Moroshko, Mor Shpigel Nacson, Blake E Woodworth, Nathan Srebro, Amir
  Globerson, and Daniel Soudry. On the implicit bias of initialization shape: Beyond infinitesimal
  mirror descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 468–477. PMLR, 2021.
Jimmy Ba, Murat A Erdogdu, Taiji Suzuki, Zhichao Wang, Denny Wu, and Greg Yang. High-
  dimensional asymptotics of feature learning: How one gradient step improves the representation.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:37932–37946, 2022.
Yasaman Bahri, Jonathan Kadmon, Jeffrey Pennington, Sam S Schoenholz, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein,
  and Surya Ganguli. Statistical mechanics of deep learning. Annual Review of Condensed Matter
  Physics, 11:501–528, 2020.
Pierre Baldi and Kurt Hornik. Neural networks and principal component analysis: Learning from
  examples without local minima. Neural networks, 2(1):53–58, 1989.
Lukas Braun, Clémentine Dominé, James Fitzgerald, and Andrew Saxe. Exact learning dynamics of
  deep linear networks with prior knowledge. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:6615–6629, 12 2022. URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2022/hash/2b3bb2c95195130977a51b3bb251c40a-Abstract-Conference.
  html.
Lukas Braun, Erin Grant, and Andrew M Saxe. Not all solutions are created equal: An analytical
  dissociation of functional and representational similarity in deep linear neural networks. Under
  review, 2025.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. On the global convergence of gradient descent for over-
  parameterized models using optimal transport. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 31, 2018.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. Implicit bias of gradient descent for wide two-layer neural networks
  trained with the logistic loss. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 1305–1338. PMLR, 2020.
Lenaic Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. On lazy training in differentiable programming.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Hugo Cui, Luca Pesce, Yatin Dandi, Florent Krzakala, Yue M Lu, Lenka Zdeborová, and Bruno
  Loureiro. Asymptotics of feature learning in two-layer networks after one gradient-step. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2402.04980, 2024.
Sander Dalm, Joshua Offergeld, Nasir Ahmad, and Marcel van Gerven. Efficient deep learning with
  decorrelated backpropagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02385, 2024.
Simon Du and Wei Hu. Width provably matters in optimization for deep linear neural networks. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1655–1664. PMLR, 2019.
Simon Du, Jason Lee, Haochuan Li, Liwei Wang, and Xiyu Zhai. Gradient descent finds global
  minima of deep neural networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1675–
  1685. PMLR, 2019.
Simon S Du, Xiyu Zhai, Barnabas Poczos, and Aarti Singh. Gradient descent provably optimizes
  over-parameterized neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02054, 2018.
Burak Erdeniz and Nart Bedin Atalay. Simulating probability learning and probabilistic reversal
  learning using the attention-gated reinforcement learning (agrel) model. In The 2010 International
  Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2010.
Matthew Farrell, Stefano Recanatesi, and Eric Shea-Brown. From lazy to rich to exclusive task rep-
 resentations in neural networks and neural codes. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 83:102780–
 102780, 12 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2023.102780.
Stanislav Fort, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Mansheej Paul, Sepideh Kharaghani, Daniel M Roy,
  and Surya Ganguli. Deep learning versus kernel learning: an empirical study of loss landscape
  geometry and the time evolution of the neural tangent kernel. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:5850–5861, 2020.
Robert M French. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks. Trends in cognitive sciences,
  3(4):128–135, 1999.
Kenji Fukumizu. Effect of batch learning in multilayer neural networks. IEEE Transactions on
  Neural Networks, 11:17–26, 1998. doi: 10.1109/72.822506.
Mario Geiger, Stefano Spigler, Arthur Jacot, and Matthieu Wyart. Disentangling feature and lazy
 training in deep neural networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment,
 2020:113301, 11 2020. doi: 10.1088/1742-5468/abc4de. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/
 1906.08034.
Federica Gerace, Luca Saglietti, Stefano Sarao Mannelli, Andrew Saxe, and Lenka Zdeborová.
  Probing transfer learning with a model of synthetic correlated datasets. Machine Learning: Sci-
  ence and Technology, 2022.
Gauthier Gidel, Francis Bach, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Implicit regularization of discrete gradient
  dynamics in linear neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Daniel Gissin, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, and Amit Daniely. The implicit bias of depth: How incremental
  learning drives generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12051, 2019.
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural
  networks. pp. 249–256. proceedings.mlr.press, JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 03
  2010. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v9/glorot10a.html.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


James V Haxby, M Ida Gobbini, Maura L Furey, Alumit Ishai, Jennifer L Schouten, and Pietro
  Pietrini. Distributed and overlapping representations of faces and objects in ventral temporal
  cortex. Science, 293(5539):2425–2430, 2001.

Soufiane Hayou, Nikhil Ghosh, and Bin Yu. The impact of initialization on lora finetuning dynamics.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08447, 2024.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Sur-
  passing human-level performance on imagenet classification. 2015 IEEE International Con-
  ference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 12 2015. doi: 10.1109/iccv.2015.123. URL https:
  //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7410480/.

Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=nZeVKeeFYf9.

Dongsung Huh. Curvature-corrected learning dynamics in deep neural networks. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4552–4560. PMLR, 2020.

Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Arthur Jacot, François Ged, Berfin Şimşek, Clément Hongler, and Franck Gabriel. Saddle-to-saddle
  dynamics in deep linear networks: Small initialization training, symmetry, and sparsity. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2106.15933, 2021.

James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
  114(13):3521–3526, 2017.

Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neural
  network representations revisited. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3519–
  3529. PMLR, 2019.

Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep con-
  volutional neural networks. Communications of the ACM, 60:84–90, 05 2012. doi: 10.1145/
  3065386. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2012/
  file/c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf.

Daniel Kunin, Atsushi Yamamura, Chao Ma, and Surya Ganguli. The asymmetric maximum margin
  bias of quasi-homogeneous neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03820, 2022.

Daniel Kunin, Allan Raventós, Clémentine Dominé, Feng Chen, David Klindt, Andrew Saxe, and
  Surya Ganguli. Get rich quick: exact solutions reveal how unbalanced initializations promote
  rapid feature learning, 06 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.06158.

Aarre Laakso and Garrison Cottrell. Content and cluster analysis: assessing representational simi-
  larity in neural systems. Philosophical psychology, 13(1):47–76, 2000.

Andrew K Lampinen and Surya Ganguli. An analytic theory of generalization dynamics and transfer
  learning in deep linear networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10374, 2018.

Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied
  to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998. URL https:
  //hal.science/hal-03926082/document.

Jaehoon Lee, Lechao Xiao, Samuel Schoenholz, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Jascha Sohl-
  Dickstein, and Jeffrey Pennington. Wide neural networks of any depth evolve as linear models
  under gradient descent. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sebastian Lee, Stefano Sarao Mannelli, Claudia Clopath, Sebastian Goldt, and Andrew Saxe.
  Maslow’s hammer for catastrophic forgetting: Node re-use vs node activation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.09029, 2022.
Aitor Lewkowycz, Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Guy Gur-Ari. The large
  learning rate phase of deep learning: the catapult mechanism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02218,
  2020.
Zhiyuan Li, Yuping Luo, and Kaifeng Lyu. Towards resolving the implicit bias of gradient descent
  for matrix factorization: Greedy low-rank learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.09839, 2020.
Yiheng Liu, Tianle Han, Siyuan Ma, Jiayue Zhang, Yuanyuan Yang, Jiaming Tian, Hongping He,
  Antong Li, Mengshen He, Zhengliang Liu, Zihao Wu, Dajiang Zhu, Xiang Li, Qiang Niu,
  Dingang Shen, Tianming Liu, and Bao Ge. Summary of chatgpt-related research and per-
  spective towards the future of large language models. Meta-Radiology, 1, 04 2023a. doi:
  10.1016/j.metrad.2023.100017.
Yuhan Helena Liu, Aristide Baratin, Jonathan Cornford, Stefan Mihalas, Eric Shea-Brown, and
  Guillaume Lajoie. How connectivity structure shapes rich and lazy learning in neural circuits.
  ArXiv, 2023b.
Tao Luo, Zhi-Qin John Xu, Zheng Ma, and Yaoyu Zhang. Phase diagram for two-layer relu neural
  networks at infinite-width limit. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(71):1–47, 2021.
Sadhika Malladi, Alexander Wettig, Dingli Yu, Danqi Chen, and Sanjeev Arora. A kernel-based
  view of language model fine-tuning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  23610–23641. PMLR, 2023.
Sibylle Marcotte, Remi Gribonval, and Gabriel Peyré.    Abide by the law and
  follow the flow:    conservation laws for gradient flows, 12 2023.     URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  c7bee9b76be21146fd592fc2b46614d5-Abstract-Conference.html.
Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
 sequential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation, volume 24, pp. 109–165.
 Elsevier, 1989.
Song Mei, Andrea Montanari, and Phan-Minh Nguyen. A mean field view of the landscape of two-
  layer neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(33):E7665–E7671,
  2018.
Dmytro Mishkin and Jiri Matas. All you need is a good init. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06422,
 2015.
Ari Morcos, Maithra Raghu, and Samy Bengio. Insights on representational similarity in neural
  networks with canonical correlation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31,
  2018.
Luca Moschella, Valentino Maiorca, Marco Fumero, Antonio Norelli, Francesco Locatello, and
  Emanuele Rodolà. Relative representations enable zero-shot latent space communication. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2209.15430, 2022.
German I Parisi, Ronald Kemker, Jose L Part, Christopher Kanan, and Stefan Wermter. Continual
  lifelong learning with neural networks: A review. Neural Networks, 113:54–71, 2019.
Jeffrey Pennington, Samuel Schoenholz, and Surya Ganguli. Resurrecting the sigmoid in deep learn-
   ing through dynamical isometry: theory and practice. Advances in neural information processing
   systems, 30, 2017.
Tomaso Poggio, Qianli Liao, Brando Miranda, Andrzej Banburski, Xavier Boix, and Jack Hidary.
  Theory iiib: Generalization in deep networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.11379, 2018.
Shahryar Rahnamayan and Gary Wang. Toward effective initialization for large-scale search spaces.
  01 2009. URL https://www.sfu.ca/˜gwa5/pdf/2009_02.pdf.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Roger Ratcliff. Connectionist models of recognition memory: constraints imposed by learning and
  forgetting functions. Psychological review, 97(2):285, 1990.

Grant Rotskoff and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Parameters as interacting particles: long time convergence
  and asymptotic error scaling of neural networks. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 31, 2018.

Grant Rotskoff and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Trainability and accuracy of artificial neural networks:
  An interacting particle system approach. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 75
  (9):1889–1935, 2022.

Andrew Saxe, James L. McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dy-
  namics of learning in deep linear neural networks. openreview.net, 12 2013. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=_wzZwKpTDF_9C.

Andrew M. Saxe, James L. McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dy-
  namics of learning in deep linear neural networks. In 2nd International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014, Conference Track Proceed-
  ings, 2014.

Andrew M. Saxe, James L. McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. A mathematical theory of semantic
  development in deep neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116
  (23):11537–11546, 2019a. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1820226116. URL https://www.pnas.org/
  content/116/23/11537.

Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. A mathematical theory of semantic
  development in deep neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116
  (23):11537–11546, 2019b.

Justin Sirignano and Konstantinos Spiliopoulos. Mean field analysis of neural networks: A law of
  large numbers. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 80(2):725–752, 2020.

Salma Tarmoun, Guilherme Franca, Benjamin D Haeffele, and Rene Vidal. Understanding the
  dynamics of gradient flow in overparameterized linear models. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 10153–10161. PMLR, 2021.

Matthew E Taylor and Peter Stone. Transfer learning for reinforcement learning domains: A survey.
 Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10(7), 2009.

Sebastian Thrun and Lorien Pratt. Learning to learn. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.

Zhenfeng Tu, Santiago Aranguri, and Arthur Jacot. Mixed dynamics in linear networks: Unifying
  the lazy and active regimes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17580, 2024.

Aditya Vardhan Varre, Maria-Luiza Vladarean, Loucas Pillaud-Vivien, and Nicolas Flammarion.
  On the spectral bias of two-layer linear networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.

Blake Woodworth, Suriya Gunasekar, Jason D Lee, Edward Moroshko, Pedro Savarese, Itay Golan,
  Daniel Soudry, and Nathan Srebro. Kernel and rich regimes in overparametrized models. In
  Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3635–3673. PMLR, 2020.

Xiangxiang Xu and Lizhong Zheng. Neural feature learning in function space *. Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 25:1–76, 2024. URL https://jmlr.org/papers/volume25/
  23-1202/23-1202.pdf.

Yizhou Xu and Liu Ziyin. When does feature learning happen? perspective from an analytically
  solvable model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07085, 2024.

Daniel LK Yamins, Ha Hong, Charles F Cadieu, Ethan A Solomon, Darren Seibert, and James J
  DiCarlo. Performance-optimized hierarchical models predict neural responses in higher visual
  cortex. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 111(23):8619–8624, 2014.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Greg Yang and Edward J Hu. Feature learning in infinite-width neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.14522, 2020.
Greg Yang, Edward J Hu, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Xiaodong Liu, David Farhi, Nick Ry-
  der, Jakub Pachocki, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Tensor programs v: Tuning large neural
  networks via zero-shot hyperparameter transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03466, 2022.
Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3987–3995. PMLR, 2017.
Libin Zhu, Chaoyue Liu, Adityanarayanan Radhakrishnan, and Mikhail Belkin. Catapults in sgd:
  spikes in the training loss and their impact on generalization through feature learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.04815, 2023.
Liu Ziyin, Botao Li, and Xiangming Meng. Exact solutions of a deep linear network. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24446–24458, 2022.
Difan Zou, Yuan Cao, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Gradient descent optimizes over-
  parameterized deep relu networks. Machine learning, 109:467–492, 2020.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P RELIMINARIES
A.1 A PPENDIX : BALANCED C ONDITION
Definition A.1 (Definition of λ-balanced property (Saxe et al. (2013), Marcotte et al. (2023))). The
weights W1 , W2 are λ-balanced if and only if there exists a Balanced Coefficient λ ∈ R such that:
                            B(W1 , W2 ) = W2T W2 − W1 W1T = λI                                  (19)
where B is called the Balanced Computation.
For λ = 0 we have Zero-Balanced given as A4 (). W1 (0)W1 (0)T = W2 (0)T W2 (0).
Theorem A.2. Balanced Condition Persists Through Training
Suppose at initialization
                            W2 (0)T W2 (0) − W1 (0)W1 (0)T = λI                                 (20)
Then for all t ≥ 0

                             W2 (t)T W2 (t) − W1 (t)W1 (t)T = λI                                (21)
Proof. Consider:

                                                           T
      d                                         d                                 d
         W2 (t)W2 (t)T − W1 (t)W1 (t)T =                                    T

    τ                                         τ W2 (t)       W2 (t) + W2 (t)    τ W2 (t)
      dt                                        dt                                dt
                                                                                          T
                                                   d                               d
                                             − τ W1 (t) W1 (t)T − W1 (t) τ W1 (t)
                                                   dt                             dt
                                                                              T
                                           = W1 (t) Σ̃yx − W2 (t)W1 (t)Σ̃xx W2 (t)

                                             + W2 (t)T Σ̃yx − W2 (t)W1 (t)Σ̃xx W1 (t)

                                             − W2 (t)T Σ̃yx − W2 (t)W1 (t)Σ̃xx W1 (t)

                                             − W1 (t) Σ̃yx − W2 (t)W1 (t)Σ̃xx W2 (t)
                                           =0
Note that W2 (t)T W2 (t) − W1 (t)W1 (t)T is conserved for any initial value λ.
A.2 D ISCUSSION A SSUMPTIONS
Whittened Inputs. Although the whitened input assumption is quite strong, it is commonly used
in analytical work to obtain exact solutions, and much of the existing literature relies on these so-
lutions Fukumizu (1998); Braun et al. (2022); Kunin et al. (2024). While relaxing this assump-
tion prevents the exact description of network dynamics, Kunin et al. (2024) examine the implicit
bias of the training trajectory without relying on whitened inputs. If the interpolating manifold is
one-dimensional, the solution can be solved exactly in terms of λ. Their findings demonstrate a
similar quantitative dependence on λ, governing the implicit bias transition between rich and lazy
regimes. Furthermore, recent advancements, such as the ”decorrelated backpropagation” technique
introduced by Dalm et al. (2024) which whitens inputs during training, showing that optimizing for
whitened inputs can actually be done in practice and improve efficiency in real-world applications.
Importantly, This study highlights that in certain real-world scenarios, whitening can provide a more
optimal learning condition. This approaches emphasize the potential advantages of input whitening
for downstream tasks, reinforcing the validity of our assumption.
Dimension. Previous works imposed specific dimensionality constraints. For example: Fuku-
mizu (1998) assumed equal input and output dimensions (Ni = No ) while allowing a bottle-
neck in the hidden dimension (Nh ≤ Ni = No ). Braun et al. (2022) extended these solutions
to cases with unequal input and output dimensions (Ni ̸= No ) but restricted bottleneck networks
(Nh = min(Ni , No )) and introduced an additional invertibility condition on the B. In our work we
allow for unequal input and output Ni ̸= No and do not introduce an additional invertibility assump-
tion. This flexibility expands the applicability of our framework to a wider range of architectures.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Full rank Previous work by Braun et al. (2022), imposed a full-rank initialization condition, de-
fined as rank(W2 (0)W1 (0)) = Ni = No . However, this assumption is not necessary in our
framework.
Balancedness Assumption A significant departure from prior works is the relaxation of the bal-
ancedness assumption: Earlier studies, such as Fukumizu (1998) and Braun et al. (2022) assumed
strict zero-balancedness (W1 (0)W1 (0)T = W2 (0)T W2 (0)), which constrained the networks to
the rich regime. Our approach generalizes this to λ-balancedness, enabling exploration of the con-
tinuum between the rich and lazy regimes. While some efforts, such as Tarmoun et al. (2021),
have explored removing the zero-balanced constraint, their solutions were limited to unstable or
mixed forms. In contrast, our methodology systematically studies different learning regimes by
varying initialization properties, particularly through the relative scale parameter. This allows con-
trolled transitions between regimes, advancing understanding of neural network behavior across
the spectrum. Other studies, such as Kunin et al. (2024) and Xu & Zheng (2024) have also re-
laxed the balancedness assumption, though their analysis was restricted to single-output neuron
settings. We emphasize the importance of this balanced quantity by rigorously proving that, in the
averaging limit, standard network initializations (e.g., LeCun initialization LeCun et al. (1998),
He initialization) lead to λ-balanced behavior in the infinite-width limit. Specifically, the term
W1 (0)W1 (0)T = W2 (0)T W2 (0) converges to a scaled identity matrix. Furthermore, previous
studies have demonstrated that the relative scaling of λ significantly impacts the learning regime in
practical scenarios, highlighting the crucial role of dynamical studies of networks as a function of
this parameter.

A.3    R ANDOM WEIGHT INITIALISATIONS AND λ-BALANCED P ROPERTY
Throughout this work, we assume that initial weights are λ-Balanced. However, in practice, weights
are not initialized with that goal in mind. Usually, a weight matrix W is initialized with some
random distribution centered around 0, with variance inversely proportional to the number of layers
on which W has a direct effect (Glorot & Bengio (2010), LeCun et al. (1998), He et al. (2015)).
In this section, we show that many common initialization techniques lead to λ-Balanced weights
in expectation. Furthermore, as the size of a network tends to infinity, these random weights are
λ-Balanced in probability.

We do this by first finding the expectation and variance of the balance computation for two
adjacent weight matrices, Wi+1 and Wi , initialized under a normal distribution with zero mean.
Subsequently, we describe how network structure and size can impact the expectation and variance
of the balance computation.
Theorem A.3. [Random Weight Initialization Leads to Balanced Condition] Consider a fully
connected neural network with L layers. Each layer has Ni neurons, and the weights of each layer
                                                                 i              i
Wi is a matrix of dimension (Ni , Ni+1 ). The matrix Wi = (wN,m      ) where wN,m    ∼ N (0, σi2 ),
where σi2 is determined based on the initialization technique. Then the following hold for all i ∈
[1, L − 1]:
               T
      1. E [Wi+1  W       − Wi WiT ] = (Ni+2 σi+1
                                                2
                                                    − Ni σi2 )I
               T i+1
      2. Var Wi+1 Wi+1 − Wi Wi = (Ni+2 σi+1 + Ni σi4 )B, where B is a square matrix with
                                     T            4

         fours across the diagonal and ones everywhere else.
Note that in the case L = 3, N0 = i, N1 = h, N2 = o with i, h, o being the input, hidden and output
dimensions respectively as defined in the main text.

Proof of Theorem A.3.
                                      w1,1              w1,2      ···     w1,Ni+2
                                                                                 
                                     w2,1              w2,2      ···     w2,Ni+2 
                         Let Wi+1 = 
                                     ...                ..       ..         ..   
                                                          .          .        .                 (22)
                                            wNi+1 ,1   wNi+1 ,2   ···    wNi+1 ,Ni+2
                                      = (w1       w2        ...     wNi+2 )

with wj = (w1,j , w2,j , . . . , wNi+1 ,j )T .


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then,


                            wT1
                                              
                           wT2                
               T
              Wi+1 Wi+1 =  ..                  (w1    w2        ···    wNi+2 )
                                              
                           .                  
                               wTNi+2
                                ⟨w1 , w1 ⟩                  ⟨w1 , w2 ⟩       ···      ⟨w1 , wNi+2 ⟩
                                                                                                   
                               ⟨w2 , w1 ⟩                  ⟨w2 , w2 ⟩       ···      ⟨w2 , wNi+2 ⟩ 
                             =      ..                         ..           ..             ..      
                                     .                          .              .            .      
                                    ⟨wNi+2 , w1 ⟩       ⟨wNi+2 , w2 ⟩        ···    ⟨wNi+2 , wNi+2 ⟩


Now, consider ⟨wi , wj ⟩ with i ̸= j,


                                Ni+2
                                  X
                 ⟨wi , wj ⟩ =           wk,i wk,j
                                  k=1
                                                       
                                      Ni+2
                                        X
              E [⟨wi , wj ⟩] = E             wk,i wk,j 
                                        k=1
                                Ni+2
                                  X
                            =           E[wk,i wk,j ]
                                  k=1
                                Ni+2
                                  X
                            =           E[wk,i ]E[wk,j ] = 0         (by independence)
                                  k=1
                                                               2
            Var [⟨wi , wj ⟩] = E ⟨wi , wj ⟩2 − [E [⟨wi , wj ⟩]]

                                                  2 
                                   Ni+2
                                    X
                             = E        wk,i wk,j  
                                                      
                                         k=1
                                                                                             
                                      Ni+2                    Ni+2
                                        X                        XX
                                               2    2
                            = E              wk,i wk,j +2                 wk,i wk,j wl,i wl,j 
                                        k=1                      k=1 l>k
                                Ni+2                         Ni+2
                                  X                           XX
                                           2    2
                            =           E[wk,i wk,j ]+2                  E[wk,i ]E[wk,j ]E[wl,i ]E[wl,j ]
                                  k=1                         k=1 l>k
                                Ni+2
                                  X
                                           2       2
                            =           E[wk,i ]E[wk,j ]
                                  k=1
                                      4
                            = (Ni+2 )σi+1


Similarly, consider ⟨wi , wi ⟩:


                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Ni+2
                               X
                                       2
                ⟨wi , wi ⟩ =          wk,i
                               k=1
                                               
                                    Ni+2
                                     X
                                            2 
                                                          2           2
            E [⟨wi , wi ⟩] = E            wk,i = Ni+2 E wk,i = Ni+2 σN i+1
                                     k=1
                                h            i
                                           2                2
          Var [⟨wi , wi ⟩] = E (⟨wi , wi ⟩) − E [⟨wi , wi ⟩]
                                           2 
                                 Ni+2
                                X 2               2     4
                           = E       wk,i  − Ni+2    σN   i+1
                                       k=1
                                       2 
                               Ni+2
                                X
                                     2         2    4
                         = E      wk,i     − Ni+2 σNi+1
                             
                                       k=1
                                                                       
                                    Ni+2             Ni+2 Ni+2
                                     X               X X
                                            4                     2    2     2    4
                         = E              wk,i +2               wk,i wl,i − Ni+2 σN i+1
                                     k=1             k=1 l=k+1
                               Ni+2                  Ni+2 Ni+2
                               X         4      X X
                                                      2
                                                              2      2    4
                         =            E wk,i +2    E wk,i  E wl,i − Ni+2 σN i+1
                               k=1                   k=1 l=k+1
                                   4           2            4        2    4
                         = Ni+2 (3σN i+1
                                         ) + (Ni+2 − Ni+2 )σN i+1
                                                                  − Ni+2 σN i+1
                                  4
                         = 4Ni+2 σN i+1


Hence                                    T                2

                                      E Wi+1 Wi+1 = Ni+2 σi+1   I

                                      T                     4
                                 Var Wi+1 Wi+1 = 4 (Ni+2 ) σi+1 B
For the case for Wi , notice we can express Wi WiT as (WiT )T (WiT ). Hence we can use the proof
                ′                                    ′
above, with Wi+1    = WiT . In this case the matrix Wi+1 has shape (Ni , Ni+1 ), and each element
of the matrix has variance σi2 . We have:

                                              E Wi WiT = Ni σi2 I



                                             Var Wi WiT = Ni σi4 B


By assumption, Wi , Wi+1 are independent. Hence Cov(Wi , Wi+1 ) = 0. We can use this prop-
erty together with linearity of expectation:
                         T
                             Wi+1 − WiT Wi = Ni+2 σi+1
                                                   2
                                                       − Ni σi2 I

                      E Wi+1

                          T
                              Wi+1 − WiT Wi = Ni+2 σi+1
                                                    4
                                                        + Ni σi4 B

                     Var Wi+1
This completes the proof.

In neural network training, proper weight initialization is crucial for ensuring stable gradients
during backpropagation, which helps to avoid issues such as vanishing and exploding gradients.
The goal of weight scaling is to maintain appropriate variance across layers, enabling efficient and
effective learning (Glorot & Bengio (2010)). The weights are typically initialized to be random and
centered around 0 to break symmetry and ensure that different neurons learn different features.

Some of the most commonly used initialization methods are detailed below:


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        • LeCun Initialization (LeCun et al. (1998)): Weights are initialized using a normal distri-
          bution with a mean of 0 and a variance of N1i , where Ni is the number of input units in the
          layer. Mathematically, the weights w are drawn from N (0, N1i ).


        • Glorot Initialization (Glorot & Bengio (2010)): Weights are initialized using a nor-
                                                                   2
          mal distribution with a mean of 0 and a variance of Ni +N  i+1
                                                                         , where Ni is the number
          of input units and Ni+1 is the number of output units. This method balances the vari-
          ance between layers with different widths. Mathematically, the weights w are drawn from
                    2
          N (0, Ni +N i+1
                          ).


        • He Initialization (He et al. (2015)): Weights are initialized using a normal distribution
          with a mean of 0 and a variance of N2i , where Ni is the number of input units in the layer.
          This method is particularly suited for layers with ReLU activation functions. Mathemati-
          cally, the weights w are drawn from N (0, N2i ).


        • Scaled Initialization (Rahnamayan & Wang (2009)): Weights are initialized using a
                                                                   αi
          normal distribution with a mean of 0 and a variance of N   i
                                                                       , where Ni is the number of input
          units in the layer and αi is a parameter specific to each layer. Mathematically, the weights
                                    αi
          w are drawn from N (0, N    i
                                        ).


These initialization methods help ensure that the network starts with weights that facilitate stable and
efficient learning, avoiding the common pitfalls of poorly initialized neural networks. Using (A.3),
we can calculate the respective Expectations and Variances of the Balanced Computation under the
different initialisations:


                       i+1          i            T
 Initialization   Var(wN,m )   Var(wN,m )    E[Wi+1  Wi+1 − Wi WiT ]                  T
                                                                               Var[Wi+1    Wi+1 − Wi WiT ]

                      1           1                  Ni+2                              Ni+2
    LeCun            Ni+1         Ni                 Ni+1 − 1 I                           2
                                                                                       Ni+1
                                                                                               + N1i B
                                                                                             2                    2
                       2           2             Ni+2          Ni                   2                      2
    Glorot        Ni+1 +Ni+2    Ni+1 +Ni    2 Ni+1 +Ni+2 − Ni+1 +Ni I   (Ni+2 Ni+1 +N   i+2
                                                                                                + Ni Ni +N   i+1
                                                                                                                    )B

      He              2
                     Ni+1
                                  2
                                  Ni             2 N  Ni+1 − 1 I
                                                       i+2                               Ni+2
                                                                                   4 N 2 + N1i B
                                                                                           i+1
                                                                                     2  2               2  2
                     α2i+1        α2i

                                                 Ni+2 2        2                      α                 α
    Scaled           Ni+1         Ni             Ni+1 αi+1 − αi I            (Ni+2 Ni+1 i+1
                                                                                                + Ni Nii )B


Table 1: Comparison of Variance and Expectation of Balanced Computation for Different Weight
Initializations


Fig. 6 shows a numerical example of how the Balanced computation would look like for initialising
weights with LeCun, He, Scaled and Glorot initialisations using Ni = 160, Ni+1 = 80, Ni+2 =
120. With these numbers of nodes in each layer one can appreciate how the Balanced Computation
on the weights is visually similar to a scaled identity matrix. In Fig. 7 We show how the sign of
the scaled identity changes with the dimentions Ni , Ni+1 Ni+2 .


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Balanced computation for different weight initializationsusing Ni = 160, Ni+1 =
80, Ni+2 = 120, α1 = 1 ,α2 = 2. The figure compares LeCun, He, Scaled, and Glorot initial-
izations, showing how the balanced computation on the weights visually resembles a scaled identity
matrix.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Impact of Network Structure on sign of balanced coefficient for different initialisations.
Lecun, He and Scaled initialisations depend solely on the ratio of the sizes of the output and hidden
layers. Scaled initialisation’s dependence is affected by the parameters αi+1 , αi . Glorot initialisa-
tion’s sign depends on both ratios.

State-of-the-art models such as (Krizhevsky et al. (2012), Liu et al. (2023a)) use more than 10,000
nodes in each hidden layer. This implies that if we wished to perform some mathematical analysis
on these models, assuming the initial random weights are λ-Balanced would be a very close
depiction to reality. In addition, these models often have a different number of nodes per layer, so
understanding the effect of the relationship between Ni , Ni+1 , and Ni+2 is crucial.

Specifically, we aim to understand how changes in the relative width of layers i, i + 1, i + 2
affect the Balanced Computation: suppose Ni+1 = kNi for some k ∈ R+ and Ni+2 = rNi for
some r ∈ R+ . Then we can express the table above in terms of k, r, and Ni only:

                        i+1          i           T
  Initialization   Var(wN,m )   Var(wN,m )   E[Wi+1 Wi+1 − Wi WiT ]      Var[Wi+1T
                                                                                    Wi+1 − Wi WiT ]
                       1           1                  r                          1    r

     LeCun            kNi          Ni                 k −1 I                    Ni k2 + 1 B

                        2            2               r     1               4       r         1
     Glorot         Ni (k+r)     Ni (k+1)       2 k+r   − k+1    I        Ni    (r+k) 2 + (k+1)  2   B
                       2           2
                                                   2 kr − 1 I                    4    r

       He             kNi          Ni                                           Ni k2 + 1 B
                      α2i+1
                                                                                   2
                                   α2i

                                                  r 2        2
                                                                             1     rαi+1      2
     Scaled           kNi          Ni             k αi+1 − αi I              Ni      k2 + αi B


            Table 2: Comparison of Variance and Expectation for Different Initializations

From Table 2, we can observe that as the number of nodes in each layer tends to infinity, while
the ratios between the number of nodes in each layer (r, k) are maintained, the variance of the
Balanced Computation tends to zero. Hence the Balanced Computation converges in probability to
λ-Balanced weights.

Further, Table 2 shows that a larger value of r will lead to a higher value of λ in every one
of the initializations displayed. Moreover, a larger k has the opposite effect. In addition, we can
observe that in some initializations there are limits as to what value λ can take (such as in LeCun
λ ≥ 0).

Some special cases of r and k are interesting to consider to gain an intuition of how chang-
ing these values influences the Balancedness of the Weights. In the table below, we consider the
cases:
      1. r = k: the three layers of the network have the same number of nodes.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      2. r → 0, k fixed: Ni >> Ni+2 , Ni+1 , the first of the three layers is much larger than the
         other two layers.
      3. r → ∞, k fixed: Ni+2 >> Ni , Ni+1 , the last of the three layers is much larger than the
         other two layers (k is fixed).
      4. k → 0, r fixed: the middle layer is exceedingly small, Ni+1 << Ni , Ni+2
      5. k → ∞, r fixed: the middle layer is much bigger than the other two layers, Ni+1 >>
         Ni , Ni+2
                 α2
      6. r = α2 i : the inner and outer layers have a ratio proportional to the scale factors of each
               i+1
         weight layer. This case is important for Scaled initialization.


                                                                                              α2
       Initialization      r=k           r→0       r→∞            k→∞      k→0        r = α2 i k
                                                                                              i+1

                                                       r                     r
          LeCun               0            −I          kI          −I        kI           -
                                                                              2
          Glorot              0            2I          2I           0      − k+1  I       -
                                                        r
                                                                           2 kr I

            He                0           −2I      2   k      I   −2I                     -
                          2                        r 2                     r 2
          Scaled        (αi+1 − αi2 )I   −αi2 I    k αi+1 I       −αi2 I   k αi+1 I       0

           Table 3: Comparison of Variance and Expectation under Different Conditions

From Table 3 above one can appreciate the impact network structure can have on the Balanced
Computation of the weights of each layer. One can also see that there are many cases when the
Balanced computation does not equal 0, both in the limit of r, k and not in the limit.

We have showed that although the Balanced property is only preserved in Linear Networks,
it occurs at initialisation for large networks which utilise some of the most common weight
initialisation techniques.

These findings provide motivation to better understand the relation between the Balanced
Computation of a Network, its structure and the regime it will learn in. If we are able to understand
the relation between λ-Balanced weights and Rich and Lazy Learning in Linear Networks, one
might be able to approximate these results to the nonlinear case.

A possible future application might be the ability to heavily influence a network’s learning
regime by altering the relative width of its layers, its activation functions or weight initialisation
techniques used for each layer.

In order to better understand the effects of λ on the learning dynamics and learning regime
of the network, we first study aligned λ-Balanced networks.
A.4 S CALE VS RELATIVE SCALE
A straightforward intuition for the scale and the relative scale can be gained by considering the scalar
case where Ni = Nh = No = 1. In this scenario, it is easy to ensure that w12 = w22 satisfies λ = 0
while allowing for different absolute scales. For instance, w1 = w2 = 0.001 or w1 = w2 = 5. In
such cases, the absolute scale is clearly decoupled from the relative scale. However, in more complex
settings, the relative scale and absolute scale interact in non-trivial ways. While our study primarily
focuses on the effects of relative scale, the influence of absolute scale is inherently embedded within
our framework through the definitions of B, C, and D (see Equations 10). However, this influence is
not immediately apparent from the main theorem. A clearer distinction between the roles of relative
and absolute scale can be observed in Theorem 5.1. We investigate first how λ, the relative scale
parameter, governs the transition between sigmoidal and exponential dynamical regimes. A similar
argument applies to absolute scale, which appears explicitly as sα (0) in these equations. Consider
the case when λ = 0, the dynamics of sα reduce to the classical solution of the Bernoulli differential


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


equation. In the limiting case where sα (0) → 0, the system exhibits classic sigmoidal dynamics
(characteristic of the rich regime), whereas the limit sα (0) → ∞ yields exponential dynamics
(characteristic of the lazy regime).
We performed an experiment to further examine the interplay between relative weight scale, absolute
weight scale, and the network’s learning regime in the general setting. We define the absolute scale
of the weights as the norm of W2 W1 . We generate random initial weights of a given relative and
absolute scale and train the network on a random input-output task. We compute the logarithmic
kernel distance of the NTK from initialization and the logarithmic loss throughout training. We plot
these values in a heat map for λ in [−9, 9] and relative scale in (0, 20]. We repeat this procedure
for three architectures: a square network (Ni = 2, Nh = 2, No = 2), a funnel network (Ni =
4, Nh = 2, No = 2), and an anti-funnel network (Ni = 2, Nh = 2, No = 4). These are the same
architectures as in Figure 5 in the main text.
In all three different types of networks, at the start of training, the model loss depends entirely on an
absolute scale, not the relative scale. Throughout training across networks, the learning dynamics
are intricately influenced by both the absolute and relative scales and fully captured by our theoretical
solution. In the square network, the loss increases with absolute scale but decreases with relative
scale, as shown in Fig.8. Similarly, the kernel distance phase plot exhibits an intricate relationship
with the relative and absolute scales, as illustrated in Fig.5. Strikingly, for large imbalanced λ,
even at small scales, the network transitions into a lazy regime. The funnel and anti-funnel network
architectures demonstrate antisymmetric behavior as shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10. Here, we focus on
the anti-funnel network for brevity. The evolution of the loss reveals that negatively λ initializations
first converge, whereas positively λ initializations retain larger loss values. Additionally, the kernel
distance attains its maximum for positive λ, aligning with the results outlined in section 5. At
convergence, the loss across all networks stabilizes uniformly, irrespective of initial conditions,
confirming consistent convergence. This outcome aligns with the theoretical expectation for linear
networks under gradient flow, which predictably converge to the same solution. Furthermore, in
square networks, the kernel distance depends exclusively on the relative scale λ and peaks at λ = 0
(results corresponding to the green curve in Fig. 5B.) This observation illustrates that the regime at
λ = 0 is consistently rich, independent of the absolute scale as predicted by our theoretical results in
C.3. For funnel and anti-funnel networks, the kernel distance exhibits an antisymmetric pattern. In
the anti-funnel network, the kernel distance depends mostly on λ, achieving high values for positive
λ and approaching zero for negative λ (matching the results in Fig. 5B ( pink line)). Conversely,
in the funnel network, the kernel distance is high for negative λ and approaches zero for positive
λ, corroborating the results in Fig. 5B. (blue line). These results emphasize the interplay between
relative and absolute scales, highlighting their critical roles in determining the system’s behavior.
Altogether, the absolute scale and relative scale of the weights play a critical role in describing the
phase portrait of the learning regime, as first demonstrated in the Kunin et al. (2024) paper on ReLU
networks.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Square network: Phase plots showing (left) the logarithmic kernel distance of the NTK
from initialization and (right) the corresponding logarithmic loss as functions of the relative scale λ
and the absolute scale. (Top to bottom) Different time steps during training t = 1, t = 20, t = 100.


Figure 9: Anti-funnel network: Phase plots showing (left) the logarithmic kernel distance of the
NTK from initialization and (right) the corresponding logarithmic loss as functions of the relative
scale λ and the absolute scale. (Top to bottom) Different time steps during training t = 1, t = 400,
t = 4000.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Funnel network: Phase plots showing (left) the logarithmic kernel distance of the NTK
from initialization and (right) the corresponding logarithmic loss as functions of the relative scale
λ and the absolute scale. (Top to bottom) Different time steps during training t = 1, t = 400,
t = 4000.

B    A PPENDIX : E XACT LEARNING DYNAMICS WITH PRIOR KNOWLEDGE
B.1 A PPENDIX : F UKUMIZU A PPROACH
Lemma B.1. We introduce the variables
                                             T
                         W1T            T   W1 W1                         W1T W2T
                   Q=             and QQ =                                          .            (23)
                         W2                 W2 W1                         W2 W2T
Defining
                                                 − λ2 I

                                                           (Σ̃yx )T
                                       F=                     λ       ,                          (24)
                                                 Σ̃yx         2I

the gradient flow dynamics of QQT (t) can be written as a differential matrix Riccati equation
                              d
                          τ      (QQT ) = FQQT + QQT F − (QQT )2 .                               (25)
                              dt
Proof. We introduce the variables
                                                              T
                            W1T                              W1 W1        W1T W2T
                     Q=                and   QQT =                                  .            (26)
                            W2                               W2 W1        W2 W2T
We compute the time derivative
                                     dW1T                           dW1T
                                 "                                                      #
                 d                             T dW1                          T dW2
                τ (QQT ) = τ          dt W1 + W1 dt                  dt W2 + W1 dt          .    (27)
                 dt                  dW2        dW1                 dW2T      T dW2
                                      dt W1 + W2 dt                  dt W2 + W2 dt

Using equations 18 and 19, we compute the four quadrants separately giving
                                    dW1T

                                                   T dW1
                                τ        W1 + W1             =                                   (28)
                                     dt               dt

                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            = (Σyx − W2 W1 )T W2 W1 + W1T W2T (Σyx − W2 W1 )                                   (29)
              = (Σyx )T W2 W1 + W1T W2T Σyx − W1T W2T W2 W1 − (W2 W1 )T W2 W1                                  (30)
          yx T
  = (Σ )         W2 W1 + W1T W2T Σyx − W1T W2T W2 W1 − W1T W1 W1T W1 − λW1T W1 ,                               (31)

                                                 dW1T T       dW2T

                                        τ            W2 + W1T                    =                             (32)
                                                  dt           dt
                           = (Σyx − W2 W1 )T W2 W2T + W1T W1 (Σyx − W2 W1 )T                                   (33)
                  yx T
           = (Σ )          W2 W2T + W1T W1 (Σyx )T − W1T W1 W1T W2T − W1T W2T W2 W2T ,                         (34)

                                                 dW2         dW1
                                         τ           W1 + W2                 =                                 (35)
                                                  dt          dt
                            = (Σyx − W2 W1 )W1T W1 + W2 W2T (Σyx − W2 W1 )                                     (36)
                       yx
                 =Σ         W1T W1 + W2 W2T Σyx − W2 W2T W2 W1 − W2 W1 W1T W1 ,                                (37)

                                                             dW2T

                                                 dW2 T
                                         τ           W2 + W2                     =                             (38)
                                                  dt          dt
                             (Σ̃yx − W2 W1 )W1T W2T + W2 W1 (Σ̃yx − W2 W1 )T                                   (39)
              = Σ̃yx W1T W2T + W2 W1 (Σ̃yx )T − W2 W1 W1T W2T − W2 W1 (W2 W1 )T                                (40)
                      yx
               = Σ̃        W1T W2T + W2 W1 (Σ̃yx )T − W2 W1 W1T W2T − W2 W1 W1T W2T                            (41)
         yx
  = Σ̃        W1T W2T + W2 W1 (Σ̃yx )T − W2 W1 W1T W2T − W2 W2T W2 W2T + λW2 W2T .                             (42)
Defining                                              λ
                                                     −2I      (Σ̃yx )T
                                                 F=              λ       ,                                     (43)
                                                     Σ̃yx        2I
the gradient flow dynamics of QQT (t) can be written as a differential matrix Riccati equation
                                     d
                                 τ      (QQT ) = FQQT + QQT F − (QQT )2 .                                      (44)
                                     dt
           d
We write τ dt (QQT ) for completeness

           λ                                                                                   T
                                                                                                 − λ2
                                                                 T
 d   T    − 2 (Σ̃yx )T W1T W1                         W1T W2    W1 W1                W1T W2             (Σ̃yx )T
τ (QQ ) = yx                                                  +
 dt       Σ̃     λ
                  2
                         W2 W1                        W2 W2T    W2 W1                W2 W2T      Σ̃yx      λ
                                                                                                           2
             T               2
             W1 W1 W1T W2
         −
             W2 W1 W2 W2T
                                                                                                               (45)

                                                              T   λ
      − λ2 (Σ̃yx )T W1T W1 W1T W2
                                            T
                                            W1 W1 W1T W2          − 2 (Σ̃yx )T
    = yx                                  +
      Σ̃       λ        W2 W1 W2 W2T        W2 W1 W2 W2T          Σ̃yx     λ
         T 2                                                               2                                   (46)
         W1 W1 W1T W2 W1T W1 W1T W2
     −
         W2 W1 W2 W2T W2 W1 W2 W2T
                λ T
                − 2 W1 W1 + (Σ̃yx )T W2 W1 − λ2 W1T W2 + (Σ̃yx )T W2 W2T

           =
                   Σ̃yx W1T W1 + λ2 W2 W1      Σ̃yx W1T W2T + λ2 W2 W2T
                λ T
               − 2 W1 W1 + W1T W1 (Σ̃yx )T λ2 W1T W2 + W1T W2 (Σ̃yx )T

           +                                                                                                   (47)
                − λ W2T W1 + W2 W1 (Σ̃yx )T λ2 W2 W2T + W2 W2T (Σ̃yx )T
                2T
               W1 W1 W1T W2 W1T W1 W1T W2
           −
                W2 W1 W2 W2T W2 W1 W2 W2T

                                                         28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          λ T
         − 2 W1 W1 + (Σ̃yx )T W2 W1 − λ2 W1T W2 + (Σ̃yx )T W2 W2T

      =
            Σ̃yx W1T W1 + λ2 W2 W1      Σ̃yx W1T W2T + λ2 W2 W2T
          λ T
         − 2 W1 W1 + W1T W1 (Σ̃yx )T λ2 W1T W2 + W1T W2 (Σ̃yx )T

      +                                                                                           (45)
         − λ W2T W1 + W2 W1 (Σ̃yx )T λ2 W2 W2T + W2 W2T (Σ̃yx )T
          2T
         W1 W1 W1T W1 + W1T W2 W2T W1 W1T W1 W1T W2 + W1T W2 W2T W2
      −
         W2 W1 W1T W1 + W2 W2T W2 W1 W2 W1 W1T W2 + W2 W2T W2 W2T


The four quadrants of 27 are equivalent to equations 31, 34, 37, and 42 respectively.
B.2 QQT D IAGONALISATION
Lemma B.2. If F = P ΛP T is symmetric and diagonalizable, then the matrix Riccati differential
          d
equation dt (QQT ) = FQQT + QQT F − (QQT )2 with initialization QQT (0) = Q(0)Q(0)T
has a unique solution for all t ≥ 0, and the solution is given by
                                  "                      t
                                                               !       #−1
               T        F τt                 T      e2Λ τ − I     T                 t
           QQ (t) = e Q(0) I + Q(0) P                            P Q(0)    Q(0)T eF τ .  (48)
                                                        2Λ
This is true even when there exists Λi = 0.
Proof. First we show that there exists a unique solution to the initial value problem stated. This is
true by Picard-Lindelöf theorem. Now   we show  that the provided solution satisfies the ODE. Let
                                              t
        t                                  e2Λ τ −I
L = eF τ Q(0) and C = I+Q(0)T P              2Λ       P T Q(0) such that solution QQT (t) = LC −1 LT .
The time derivative of QQT is then given by
                  d              d                  d                   d
                     (QQT ) = (L)C −1 LT + L (C −1 )LT + LC −1 (LT )                              (49)
                  dt            dt                  dt                 dt
Solving for these derivatives individually, we find
          d          d    t              t
             (L) = eF τ Q(0) = F eF τ Q(0) = F L                                                  (50)
          dt        dt                                                !
                                                            2Λ τt
       d                    d                          d  e       − I
         (C −1 ) = −C −1 (C)C −1 = −C −1 Q(0)T P                        P T Q(0)C −1              (51)
      dt                    dt                         dt     2Λ
We consider the derivative of the fraction serpately,
                                                  t
                                                           !
                                      d      e2Λ τ − I               t
                                                               = e2Λ τ                            (52)
                                      dt        2Λ
this is true even in the limit as λi → 0. Plugging these derivatives back in we see that the solution
satisfies the ODE. Lastly, let t = 0, we see that the the solution satisfies the initial conditions.
B.3 F D IAGONALIZATION
Lemma B.3. The eigendecomposition of F = PΛPT where
                                            √                               S˜λ
                                                                                           

        1 Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)
                                                                                   0      0
   P= √                                     √ 2Ṽ⊥ ,                     Λ=0     −S˜λ    0      (53)
         2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) −Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)  2Ũ⊥
                                                                             0     0     λ⊥
and the matrices S˜λ , λ⊥ , H̃, and G̃ are the diagonal matrices defined as:
        r                                                       s
                 λ 2                           λ                   S˜λ − S̃            1
 S˜λ = S̃ 2 + I, λ⊥ = sgn(No − Ni ) I, H̃ = sgn(λ)                          , G̃ = p          . (54)
                  4                            2                    ˜
                                                                   Sλ + S̃           I + H̃ 2
Beyond the invertibility of F , notice from the equation (Fukumizu solution) we need to understand
the relationship between F and Q(0). To do this the following lemma relates the structure between
the SVD of the model with the SVD structure of the individual parameters.
Proof. We leave for the reader by computing
                                         F = P ΛP T                                               (55)



                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.4 S OLUTION U NEQUAL -I NPUT-O UTPUT
Theorem B.4. Under the assumptions of whitened inputs, 1, lambda-balanced weights 2, no bottle-
neck 3, the temporal dynamics of QQT are
                                       Z1 A−1 Z1T Z1 A−1 Z2T

                               T
                           QQ (t) =                               ,
                                       Z2 A−1 Z1T Z2 A−1 Z2T
where the variables Z1 ∈ RNi ×Nh , Z2 ∈ RNo ×Nh , and A ∈ RNh ×Nh are defined as
         1                 ˜ t      1                  ˜ t               t
 Z1 (t) = Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)eSλ τ B T − Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T + Ṽ⊥ eλ⊥ τ Ṽ⊥T
                                                                                W1 (0)T                                                   (56)
         2                          2
         1                 ˜ t      1                  ˜ t               t
 Z2 (t) = Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)eSλ τ B T + Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T + Ũ⊥ eλ⊥ τ ŨT⊥ W2 (0)                                                    (57)
         2                   !      2                 !                                 !
                             2S˜λ τt                         −2S˜λ τt                                                λ⊥ τt
                         e         −I                      e            −I                                       e       −I
  A(t) =I + B                                  BT − C                              C T + W2 (0)T Ũ⊥                            ŨT⊥ W2 (0)
                               4S˜λ                             4S˜λ                                                   λ⊥
                                           t
                                                   !
                                       eλ⊥ τ − I         T
               + W1 (0)Ṽ⊥                             Ṽ⊥ W1 (0)T                                                                        (58)
                                          λ⊥

Proof. We start and use the diagonalization of F to rewrite the matrix exponential of F and F . Note
that PT P = PPT = I and therefore PT = P−1 .
 Ft     Γ T
e τ = Pe P
                                                              ˜ t                                 
                                                               S
                                                       √      e λτ                  0          0                                                   √     T
         1                                                                                          1

               Ṽ(G̃ − H̃ G̃)       Ṽ(G̃ + H̃ G̃)     √2V⊥  0
                                                             
                                                                                  −S˜λ t                     Ṽ(G̃ − H̃ G̃)    Ṽ(G̃ + H̃ G̃)      √2V⊥
       = √                                                                       e     τ       0
                                                                                                    √
          2     Ũ(G̃ + H̃ G̃)     −Ũ(G̃ − H̃ G̃)      2U⊥  
                                                                                               t
                                                                                                    2       Ũ(G̃ + H̃ G̃)   −Ũ(G̃ − H̃ G̃)       2U⊥
                                                                                             λ
                                                                0                   0       e ⊥τ
                                                      S˜ t
                                                                            
                                                                                                                        T                               T
         1                                                                  1                                                 1             t 1

               Ṽ(G̃ − H̃ G̃)      Ṽ(G̃ + H̃ G̃) e λ τ            0                Ṽ(G̃ − H̃ G̃)     Ṽ(G̃ + H̃ G̃)             Ṽ⊥    λ        Ṽ⊥
       = √                                                                √                                              + 2√           e ⊥τ √
          2     Ũ(G̃ − H̃ G̃)     −Ũ(G̃ + H̃ G̃)                −S˜λ t     2        Ũ(G̃ + H̃ G̃)   −Ũ(G̃ − H̃ G̃)         2   Ũ⊥         2  Ũ ⊥
                                                       0        e      τ

              Λt        λ  t
       = Oe    τ O + 2Me ⊥ τ MT .                                                                                                           (59)



   t             t                         t                             t                                               t
eF τ F−1 eF τ − F−1 = OeΛ τ OT OΛ−1 OT OeΛ τ OT − OΛ−1 OT + M(eλ⊥ τ − I)(λ⊥ )−1 MT .
                                                                                (60)
                 F = OΛOT + 2Mλ⊥ MT                                                                                                       (61)
                       T
           1     Ṽ⊥
Where M = √2             . Placing these expressions into equation 48 gives
                Ũ⊥
          h         t                 t
                                           i
 QQT (t) = OeΛ τ OT + 2Meλ⊥ τ MT Q(0)
                                                                                      −1
                   1                    t
                                                                  t

             I + Q(0)T O e2Λ τ − I Λ−1 OT + M(eλ⊥ τ − I)λ−1               ⊥ MT
                                                                                 Q(0)                                                     (62)
                   2
                      h      t               t
                                                  i T
          Q(0)T OeΛ τ OT + 2Meλ⊥ τ MT

                                                                       T
                          T      1 Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)         W1T (0)
                       O Q(0) = √
                                  2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) −Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)       W2 (0)

                           1 (G̃ − H̃ G̃)Ṽ T W1T (0) + (G̃ + H̃ G̃)Ũ T W2 (0)
                         =√
                            2 (G̃ + H̃ G̃)Ṽ T W1T (0) − (G̃ − H̃ G̃)Ũ T W2 (0)
                                                     T
                                               1     B
                                           =√           T                                                                                 (63)
                                                 2  −C
where

                        B = W2 (0)T Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) + W1 (0)Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) ∈ RNh ×Nh                                                     (64)
                                           T                                                                    Nh ×Nh
                        C = W2 (0) Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) − W1 (0)Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) ∈ R                                                            (65)


                                                                        30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                      S˜ t                               !
                          1         Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)   e λτ                     0
                OeΛt/τ = √                                                                         ˜ t
                           2        Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) −Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)    0                  e −S λ τ
                                                                                          !
                                                     ˜ t                            ˜ t
                           1       Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)eSλ τ        Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ
                         =√                         ˜ t                           ˜ t                               (66)
                            2      Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)eSλ τ        −Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ
                                                                                               !
                                                         ˜ t                             ˜ t
                                                                 Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ

                              1       Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)eSλ τ                                               BT
            OeΛt/τ O T Q(0) =                          ˜ t                          ˜ t
                              2       Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)eSλ τ       −Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ                  −C T
                                                                                               !
                                               ˜ t                                 ˜ t
                       1    Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)eSλ τ B T − Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T
                     =                       ˜ t                         ˜ t                                        (67)
                       2    Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)eSλ τ B T + Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T

                                                    t                       T
                    t              1 Ṽ⊥ eλ⊥ τ             0        1 Ṽ⊥       W1 (0)T
              2Meλ⊥ τ MT Q(0) = 2 √                            t   √
                                    2 Ũ⊥         0     e λ⊥ τ       2 Ũ⊥       W2 (0)
                                       λ⊥ τt
                                               T

                                 Ṽ⊥ e       Ṽ⊥          0                  T
                                                                      W1 (0)
                              =                              t
                                        0          Ũ⊥ eλ⊥ τ ŨT⊥      W2 (0)
                                           t
                                 Ṽ⊥ eλ⊥ τ Ṽ⊥ T
                                                 W1 (0)T
                              =         λ⊥ τt   T
                                  Ũ⊥ e       Ũ⊥ W2 (0)
                                                                                                                    (68)
Putting it together we get the expressions for Z1 (t) and Z2 (t)

   h       t            t
                            i
       OeΛ τ OT + 2Meλ⊥ τ MT Q(0) =
                                                                        !
                             ˜ t                                 ˜ t                     t
             Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)eSλ τ B T − Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T

     1                                                                           Ṽ⊥ eλ⊥ τ Ṽ⊥
                                                                                             T
                                                                                                W1 (0)T
   =                          ˜ t                         ˜ t               +              t                        (69)
     2       Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)eSλ τ B T + Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T                 Ũ⊥ eλ⊥ τ ŨT⊥ W2 (0)


          1                 ˜ t      1                  ˜ t               t
  Z1 (t) = Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)eSλ τ B T − Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T + Ṽ⊥ eλ⊥ τ Ṽ⊥T
                                                                                 W1 (0)T                            (70)
          2                          2
          1                 ˜ t      1                  ˜ t               t
  Z2 (t) = Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)eSλ τ B T + Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T + Ũ⊥ eλ⊥ τ ŨT⊥ W2 (0)                             (71)
          2                          2
We now compute the terms inside the inverse
                     t
   Q(0)T M(eλ⊥ τ )λ−1    T
                   ⊥ M Q(0)
                                                                     −1              T
                          1 Ṽ⊥ eλ⊥ τt

                     T √                          0       λ⊥ 0             1 Ṽ⊥        W1 (0)T
   = W1 (0) W2 (0)                                  t                    √
                           2 Ũ⊥          0    e λ⊥ τ      0 λ⊥             2 Ũ⊥        W2 (0)
                           λ t −1
                          e ⊥ τ λ Ṽ⊥ ṼT W1 (0)T
   = W1 (0) W2 (0)T              t
                                   ⊥        ⊥
                           eλ⊥ τ λ−1         T
                                   ⊥ Ũ⊥ Ũ⊥ W2 (0)
     h                t
                                                                                    i
                                                              λ⊥ τt −1 T
   = W1 (0)Ṽ⊥ eλ⊥ τ λ−1 ⊥  Ṽ T
                               ⊥ W  1 (0)T
                                           + W  2 (0)T
                                                       Ũ ⊥ e      λ ⊥ Ũ ⊥ W 2 (0)              (72)


                                                1 Ṽ⊥ λ⊥ 0 −1 1 Ṽ⊥ T W1 (0)T

       T
           Mλ−1 T
                                                     T
Q(0)         ⊥ M Q(0) = 2             W2 (0) √
                                 W1 (0)                                    √
                                                  2 Ũ⊥       0 λ⊥           2 Ũ⊥     W2 (0)
                                                    −1
                                            Ṽ⊥ λ Ṽ⊥ ṼT W1 (0)T
                         = W1 (0) W2 (0)T           ⊥         ⊥
                                            Ũ⊥    λ−1⊥ Ũ ⊥ Ũ T
                                                                ⊥ W2 (0)
                          = W1 (0)Ṽ⊥ λ⊥ Ṽ⊥ W1 (0) + W2 (0)T Ũ⊥ λ−1
                                       −1 T

                                                    T                         T           (73)
                                                                         ⊥ Ũ⊥ W2 (0)


                                                         31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now
                                                           T
1     T

           2Λ τt

                      −1 T   1          t
                                          Λτ

                                                      −1    B
  Q(0) O e       − I Λ O = [B − C] e         −I Λ
2                            4                             −C T
                             1     2S˜λ t
                                                                     ˜ t

                           =    B e     τ − I   (S˜λ )−1 B T − C e−2Sλ τ − I (S˜λ )−1 C T
                             4
                                                                                    (74)
Putting it all together
                        ˜ t
                                   !                      ˜ t
                                                                    !                                t
                                                                                                              !
                     e2Sλ τ − I           T           e−2Sλ τ − I        T             T         e λ⊥ τ − I
A(t) =I + B                              B −C                           C + W2 (0) Ũ⊥                            ŨT⊥ W2 (0)
                        4S˜λ                             4S˜λ                                        λ⊥
                                     t
                                              !
                               e λ⊥ τ − I           T
           + W1 (0)Ṽ⊥                            Ṽ⊥ W1 (0)T                                                        (75)
                                   λ⊥

So, final form:
       QQT (t) =
       "                                                                                                      !#
          1                    S˜λ τt    T    1                   −S˜λ τt   T            λ⊥ τt     T        T
          2 Ṽ (G̃ − H̃  G̃)e         B    −  2 Ṽ (G̃ +  H̃ G̃)e         C   +   Ṽ ⊥ e        Ṽ ⊥ W1 (0)
                                S˜λ τt                               ˜ t                       t
           1
           2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e          B T + 12 Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T + Ũ⊥ eλ⊥ τ ŨT⊥ W2 (0)
       "                  ˜ t
                                       !                              !       !
                                                         −2S˜λ τt
             1        e2Sλ τ − I                       e          − I
        I+        B                       BT − C                          CT
             4             S˜λ                               S˜λ
                                       !                                               !                 #−1
                         λ⊥ τt                                              λ⊥ τt
                       e        −   I                                     e       −  I
      +W2 (0)T Ũ⊥                       ŨT⊥ W2 (0) +W1 (0)Ṽ⊥                           Ṽ⊥T
                                                                                                 W1 (0)T
                           λ⊥                                                 λ⊥
       "                                                                                                      !#T
          1                    S˜λ τt    T    1                   −S˜λ τt   T            λ⊥ τt     T        T
          2 Ṽ (G̃ − H̃  G̃)e         B    −  2 Ṽ (G̃ +  H̃ G̃)e         C   +   Ṽ ⊥ e        Ṽ ⊥ W1 (0)
                                S˜λ τt                               ˜ t                       t
           1
           2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e          B T + 12 Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T + Ũ⊥ eλ⊥ τ ŨT⊥ W2 (0)
                                                                                                                     (76)



B.5     S TABLE SOLUTION U NEQUAL -I NPUT-O UTPUT
Theorem B.5. Given the assumptions of Theorem 4.3 further assuming that B is invertible and
             t
defining eλ⊥ τ = sgn(No − Ni ) λ2 , the temporal evolution of QQT is described as follows:

                                 h
                                     ˜ t             ˜ t
                    QQT (t) = Z e−Sλ τ B −1 B −T e−Sλ τ                                                              (77)
                                ˜ t
                                    !                                 !
                                                          −S˜λ τt
                       I − e−2Sλ τ         ˜ t           e        − I               ˜ t
                    +                 − e−Sλ τ B −1 C                   C T B −T e−Sλ τ
                              ˜
                            4Sλ                             4Sλ˜
                             ˜ t                                                 ˜ t
                    − e−Sλ τ B−1 W2 (0)T Ũ⊥ λ−1  T
                                              ⊥ Ũ⊥ W2 (0)B
                                                           −T −Sλ τ
                                                             e
                       ˜ t    λ⊥ t                                                     ˜ t
                    e−Sλ τ e 2 τ B−1 W2 (0)T Ũ⊥ λ−1  T
                                                  ⊥ Ũ⊥ W2 (0)B
                                                               −T −Sλ τ
                                                                 e
                             ˜ t   λ t                                                     ˜ t
                   + e−Sλ τ e 2 τ B−1 W1 (0)Ṽ⊥ λ−1    T      T −T −Sλ τ
                                                  ⊥ Ṽ⊥ W1 (0) B    e
                                                                  t −1
                                                                    i
                      ˜ t                                       ˜
                 − e−Sλ τ B−1 W1 (0)Ṽ⊥ λ−1⊥ Ṽ T
                                                ⊥ W 1 (0)T −T −Sλ τ
                                                          B   e        ZT

               h                                                            i                                              
                                        ˜ t               ˜ t                           t    ˜ t
     1
     2 Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) − (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T B −T e−Sλ τ + Ṽ⊥ Ṽ⊥  T
                                                                         W1 (0)B −T eλ⊥ τ e−Sλ τ
Z=      h                                                   i                                    
                                     −S˜λ τt             ˜ t                              t   ˜ t
    1
    2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) + (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e        C T B −T e−Sλ τ + Ũ⊥ ŨT⊥ W2 (0)T B −T eλ⊥ τ e−Sλ τ
                                                                                                                     (78)


                                                            32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We start from


     QQT (t) =
     "                                                                                                   !#
                            S˜λ τt                              ˜ t                     t
        1
        2 Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e         B T − 21 Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T + Ṽ⊥ eλ⊥ τ Ṽ⊥         T
                                                                                                W1 (0)T
                             S˜λ τt                              ˜ t                      t
         1
         2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e         B T + 12 Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T + Ũ⊥ eλ⊥ τ ŨT⊥ W2 (0)
     "                  ˜ t
                                    !                   ˜ t
                                                                 !        !
           1         e2Sλ τ − I          T          e−2Sλ τ − I         T
      I+        B                      B −C                           C
           4             S˜λ                             S˜λ
                          t
                                    !                                      t
                                                                                  !                 #−1
             T       e λ⊥ τ − I         T                             e λ⊥ τ − I        T         T
    +W2 (0) Ũ⊥                       Ũ⊥ W2 (0) +W1 (0)Ṽ⊥                          Ṽ⊥ W1 (0)
                         λ⊥                                               λ⊥
     "                                                                                                   !#T
        1                   S˜λ τt    T    1                  −S˜λ τt   T           λ⊥ τt     T        T
        2 Ṽ ( G̃ − H̃ G̃)e        B    −  2 Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e         C   +  Ṽ ⊥ e        Ṽ ⊥ W1 (0)
                             S˜λ τt                              ˜ t                      t
         1
         2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e         B T + 12 Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T + Ũ⊥ eλ⊥ τ ŨT⊥ W2 (0)
                                                                                                               (79)


                      ˜ t
We extract B −T e−Sλ τ from all terms as exemplified bellow



                     h                                                        i
                                                      −S˜λ τt   T   −T −S˜λ τt
                  1  Ṽ ( G̃ − H̃ G̃) − (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e         C   B    e
 OeΛt/τ O T Q(0) =  h                                                         i B T eS˜λ τt (80)
                                                     − S˜   t
                  2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) + (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e λ τ C B e λ τ
                                                                T   −T  − S˜ t


and rewrite the dynamis as


 QQT (t) =
 "                                                                                                          !#
                                             −S˜λ τt              ˜ t            t                      ˜ t
      1                   1
      2 Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) − 2 Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e         C T B −T e−Sλ τ + Ṽ⊥ eλ⊥ τ Ṽ⊥  T
                                                                                        W1 (0)T B −T e−Sλ τ
                                              −S˜λ τt               ˜ t            t                   ˜ t
       1                   1
       2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) + 2 Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e         C T B −T e−Sλ τ + Ũ⊥ eλ⊥ τ ŨT⊥ W2 (0)B −T e−Sλ τ
 "                                                 ˜ t
                                                       !                            ˜ t
                                                                                          !                   !
     −S˜λ τt   −1 −T −S˜λ τt       1     I − e−2Sλ τ         −S˜λ τt    −1    e−2Sλ τ − I      T   −T −S˜λ τt
   e         B B e             +                          −e         B C                     C B e
                                   4         S˜λ                                    S˜λ
                                     t
                                           !
   −S˜λ τt    −1                e λ⊥ τ − I                           ˜ t
+e         B W2 (0) Ũ⊥T
                                             ŨT⊥ W2 (0)B −T e−Sλ τ
                                    λ⊥
                                       t
                                            !                              #−1
      −S˜λ τt    −1              e λ⊥ τ − I      T         T   −T −S˜λ τt
  +e          B W1 (0)Ṽ⊥                     Ṽ⊥ W1 (0) B e
                                     λ⊥
 "                                                                                                          !#T
                                             −S˜λ τt              ˜ t            t                      ˜ t
      1                   1
      2 Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) − 2 Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e         C T B −T e−Sλ τ + Ṽ⊥ eλ⊥ τ Ṽ⊥  T
                                                                                        W1 (0)T B −T e−Sλ τ
                                              −S˜λ τt               ˜ t            t                   ˜ t
       1                   1
       2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) + 2 Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e         C T B −T e−Sλ τ + Ũ⊥ eλ⊥ τ ŨT⊥ W2 (0)B −T e−Sλ τ
                                                                                                               (81)


                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


QQT (t) =
        h                                                        i                                      
    1                                    −S˜λ τt   T   −T −S˜λ τt            T          −T λ⊥ τt −S˜λ τt
      Ṽ   (G̃ − H̃ G̃) − (G̃ +   H̃ G̃)e        C   B   e          + Ṽ  Ṽ
                                                                         ⊥ ⊥   W 1 (0)B   e      e
 2 h                                                            i                                       
                                        −S˜λ τt       −T −S˜λ τt                                t   ˜ t
   1
   2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) + (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e
                                                  T
                                                C B e              + Ũ⊥ Ũ⊥ W2 (0)T B −T eλ⊥ τ e−Sλ τ
                                                                            T

h
      ˜ t               ˜ t
  e−Sλ τ B −1 B −T e−Sλ τ
                ˜ t
                    !                            ˜ t
                                                        !
      I − e−2Sλ τ         −S˜λ τt  −1      e−Sλ τ − I                    ˜ t
+                     −e          B C                     C T B −T e−Sλ τ
             ˜
           4Sλ                                     ˜
                                                 4Sλ
         ˜ t                                            ˜ t
− e−Sλ τ B−1 W2 (0)T Ũ⊥ λ−1  T
                          ⊥ Ũ⊥ W2 (0)B
                                       −T −Sλ τ
                                         e
   ˜ t    λ⊥ t                                                ˜ t
e−Sλ τ e 2 τ B−1 W2 (0)T Ũ⊥ λ−1  T
                              ⊥ Ũ⊥ W2 (0)B
                                           −T −Sλ τ
                                             e
         ˜ t   λ t                                             ˜ t
+ e−Sλ τ e 2 τ B−1 W1 (0)Ṽ⊥ λ−1   T       T −T −Sλ τ
                              ⊥ Ṽ⊥ W1 (0) B     e
                                                     i−1
     ˜  t
                                        T −T −S˜λ τt
− e−Sλ τ B−1 W1 (0)Ṽ⊥ λ−1⊥  Ṽ T
                                ⊥ W1 (0) B    e
 h                                                    i                                   T
                                    ˜ t            ˜ t                           t    ˜ t
  Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) − (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T B −T e−Sλ τ + Ṽ⊥ Ṽ⊥T
                                                                  W1 (0)B −T eλ⊥ τ e−Sλ τ
 h                                                   i                                    
                                   ˜ t            ˜ t                              t   ˜ t
 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) + (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C T B −T e−Sλ τ + Ũ⊥ ŨT⊥ W2 (0)T B −T eλ⊥ τ e−Sλ τ
                                                                                                     (82)
          λ⊥ τt
where e           = sgn(No − Ni ) λ2 is a scalar
B.5.1      P ROOF E XACT LEARNING DYNAMICS WITH PRIOR KNOWLEDGE UNEQUAL
           DIMENSION
We follow a similar derivation presented in Braun et al. (2022) and start with the following equation
              h      t                t
                                            i
  QQT (t) = OeΛ τ OT + 2Meλ⊥ τ MT Q(0)
              |                {z                }
                                     L
                                                                             −1
                          1    T

                                     2Λ τt

                                                −1 T     λ⊥ τt      −1 T

                       I + Q(0) O e        − I Λ O + M(e       − I)λ⊥ M Q(0)                         (83)
                          2
                     |                             {z                         }
                                                        C−1
                            h    t            t
                                                   i
                       Q(0)T OeΛ τ OT + 2Meλ⊥ τ MT
                       |            {z             }
                                      R
                  =LC−1 R,                                                                           (84)
Substituting our solution into the matrix Riccati equation then yields

                                 d
                             τ      QQT = FQQT + QQT F − (QQT )2                                     (85)
                                 dt
                       d        ?
                         LC−1 R = FLC−1 R + LC−1 RF − LC−1 RLC−1 R.
                        ⇒τ                                                                           (86)
                      dt
Using the chain rule ∂(AB) = (∂A)B + A(∂B) and the identities
                     d                d                             d tA
                        (A−1 ) = A−1 ( A)A−1        and                (e ) = AetA = etA A           (87)
                     dt               dt                            dt

                       d         d
                   τ      QQT = τ LC−1 R                                                             (88)
                       dt        dt

                                    d     −1        d −1
                              =τ       L C R + τL      C R                                           (89)
                                    dt              dt

                                    d     −1       −1    d           d −1
                              =τ       L C R + τ LC         R + τL      C   R,                       (90)
                                    dt                   dt          dt


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, we note that
                                                                                 T
                                     1         Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)
                                 O= √                                                          (91)
                                      2         Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) −Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)

                                                        T
          1           Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)      1 Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)
  OT O = √                                                √
           2           Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) −Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)     2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) −Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)
                                                                                               (92)
            =I                                                                                 (93)



                           T 1 Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)      1 Ṽ⊥
                       O M= √                                      √                           (94)
                              2 Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) −Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)     2 Ũ⊥

                            1 (G̃ − H̃ G̃)T ṼT Ṽ⊥ + (G̃ + H̃ G̃)T ŨT Ũ⊥
                          =                                                                    (95)
                            2 (G̃ + H̃ G̃)T ṼT Ṽ⊥ − (G̃ − H̃ G̃)T ŨT Ũ⊥
                                  =0                                                           (96)
and

                           T 1   T      T
                                            Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)
                      M O = √ Ṽ⊥ Ũ⊥                                                          (97)
                              2              Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) −Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)
                                T
                            1 Ṽ⊥ Ṽ(G̃ − H̃ G̃) + ŨT⊥ Ũ(G̃ + H̃ G̃)
                          =     T                                                              (98)
                            2 Ṽ⊥ Ṽ(G̃ + H̃ G̃) − ŨT⊥ Ũ(G̃ − H̃ G̃)
                                 = 0.                                                          (99)
we get
                     d          d
                        QQT = τ      LC−1 R

                 τ                                                                           (100)
                     dt         dt

                                   d      −1       d −1
                            =τ        L C R + τL      C R                                    (101)
                                   dt              dt

                                   d      −1      −1    d           d −1
                            =τ        L C R + τ LC         R + τL      C   R,                (102)
                                   dt                   dt          dt
with


          d                1     t        λ⊥ I λ⊥ t T
  τ          L C−1 R = τ O ΛeΛ τ OT + 2M       e τM     Q(0)C−1 R          (103)
          dt               τ               2τ
                             t               t

                     = OΛeΛ τ OT + Mλ⊥ Ieλ⊥ τ MT Q(0)C−1 R                 (104)
                                                 t           t

                     = (Oλ⊥ OT + 2Mλ⊥ MT ) OeΛ τ OT + 2Meλ⊥ τ MT Q(0)C−1 R (105)
                           = FLC−1 R,                                                        (106)


                      −1       d                −1     T    1 Λt    T  λ⊥ τt λ⊥ I   T
              τ LC                R       = τ LC Q(0)    O e ΛO + 2Me
                                                                τ                 M          (107)
                               dt                           τ                 2τ

                                               −1   T     1 Λt    T   λ⊥ τt λ⊥ I  T
                                          = LC Q(0)     O e ΛO + 2Me
                                                              τ                  M           (108)
                                                          τ                  2τ
                                          = LC−1 RF                                          (109)
and


                                                           35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               d −1                  d
      τL          C   R = −τ LC−1      C C−1 R                                   (110)
               dt                   dt

                                   1         1   t
                        = −LC−1 τ Q(0)T O2 e2Λ τ ΛΛ−1 OT Q(0)                    (111)
                                   2         τ

                                        1      1      t        −1
                                    + τ Q(0)T 4 Meλ⊥ τ λ⊥ (λ⊥ ) MT Q(0) C−1 R
                                        2      τ

                                            t                      t
                        = −LC−1 Q(0)T Oe2Λ τ OT Q(0) + 2Q(0)T Meλ⊥ τ MT Q(0) C−1 R
                                                                                               (112)

                                          t        t
                        = −LC−1 Q(0)T OeΛ τ OT OeΛ τ OT Q(0)
                                                         t               t
                                      + 2Q(0)T OeΛ τ O T
                                                     | {zM} e
                                                              λ⊥ τ
                                                                   MT Q(0)                     (113)
                                                                 0
                                                             t           t
                                      + 2Q(0)T Meλ⊥ τ M  T    Λτ T
                                                      | {zO} e O Q(0)
                                                                     0

                                                        λ⊥ τt           t
                                               T
                                      + 4Q(0) Me                 M Meλ⊥ τ MT Q(0) C−1 R
                                                                     T


                        = −LC−1 RLC−1 R.                                                       (114)
Finally, substituting equations 103, 107 and 110 into the left hand side of equation 86 proves equal-
ity.                                                                                               □

C     R ICH -L AZY
C.1    DYNAMICS OF THE S INGULAR VALUES
Theorem C.1. Under the assumptions of Theorem 4.3 and with a task-aligned initialization given
by W1 (0) = RS1 Ṽ T and W2 (0) = Ũ S2 RT , where R ∈ RNh ×Nh is an orthonormal matrix, then
the network function is given by the expression W2 W1 (t) = Ũ S(t)Ṽ T where S(t) ∈ RNh ×Nh is
a diagonal matrix of singular values with elements sα (t) that evolve according to the equation,
                              sα (t) = sα (0) + γα (t; λ) (s̃α − sα (0)) ,                     (115)

where s̃α is the α singular value of S̃ and γα (t; λ) is a λ-dependent monotonic transition function
for each singular value that increases from γα (0; λ) = 0 to limt→∞ γα (t; λ) = 1 defined as
                                                              2
                                                                                       2

                 s̃λ,α sλ,α sinh 2s̃λ,α τt + s̃α sα + λ4 cosh 2s̃λ,α τt − s̃α sα + λ4
    γα (t; λ) =                                               2                            ,   (116)
                  s̃λ,α sλ,α sinh 2s̃λ,α τt + s̃α sα + λ4 cosh 2s̃λ,α τt + s̃α (s̃α − sα )


                q                       q
                            2                             2
where s̃λ,α = s̃2α + λ4 , sλ,α = sα (0)2 + λ4 , and sα = sα (0). We find that under different
limits of λ, the transition function converges pointwise to the sigmoidal (λ → 0) and exponential
(λ → ±∞) transition functions,
                                                       t
                                            e2s̃     α τ −1
                                                                  as λ → 0,
                                               2s̃α t
                              γα (t; λ) → e τ −1+ sαs̃α(0)                    .                (117)
                                                            t
                                              1 − e−|λ| τ         as λ → ±∞
                                           

Proof. According to Theorem 4.3, the network function is given by the equation

                                 W2 W1 (t) = Z2 (t)A−1 (t)Z1T (t),                             (118)
which depends on the variables of the initialization B and C. Plugging the expressions for a task-
aligned initialization W1 (0) and W2 (0) into these variables we get the following simplified expres-


                                                   36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


sions,

                           B = R S2 (G̃ + H̃ G̃) + S1 (G̃ − H̃ G̃) ,                            (119)
                                |                {z               }
                                                              DB

                           C = R S2 (G̃ − H̃ G̃) − S1 (G̃ + H̃ G̃) ,                            (120)
                                |                {z               }
                                                              DC

where we define the diagonal matrices DB and DC for ease of notation. Using these expressions,
we now get the following time-dependent expressions for Z2 (t), A−1 (t), and Z1 (t),
                        1                 ˜ t                        ˜ t

              Z1 (t) = Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)eSλ τ DB − (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ DC RT               (121)
                        2
                        1
                                          ˜ t                        ˜ t

              Z2 (t) = Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)eSλ τ DB + (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ DC RT               (122)
                        2                    !                       !      !
                                     ˜ t                     ˜ t
                                  e2Sλ τ − I     2      e−2Sλ τ − I       2
                A(t) = R I +                   DB  −                   DC     RT        (123)
                                     4S˜λ                   4S˜λ
Plugging these expressions into the expression for the network function, notice that the R terms
cancel each other resulting in following equation
                                                                                                                     
                                 S˜λ τt                        −S˜λ τt               S˜λ τt              −S˜λ τt
                (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e            DB − (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e    DC    (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e   DB + (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e           DC 
W2 W1 (t) = Ũ                                         ˜ t                                                            Ṽ T ,
                                                         2Sλ              −2S˜λ t                                    
                                                 4I + e S˜τ −I DB  2
                                                                     − e S˜ τ −I DC    2
                                                              λ                λ
               |                                                   {z                                                   }
                                                                          S(t)
                                                                                                 (124)
 Notice that the middle term is simply a product of diagonal matrices. We can factor the numerator
of this expressions as,

                    ˜ t                                                                    ˜ t
(G̃2 − H̃ 2 G̃2 )e2Sλ τ DB 2
                             + (G̃ − H̃ G̃)2 − (G̃ + H̃ G̃)2 DB DC − (G̃2 − H̃ 2 G̃2 )e−2Sλ τ DC2

                                                                                             (125)
We can further factor this expression as,

                                        ˜ t          ˜ t
                                             2
                     G̃2 (I − H̃ 2 ) e2Sλ τ DB − e−2Sλ τ DC2
                                                               − 4G̃2 H̃DB DC .              (126)

Putting it all together we find that S(t) can be expressed as,

                                            ˜ t           ˜ t
                         G̃2 (I − H̃ 2 ) e2Sλ τ DB
                                                 2
                                                   − e−2Sλ τ DC2
                                                                     − 4G̃2 H̃DB DC
                 S(t) =                    2S˜ t             −2S˜ t                 .           (127)
                                   4I + e S˜τ −I DB
                                             λ        2 − e      λ τ −I     2
                                                                S˜
                                                                         D  C
                                                 λ                        λ


Now using the relationship between H̃ and G̃ we use the following two identities:
                                                       S̃                       λ
                             G̃2 (I − H̃ 2 ) =            ,        4G̃2 H̃ =                    (128)
                                                      S˜λ                      S˜λ
Plugging these identities into the previous expression and multiplying the numerator and denomina-
tor by S˜λ gives,
                                        ˜ t            ˜ t
                                 S̃ e2Sλ τ DB 2
                                                − e−2Sλ τ DC  2
                                                                  − λDB DC
                      S(t) =              ˜ t
                                                                              .              (129)
                               4S˜λ + e2Sλ τ DB 2 − e−2S˜λ τt D 2 + D 2 − D 2
                                                                C    C      B

Add and subtract S̃ 4S˜λ + DC    2
                                   − DB 2
                                            from the numerator such that

                                            S̃ 4S˜λ + DC
                                                       2    2
                                                         − DB   + λDB DC
                   S(t) = S̃ −                  ˜ t                 ˜ t
                                                                                      .         (130)
                                  4S˜λ + e2Sλ τ DB
                                                 2 − e−2Sλ τ D 2 + D 2 − D 2
                                                              C     C     B


                                                        37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Using the form of DB and DC notice the following two identities:
                                                                            λ2

                       λ
                                               2      2       4
            DB DC =        S̃ − S2 S1 ,     DC   − DB   =−         S̃S2 S1 + I                                    (131)
                      S˜λ                                    S˜λ            4
From the second identity we can derive a third identity,
                                                                     S̃
                                 4S˜λ + DC
                                         2    2
                                           − DB =4                        S̃ − S2 S1                              (132)
                                                                    S˜λ
Plugging the first and third identities into the numerator for the previous expression gives,
                                                 (4S̃ 2 +λ2 I)

                                                      S˜λ
                                                                 S̃ −  S2 S 1
                    S(t) = S̃ −                ˜λ t                ˜ t
                                                                                    .                             (133)
                                     ˜
                                  4Sλ + e   2 S   τ D 2 − e−2Sλ τ D 2 + D 2 − D 2
                                                        B                C      C B
                                               ˜
Multiply numerator and denominator by S4λ and simplify terms gives the expression,
                                                       2
                                                   S˜λ
   S(t) = S̃ −      2   ˜
                                                                                                   S̃ − S2 S1 .   (134)
                              ˜ t  2 − e−2S˜λ τt D 2  S˜λ
                 S˜λ + S4λ e2Sλ τ DB                      2    2
                                                  C − 4 (DB − DC )

Thus we have found the transition function,

                           S˜λ      2S˜λ τt         −2S˜λ τt            ˜
                                                                    + S4λ DC
                                              2                2               2     2

                            4    e          D B − e          D C                 − DB
            γ(t; λ) = ˜                                                                     .                     (135)
                       Sλ     2S˜λ τt D 2 − e−2S˜λ τt D 2         S˜λ      ˜λ + D 2 − D 2
                        4   e           B                C     +   4    4 S       C      B

                                                                  2        2
We will use our previous identities and the definitions of DB        and DC  to simplify this expression.
Notice the following identity,
   S˜λ   2S˜λ t 2                                                                 2

                                              ˜λ Sλ sinh 2S˜λ t + S̃S(0) + λ I cosh 2S˜λ t

                            −2S˜λ τt   2
         e      τ D
                     B −  e          D C   = S
    4                                                          τ                 4                τ
                                                                                                   (136)
Putting it all together we get
                                                         2
                                                                                           2

                  S˜λ Sλ sinh 2S˜λ τt + S̃S(0) + λ4 I cosh 2S˜λ τt − S̃S(0) + λ4 I
    γ(t; λ) =                                                                                      (137)
                   S˜λ Sλ sinh 2S˜λ τt + S̃S(0) + λ4 I cosh 2S˜λ τt + S̃ S̃ − S(0)
                                                          2


We will now show why under certain limits of λ this expression simplifies to the sigmoidal and
exponential dynamics discussed in the previous section.
Sigmoidal dynamics. When λ = 0, then S˜λ = S̃ and Sλ = S(0). Notice, that the coefficients for
the hyperbolic functions all simplify to S̃S(0). Using the hyperbolic identity sinh(x) + cosh(x) =
ex , we can simplify the expression for the transition function to
                                                                     t
                                                   S̃S(0)e2S̃ τ − S̃S(0)
                                 γ(t; λ) =                      t
                                                                                       .                          (138)
                                              S̃S(0)e2S̃ τ − S̃S(0) + S̃ 2
Dividing the numerator and denominator by S̃S(0) gives the final expression.
Exponential dynamics. In the limit as λ → ±∞ the expressions
                                                                     S˜λ  → |λ|         |λ|
                                                                             2 and Sλ → 2 .
                                          2                                                2          2
Additionally, in these limits because λ4 I ≫ S̃S(0) then S̃S(0) + λ4 I → λ4 I. As a result of
                                                                                                      2
these simplifications the coefficients for the hyperbolic functions all simplify to λ4 I. As a result we
can again use the hyperbolic identity sinh(x) + cosh(x) = ex to simplify the expression as
                                                         λ2 |λ| τt    2

                                                         4 e        −λ I
                                  γ(t; λ) =                          4             .                              (139)
                                               λ2 |λ| τt
                                               4 e       + S̃            S̃ − S(0)
                                                     2
Dividing the numerator and denominator by λ4 results in all terms without a coefficient proportional
to λ2 vanishing, which simplifying further gives the final expression.


                                                           38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2 DYNAMICS OF THE REPRESENTATION FROM THE L AZY TO THE R ICH R EGIME
The lazy and rich regimes are defined by the dynamics of the NTK of the network. Lazy learning
occurs when the NTK is constant, rich learning occurs when it is not. (Farrell et al. (2023))
The NTK intuitively measures the movement of the network representations through training. As
shown in (Braun et al. (2022)), in specific experimental setup, we can calculate the NTK of the
network in terms of the internal representations in a straightforward way:
                      NTK = INo ⊗ XT W1T W1 (t)X + W2 W2T (t) ⊗ XT X                                (140)
In order to better understand the effect of λ on NTK dynamics, we first prove some theorems in-
volving the Singular Values of the λ-balanced weights, and the representations of a λ-balanced
network.
C.2.1 L AMBDA - BALANCED SINGULAR VALUE
Theorem C.2. Under a λ-Balanced initialization 2,
                                               q if the network function W2 W1 (t) =
                                                                        2
U (t)S(t)V T (t) is full rank and we define Sλ (t) =         S 2 (t) + λ4 I. , then we can recover the
parameters W2 (t) = U (t)S2 (t)RT (t), W1 (t) = R(t)S1 (t)V T (t) up to time-dependent orthogo-
nal transformation R(t) of size Nh × Nh , where
                           1                                                1
   S1 (t) = Sλ (t) − λI 2 0max(0,Ni −No )        S2 (t) =     Sλ (t) + 2λI 2
                                                                              0max(0,No −Ni )
                        2
                                                                                           (141)
Proof. We prove the case Ni ≤ No and Nh = min(Ni , No ). The proof for No ≤ Ni follows the
same structure. Let U SV T = W2 (t)W1 (t) be the Singular Value Decomposition of the product
of the weights at training step t. We will use W2 = W2 (t), W1 = W1 (t) as a shorthand.


We write the initialisation for our setting W2 W1 = U SV T . We therefore can write without loss
of generality the weight matrices W2 = U S2 G2 and W1 = G1 S1 V T . In this case we requiere
that G2 = G−1 1 and S1 S2 = S.

We assume the balanced property such that W2T W2 − W1 W1T = λI. We know this holds for
any t since this is a conserved quantity in linear networks. The matrices W1 W1T and W2T W2 are
symmetric, which consequently implies that their singular vectors are orthogonal. Consequently, in
our specific scenario, we require that G1 and G2 are orthogonal matrices and it follows that

                                           G2 = G−1   T
                                                 1 = G1                                             (142)
                                            G2 = GT1 = RT                                           (143)
We can write W2 = U S2 RT , W1 = RS1 V T , where R is an orthonormal matrix and S2 , S1 are
diagonal (possibly rectangular) matrices.


Hence

                                   RS2T S2 RT − RS1 S1 RT = λI                                      (144)

                                           S2T S2 − S1 S1 = λI                                      (145)
The matrices S1 , S2 , have shapes (Nh , Ni ), (No , Nh ) respectively. We introduce the diagonal ma-
trices Ŝ1 of shape (Nh , Ni ), Ŝ2 of shape (Ni , Nh ) such that the zero matrix has size (No − Ni , Nh )
:

                                        S1 = Ŝ1 , S2 = Ŝ2

                                                                                                    (146)
                                                                 0
Hence

                                         S2T S2 − S1 S1 = λI                                        (147)


                                                   39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


From the equation above and the fact that Ŝ1 Ŝ2 = S we derive that:
                          √                         ! 12                            √                       ! 12
                              λ2 I + 4S 2 + λI                                          λ2 I + 4S 2 − λI
                Ŝ2 =                                      ,        Ŝ1 =                                          ,       (148)
                                     2                                                         2
Hence
               √                     12 !
                   λ2 I+4S 2 +λI                                               √                     12
                                              T                                    λ2 I+4S 2 −λI                            T
  W2 = U                2                   ,R ,    W1 = R                                                0max(0,Ni −No ) V
                                                                                        2
                0max(0,No −Ni )
                                                                                                                           (149)

C.2.2 C ONVERGENCE PROOF
With our solution, QQT (t), which captures the temporal dynamics of the similarity between hidden
layer activations, we can analyze the network’s internal representations in relation to the task. This
allows us to determine whether the network adopts a rich or lazy representation, depending on the
value of λ. Consider a λ-Balanced network training on data Σyx = Ũ S̃ Ṽ T . We assume that the
convergence is toward global minima and B is invertible
Theorem C.3. Under the assumptions of Theorem B.5, the network function converges to ŨS̃ṼT
and acquires the internal representation, that is W1T W1 = ṼS̃21 ṼT and W2 W2T = ŨS̃22 ŨT
Proof. As training time increases, all terms including a matrix exponential with negative exponent
in Equation 77 vanish to zero, as Sλ = S˜λ is a diagonal matrix with entries larger zero
As training time increases, all terms in the equations vanish to zero. Terms in Equation 77 decay as
                                                        q
                                                                 2
                                                         S̃ 2 + λ4 I τt
                                              lim e−                           = 0.                                        (150)
                                              t→∞
and                                                            q
                                                                           2
                                                    t              S̃ 2 + λ4 I τt
                                            lim eλ⊥ τ e−                            = 0.                                   (151)
                                            t→∞
where S˜λ = S˜λ is a diagonal matrix with entries larger zero
Therefore, in the temporal limit, eq. 77 reduces to
                             T
             T              W1 W1 (t) W1T W2T (t)
   lim QQ (t) = lim                                                                            (152)
  t→∞                t→∞ W2 W1 (t)         W2T W2 (t)
                                       h        i−1
                      Ṽ(G̃ − H̃ G̃)         −1
                   =                     S˜λ          (Ṽ(G̃ − H̃ G̃))T (Ũ(H̃ G̃ + G̃))T      (153)
                       Ũ(H̃ G̃ + G̃)
                      Ṽ(G̃ − H̃ G̃)S˜λ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)T ṼT Ṽ(G̃ − H̃ G̃)S˜λ (H̃ G̃ + G̃)T ŨT

                   =                                                                             .
                       Ũ(H̃ G̃ + G̃)S˜λ (G̃ − H̃ G̃)T ṼT Ũ(H̃ G̃ + G̃)S˜λ (H̃ G̃ + G̃)T ŨT
                                                                                               (154)

                                                       Sλ (1 − H̃ 2 )
                          (G̃ − H̃ G̃)S˜λ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) =              = S̃                                                 (155)
                                                         1 + H̃ 2
                                                                p
                                  S˜λ (1 + H̃ 2 ) S˜λ (2H̃)       4S̃ 2 + λ2 I − λI
               S˜λ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) =
                               2
                                                  −          =                                                             (156)
                                     1 + H̃ 2       1 + H̃ 2             2
                                                                p
                ˜              2  S˜λ (1 + H̃ 2 ) S˜λ (2H̃)       4S̃ 2 + λ2 I + λI
               Sλ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) =                  +          =                                                             (157)
                                     1 + H̃ 2       1 + H̃ 2             2
                                                T
                                                 W1 W1 (t) W1T W2T (t)
                         lim QQT (t) = lim                                                                                 (158)
                        t→∞              t→∞ W2 W1 (t)       W2T W2 (t)

                                          ṼS12 ṼT ṼS̃ ŨT
                                       =                        .                                                          (159)
                                           ŨS̃ ṼT ŨS22 ŨT



                                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2.3 R EPRESENTATION IN THE LIMIT
Theorem C.4. Under the assumptions of Theorem B.5, training on data Σyx = Ũ S̃ Ṽ T , as λ → ∞
the representation tends to

       T               λI        0max(0,No −Ni )      T  T       1          S̃ 2           0max(0,Ni −No )
W2 W2 = Ũ                                         Ũ   W1 W1 = Ṽ                                           Ṽ T
                 0max(0,No −Ni )       0                         λ     0max(0,Ni −No )           0
As λ → −∞

          1                   S̃ 2          0max(0,No −Ni )                                 −λI           0max(0,Ni −No ) ˜T
W2 W2T = − Ũ                                                 Ũ T ,   W1T W1 = Ṽ                                         V
          λ             0max(0,No −Ni )           0                                    0max(0,Ni −No )          0

As λ → −∞

          1                   S̃ 2          0max(0,No −Ni )                                 −λI           0max(0,Ni −No ) ˜T
W2 W2T = − Ũ                                                 Ũ T ,   W1T W1 = Ṽ                                         V
               λ        0max(0,No −Ni )           0                                    0max(0,Ni −No )          0

Proof.
√      We start from the representation derived in C.3 and using the Taylor expansion of f (x) =
  1 + x2 , we compute
                                                    r        2
                                                 |λ| 1 + 2λS̃ + λI
                          p
                               2      2
                             λ I + 4S̃ + λI
                                              =                                             (160)
                                   2                       2
                             2
                            2S̃          −4
                 |λ| 1 + λ        + O(λ ) + λI
                                                       |λ| + λ S̃ 2
                                                    =          +      + O(λ−3 )             (161)
                                 2                        2       |λ|
Hence
                  p                                          p
                   λ2 I + 4S̃ 2 + λI                             λ2 I + 4S̃ 2 + λI   S̃ 2    S̃ 2
              lim                    = λI,            lim                          =      =−             (162)
             λ→∞         2                          λ→−∞               2             |λ|      λ
Similarly,
                             p
                            λ2 I + 4S̃ 2 − λI     |λ| − λ S̃ 2
                                                =        +      + O(λ−3 )                                (163)
                                   2                 2      |λ|
                  p                                    p
                   λ2 I + 4S̃ 2 − λI     S̃ 2            λ2 I + 4S̃ 2 − λI   S̃ 2
              lim                    =        ,   lim                      =      = −λI                  (164)
             λ→∞         2                λ      λ→−∞           2            |λ|
Since Ũ , Ṽ are independent of λ:

                                     lim    W2 W2T = Ũ         lim S2 Ũ T                              (165)
                                     λ→±∞                    λ→±∞

                                     lim W1T W1 = Ṽ            lim S1 Ṽ T                              (166)
                                     λ→±∞                    λ→±∞


As |λ| → ∞, one of the network representations approaches a scaled identity matrix, while the
other tends toward zero. Intuitively, this suggests that the representations shift less and less as |λ|
increases. Next, we demonstrate that the NTK becomes progressively less variable as |λ| grows and
ultimately converges to zero.
C.2.4 NTK MOVEMENT
Relationship between λ and the NTK of the network
Theorem C.5. Under the assumptions of Theorem B.5, consider a linear network training on data
Σyx = Ũ S̃ Ṽ T . At any arbitrary training time t ≥ 0, let W2 (t)W1 (t) = U ∗ S ∗ V ∗T . Then,


                                                       41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      1. For any λ ∈ R:
                                                  √ 2
                                                     λ I+4S ∗2 −λI
                           NTK(0) = INo ⊗ X T V           2         0 V TX
                                                          0         0
                                          √ 2                                                   (167)
                                           λ I+4S ∗2 +λI
                                    +U           2          0 U T ⊗ XT X
                                                 0          0
                                                   √ 2
                                                      λ I+4S ∗2 −λI
                           NTK(t) = INo ⊗ X T V ∗          2         0 V ∗T
                                                           0         0
                                          √ 2                                                   (168)
                                            λ I+4S ∗2 +λI
                                    + U∗          2          0 U ∗T ⊗ X T X
                                                  0          0
      2. As λ → ∞:

                                  1
          NTK(t) − NTK(0) →          INo ⊗ X T V ∗ S̃ ∗2 V ∗T X − INo ⊗ X T V S̃ 2 V T X → 0
                                  λ
                                                                                           (169)
      3. As λ → −∞:

                                    1
            NTK(t) − NTK(0) →           U S̃ 2 U T ⊗ X T X − U ∗ S̃ ∗2 U ∗T ⊗ X T X → 0        (170)
                                    λ
Proof. Follows by substituting the expressions for the network representations in terms of λ from
(Braun et al. (2022))’s expression for the NTK of a linear network. Similarly, follows from substi-
tuting the limit expressions for the network representations and the fact that the Kronecker product
is linear in both arguments.
The theorem above demonstrates that as |λ| → ∞, the NTK of a λ-Balanced network remains
constant. This indicates that the network operates in the lazy regime throughout all training steps.
The λ-balanced condition imposes a relationship between the singular values of the two weight
matrices. Specifically, if W2 and W1 are λ-balanced and satisfy W2 W1 = Σyx , then for arbitrary
singular values ai , bi , and si , the following relations hold:
                                         a2i − b2i = λ, ai · bi = si .
As λ increases, the value of bi must decrease. In the limit as λ → ∞, a2i → λ and b2i → 0. From
the first equation, when b2i → 0, a2i → λ. Since these equations apply to all singular values of the
matrices, it follows that for all i, a2i → λ, leading to the conclusion that:
                                              W2T W2 = λI,
as expected. Consequently, the task representation becomes task-agnostic in W1 . The intuition here
is that the weights are constrained by the need to fit the data, which bounds their overall norms. The
λ-balanced condition further specifies a relationship between these norms, and as |λ| increases, this
constraint tightens, driving W2 toward the identity matrix. In this regime, the network behaves sim-
ilarly to a shallow network, with λ acting as a toggle between deep and shallow learning dynamics.
This finding is significant as it highlights the impact of weight initialization on learning regimes.
C.3 R EPRESENTATION ROBUSTNESS AND SENSITIVITY TO NOISE
As derived in (Braun et al., 2025), the expected mean squared error under additive, independent and
identically distributed input noise with mean µ = 0 and variance σx2 is
                  *       P
                                                        +
                      1 X                             2
                            ||W2 W1 (xi + ξx ) − yi ||2     = σx2 ||W2 W1 ||2F + c,           (171)
                     2P i=1
                                                      ξx
             1      yy   1      yx yxT
where c =    2 Tr(Σ̃ ) − 2 Tr(Σ̃ Σ̃    ) is a noise independent constant that only depends on
the statistics of the training data. In Theorem C.3 we show that the network function converges to
ŨS̃ṼT and therefore
                                    σx2 ||W2 W1 ||2F = σx2 ||ŨS̃ṼT ||2F
                                                  = σx2 ||S̃||2F
                                                          Nh
                                                                                                (172)
                                                          X
                                                  = σx2         S̃2i
                                                          i=1


                                                 42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As derived in (Braun et al., 2025), under the assumption of whitened inputs (Assumption 1), in the
                                                            2
case of additive parameter noise with µ = 0 and variance σW   , the expected mean squared error is
                   *      P
                                                                       +
                      1 X                                            2
                               || (W2 + ξW2 ) (W1 + ξW1 ) xi − yi ||2
                     2P i=1
                                                                        ξW1 ,ξW2              (173)
                      1      2              1                   1
                    = Ni σ W     ||W2 ||2F + No σW
                                                 2
                                                   ||W1 ||2F + Ni Nh No σ 4 + c.
                      2                     2                   2
Using Theorem C.3, we have
                                          ||W1 ||2F = Tr(W1T W1 )
                                                          p                  !
                                                            λ2 I + 4S̃2 + λI
                                                    = Tr
                                                                  2                                                       (174)
                                                         Nh q
                                                                              !
                                                      1 X
                                                    =          λ2 + 4S̃2i + λ
                                                      2 i=1
and
                                          ||W2 ||2F = Tr(W2 W2T )
                                                          p                  !
                                                            λ2 I + 4S̃2 − λI
                                                    = Tr
                                                                  2                                                       (175)
                                                         Nh q
                                                                             !
                                                      1 X
                                                    =          λ2 + 4S̃2i − λ .
                                                      2 i=1
To find the λ that minimises the expected loss, we substitute the equations for the norms, take the
partial derivative with respect to λ and set it to zero
          ∂ ⟨L⟩ξW ,ξW            !
                  1      2
                             =0
               ∂λ
                             N                                                           Nh q
                                                                                                                 !
                   h
       1    2 ∂
                                                         1
                                                              2 ∂
                 X                   q                                                   X
      ⇔ Ni σW                            λ2 + 4S̃2i − λ + No σW                                 λ2 + 4S̃2i + λ       =0
       4      ∂λ i=1                                     4      ∂λ                       i=1
            Nh                                          Nh                                                                (176)
            X           λ                               X                 λ
      ⇔Ni         q                  − Ni Nh + No                 q                    + No Nh = 0
            i=1       λ2 + 4S̃2i                        i=1           λ2 + 4S̃2i
          Nh
          X       λ           Ni − No
      ⇔       q          = Nh         .
                       2      Ni + No
          i=1  λ2 + 4S̃i
It follows, that under the assumption that Ni = No , the equation reduces to
                                                  Nh
                                                  X               λ
                                                        q                         = 0.                                    (177)
                                                  i=1        λ2 + 4S̃2i
We note, that the denominator is always positive and therefore, that the left-hand side of the equation
is always larger zero for any λ > 0, and smaller than zero for any λ < 0. The euqation is therefore
only solved for λ = 0.
C.4 E FFECT OF THE ARCHITECTURE FROM THE LAZY TO THE R ICH R EGIME
Theorem C.6. Under the conditions of Theorem B.5, when λ⊥ > 0, the network enters a regime
referred to as the delayed-rich phase. In this phase, the learning rate is determined by two competing
exponential factors:                              q
                                                                              2
                                                         t            S̃ 2 + λ4 I τt
                                                   eλ⊥ τ e−
and                                                          q
                                                                         2
                                                                 S̃ 2 + λ4 I τt
                                                        e−                        .


                                                                   43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As λ increases, various parts of the network display different learning dynamics: some components
adjust rapidly, converging exponentially with λ, while others adapt more slowly, with their conver-
gence rate inversely proportional to λ, leading to a slow adaptation.
Proof. The solution to Theorem B.5 is governed by two time-dependent terms:
                                 q                                        q
                                             2                                        2
                                     S̃ 2 + λ4 I τt                  t        S̃ 2 + λ4 I τt
                              e−                      and    eλ⊥ τ e−                          .
The first term exhibits exponential decay approaching zero as time progresses:
                                                      q
                                                               2
                                                       S̃ 2 + λ4 I τt
                                             lim e−                      = 0.
                                            t→∞

In the limit as lambda gets large the rate of learning is given by
                                            p
                                               λ2 I + 4S̃ 2    λI
                                       lim                  =     ,                                (178)
                                      λ→∞          2           2
The second term also decays over time
                                                        q
                                                                  2
                                                 λ⊥ τt − S̃ 2 + λ4 I τt
                                        lim e         e                    = 0.
                                       t→∞

but in the limit as lambda gets large the rate of learning is given by
                                         p
                                            λ2 I + 4S̃ 2 − λI     S̃ 2
                                    lim                        =                         (179)
                                   λ→∞              2              λ
Thus, as λ increases, the convergence rate slows for certain parts of the network, while other
components continue to learn more quickly. This explains the delay observed in the delayed-rich
regime.

D    A PPENDIX : A PPLICATION
D.1 A PPENDIX : C ONTINUAL L EARNING
We build upon the derivation presented in Braun et al. (2022) to incorporate the dynamics of contin-
ual learning throughout the entire learning trajectory. Utilizing the assumption of whitened inputs,
the entire batch loss for the ith task is
                1                         2
    Li (Tj ) =     ∥W2 W1 Xi − Yi ∥F
               2P
                1
                                                                   T

             =     Tr (W2 W1 Xi − Yi |) (W2 W1 Xi − Yi |)
               2P
                1                                      1                           1
                   Tr W2 W1 Xi XTi (W2 W1 )T − Tr W2 W1 Xi YiT +                      Tr Yi YiT

             =
               2P                                        P                        2P
               1                           T

                                                              yxT
                                                                    1
                                                                              yy

             = Tr W2 W1 (W2 W1 ) − Tr W2 W1 Σ̃i                     + Tr Σ̃i
               2                                                       2
               1                                              T                  1   yy
                                        yx                yx         yx yxT
             = Tr W2 W1 − Σ̃i                  W2 W1 − Σ̃i      − Σ̃i Σ̃i     +      Σ̃i
               2                                                                 2
               1                      2     1   yx yxT   1   yy
             =     W2 W1 − Σ̃yx   i      −    Tr Σ̃i Σ̃i     +     Σ̃i .
               2                      F
                                         | 2           {z       2       }
                                                                 c

Hence, the extent of forgetting, denoted as F for task Ti during training on task Tk subsequent to
training the network on task Tj , specifically, the relative change in loss, is entirely dictated by the
similarity structure among tasks.
                 Fi (Tj , Tk ) = Li (Tk ) − Li (Tj )
                                 1                 2     1                 2
                               =     Σ̃yx
                                       k − Σ̃i
                                              yx
                                                     +c−    W2 W1 − Σ̃yx
                                                                       i     −c
                                 2                 F     2                 F
                                 1                   2                2
                               =       Σ̃yx
                                         k − Σ̃i
                                                yx
                                                       − W2 W1 − Σ̃yx
                                                                   i      .
                                 2                   F                F


                                                            44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


It is important to note that the amount of forgetting is a function of the weight trajectories. Therefore,
we have analytical solutions for trajectories of forgetting as well.


Figure 11: Continual learning. A Top: Network training from small zero-balanced weights across
a sequence of tasks (colored lines represent simulations, and black dotted lines represent analytical
results). Bottom: Evaluation loss for the tasks in the sequence (dotted lines) while training on the
current task (solid lines). As the network optimizes its function on the current task, the loss on
previously learned tasks increases.

Figure. D.1 panel was generated by training a linear network with Ni = 5, Nh = 10, No = 6
subsequently on four different random regression tasks with N = 25. The learning rate was η =
0.05 and the initial weights were small (σ = 0.0001).

D.2    A PPENDIX : R EVERSAL L EARNING
As first introduced in Braun et al. (2022), in the following discussion, we assume that the input and
output dimensions are equal. We denote the i-th columns of the left and right singular vectors as ui ,
ũi , and vi , ṽi , respectively.
Reversal learning occurs when both the task and the initial network function share the same left and
right singular vectors, i.e., U = Ũ and V = Ṽ, with the exception of one or more columns of the
left singular vectors, where the direction is reversed: −ui = ũi .
It is important to note that if a reversal occurs in the right singular vectors, such that −vi = ṽi , this
can be equivalently represented as a reversal in the left singular vectors, as the signs of the right and
left singular vectors are interchangeable.
In the reversal learning setting, both B = S2 Ũ T Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) + S1 V T Ṽ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) and
C = S2 Ũ T Ũ (G̃ − H̃ G̃) − S1 V T Ṽ (G̃ + H̃ G̃) are diagonal matrices.

In the case where lambda is zero, the same argument given in Braun et al. (2022) follows, the
diagonal entries of C are zero if the singular vectors are aligned and non zero if they are reversed.
Similarly, diagonal entries of B are non-zero if the singular vectors are aligned and zero if they are
reversed. Therefore, in the case of reversal learning, B is a diagonal matrix with 0 values and thus
is not invertible. As a consequence, the learning dynamics cannot be described by Equation 56.
However, as B and C are diagonal matrices, the learning dynamics simplify. Let bi , ci , si and s̃i


                                                    45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


denote the i-th diagonal entry of B, C, S and S̃ respectively, then the network dynamics can be
rewritten as



               1 h                     t                                t

   W2 W1 (t) = Ũ (G̃ + H̃ G̃)eS̃λ τ BT + (G̃ − H̃ G̃)e−S̃λ τ CT
               2
                 h       1            t
                                                              1   −2S̃λ t                    i−1
                  Sλ−1 + B e2S̃λ τ − I S̃−1         λ  B T
                                                            −   C     e     τ − I   S̃−1 T
                                                                                      λ C                         (180)
                         4                                    4
                 1                    t                            ˜  t

                    (G̃ − H̃ G̃)eS̃λ τ B − (G̃ + H̃ G̃)e−Sλ τ C ṼT
                 2
                Ni                                  t               t
               X                         b2i e2s̃λi τ − c2i e−2s̃λi τ
             =         −1     2 e2s̃λi τt s̃−1 − b2 s̃−1 − c2 e−2s̃λi τt s̃−1 + c2 s̃−1
                                                                                        ũi ṽiT                  (181)
               i=1
                   4s λi  + b i             λi        i λi     i            λi     i λi
                   Ni                                                             t
                   X                             sλi b2i s̃λi − sλi c2i s̃i e−4s̃i τ
               =                      t
                                                                   t
                                                                                             t           t
                                                                                                             ũi ṽiT
                               −2s̃            2
                                        + sλi bi 1 − e     −2s̃                2     −2s̃      −e−4s̃
                   i=1 4s̃λi e                                         + sλi ci e
                                    i τ                         λi τ                      λi τ        λi τ


                                                                                                                  (182)


It follows, that in the reversal learning case, i.e. b = 0, for each reversed singular vector, the
dynamics vanish to zero


                                                                 t
                                            −sλi c2i s̃i e−4s̃λi τ
                     lim                  t
                                                                  t             t
                                                                                    ũi ṽiT = 0.                 (183)
                     t→∞          −2s̃             2      −2s̃    τ − e −4s̃
                         4s̃λ,i e      λi τ + s c
                                               i i e
                                                               λi            λi τ


Analytically, the learning dynamics are initialized on and remain along the separatrix of a saddle
point until the corresponding singular value of the network function decreases to zero and stays
there, indicating convergence to the saddle point. In numerical simulations, however, the learning
dynamics can escape the saddle points due to the imprecision of floating-point arithmetic. Despite
this, numerical optimization still experiences significant delays, as escaping the saddle point is time-
consuming Lee et al. (2022). In contrast, when the singular vectors are aligned (c = 0), the equation
governing temporal dynamics, as described in Saxe et al. (2014), is recovered. Under these con-
ditions, training succeeds, with the singular value of the network function converging to its target
value.



                     Ni
                     X                   sλi b2i s̃λi                  T   sλi b2i s̃λi     T
               lim                                              ũi ṽ i =          2 ũi ṽi                     (184)
              t→∞
                  i=1 4s̃   e −2s̃λi τt + s b2 1 − e−2s̃λi τt               s λi b  i
                         λi                λi i

                                                                                 = s̃λi ũi ṽiT .                (185)


In summary, in the case of aligned singular vectors, the learning dynamics can be described by
the convergence of singular values. However in the case of reversal learning, analytically, training
does not succeed. In simulations, the learning dynamics escape the saddle point due to numerical
imprecision, but the learning dynamics are catastrophically slowed in the vicinity of the saddle point
as shown in figure D.2 .
In the case where λ is non-zero, the diagonal of C are also non-zero; this is true regardless of
whether they are reversed or aligned. Similarly, the diagonal entries of B remain non-zero whether
the singular vectors are aligned or reversed. Therefore, in the case of reversal learning, B is a
diagonal matrix with elements that are zero. In figure D.2


                                                         46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Plot showing the steps to convergence for two tasks: (1) the reversal learning task and (2)
a randomly sampled continual learning task across a range of λ values. The reversal learning task
exhibits catastrophic slowing at λ = 0.

D.3 A PPENDIX : G ENERALIZATION AND STRUCTURED LEARNING
We study how the representations learned for different λ initializations impact generalization of
properties of the data. To do this, we consider the case where a new feature is associated to a
learned item in a dataset and how this new feature may then be related to other items based on prior
knowledge. In particular, we first train each network (for different values of −10 ≤ λ ≤ 10) on
the hierarchical semantic learning task in Section 5 and then add a new feature (e.g., ‘eats worms’)
to a single item (e.g., the goldfish) (Fig. D.3A), correspondingly increasing the output dimension
to represent the novel feature. In order to learn the new feature without affecting prior knowledge,
we append a randomly initialized row to W2 and train it on the single item with the new feature,
while keeping the rest of the network frozen. Thus, we only change the weights from the hidden
layer to the new feature which may produce different behavior depending on how the hidden layer
representations vary based on λ. After training on the new feature-item association, we query the
network with the rest of the data to observe how the new feature is associated with the other items.
We find that as λ increases positively, the network better transfers the hierarchy such that it projects
the feature onto items based on their distance to the trained item (Fig. D.3B,C). For example, after
learning that a goldfish eats worms, the network can extrapolate the hierarchy to infer that another
fish, or birds, may also eat worms; instead, plants are not likely to eat worms. Alternatively, as λ
becomes more negative, the network ceases to infer any hierarchical structure and only learns to map
the new feature to the single item trained on. In this case, after learning that a goldfish eats worms,
the network does not infer that other fish, birds, or plants may also eat worms.
Interestingly, this setting highlights how asymmetries in the representations yielded by different λ
can actually benefit transfer and generalization. This can be shown by observing that the learning
of a new feature association only depends on the first layer W1 . Let ŷf denote the vector of the
                                                                                        (f )T
representation of the new feature f across items i in the dataset. Additionally, let w2       be the new
row of weights appended to W2 which map the hidden layer to the new feature. Following Saxe
                      (f )T
et al. (2019b), if w2       is initialized with small random weights and trained on item H̃i , it will
converge to
                                 (f )T
                               w2        = H̃iT W1T /∥W1 H̃i ∥22                                  (186)
                                    ŷf = (H̃iT W1T W1 H̃)/∥W1 H̃i ∥22                            (187)
From this we can see that differences in the representations of the new feature across items ŷf across
λ are only influenced by W1 .
In the case of the rich learning regime where λ = 0, the semantic relationship between features
and items is distributed across both layers. Instead, when λ > 0, the second layer W2 exhibits
lazy learning, yielding an output representation W2 W2T of a weighted identity matrix. However,
the first layer W1 still learns a rich representation of the hierarchy, albeit at a smaller scaling.
Furthermore, rather than distributing this learning across both layers, in the λ > 0 case, all learning
of the hierarchy occurs in the first layer, allowing it to more readily transfer this structure to the
learning of a new feature (which only depends on the first layer). Thus, in this case, the ‘shallowing’


                                                    47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of the network into the first layer is actually beneficial. Finally, we can also observe the opposite
case when λ < 0. Here, rich learning happens in the second layer, while the first layer is lazy and
learns to represent a weighted identity matrix. As such, these networks do not learn to transfer the
hierarchy of different items to the new feature.


Figure 13: Transfer learning for different λ. A A new feature (such as ‘eats worms’) is introduced
to the dataset after training on the hierarchical semantic learning task (Section 5). A randomly
initialized row is added to W2 and trained on a single item with the new feature (for example, the
goldfish), with the rest of the network frozen. The network is then tested on the transfer of the new
feature to other items, such that items closer to the goldfish in the hierarchy are more likely to have
the same feature. B The generalization loss on the untrained items with the new feature decreases
as λ increases. C As λ increases positively, networks better transfer the hierarchical structure of the
data to the representation of the new feature.

D.4 A PPENDIX : F INETUNING
It is a common practice to pretrain neural networks on a large auxiliary task before fine-tuning
them on a downstream task with limited samples. Despite the widespread use of this approach,
the dynamics and outcomes of this method remain poorly understood. In our study, we provide a
theoretical foundation for the empirical success of fine-tuning, aiming to improve our understanding
of how performance depends on the initialization. We’re interested in understanding how changing
the λ-balancedness after pre-training may impact fine-tuning on a new dataset. We use λP T to
denote how networks are first initialized prior to pretraining, and λF T to how they are re-balanced
after pre-training and before fine-tuning on a new task. Similar to the previous section, we first train
each network (for different values of −10 ≤ λP T ≤ 10) on the hierarchical semantic learning task.
We then change the λ-balancedness of each network (for different values of −10 ≤ λF T ≤ 10) and
retrain on a new dataset to observe how this impacts fine-tuning for different values and compare to
networks that are not re-balanced to some λF T (λF T = ∅) after initial pre-training.
In particular, to reset the λ-balancedness of a pretrained network to λF T , we rescale the singu-
lar values of each layer (S1 , S2 ) using the singular values of the entire network function (S =
U T W2 W1 V ), while keeping the left and right singular vectors of the network unchanged.
We consider three different tasks to fine-tune the networks on. In the first, we add an existing
feature from one item to another item in the hierarchy in order to disrupt the structure of the left
and right singular vectors. In the second task, we consider the same reversal learning task discussed
in Appendix D.2, where one column of the right singular vectors are reversed such that −vi = ṽi .
Finally, we consider a scaled version of the hierarchy where each singular value is scaled by 2.
Across all the tasks we consider, we consistently find that fine-tuning performance improves as net-
works are re-balanced to larger values of λF T and, conversely, decreases as λF T approaches 0.
Networks re-balanced to λF T = 0 also learn more slowly compared to |λF T | > 0. Interestingly,
when studying networks that are not re-balanced prior to finetuning (λF T = ∅; but are first initial-


                                                  48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ized prior to pretraining to λP T ), we see that they perform similarly on the new tasks to networks
that are re-balanced to λF T = λP T .


Figure 14: Fine-tuning performance on three tasks for different re-balancing λF T . A After training
on the hierarchical semantic learning task (Section 5), networks are re-balanced and trained on one
of three tasks: adding an existing feature from one item to another item in the hierarchy (left), the
reversal learning task in Appendix D.2 (center), or a scaled version of the hierarchy where each
singular value is scaled by 2 (right). B Change in loss on the new task across different λF T for
different λP T . As λF T approaches 0, the loss on the new task increases across all λP T . Interestingly,
networks that are not re-balanced prior to fine-tuning (λF T = ∅) perform similarly to networks that
are re-balanced to the same values (λF T = λP T ). C Dynamics of the loss across the first pre-training
task and the new fine-tuning task. Networks re-balanced to λF T = 0 consistently learn slower across
all tasks compared to networks that are re-balanced to larger magnitude values (|λF T | > 0
)

In this work, we derive the precise dynamics of two-layer linear. While straightforward in design,
these architectures are foundational in numerous machine learning applications, particularly in the
implementation of Low Rank Adapters (LoRA)Hu et al. (2022). A key innovation in LoRA is to
parameterize the update of a large weight matrix W ∈ Rd×d within a language model as ∆W = AB,
the product of two low-rank matrices A ∈ Rd×r and B ∈ Rr×d , where only A and B are trained.
To ensure ∆W = 0 at initialization, it is standard practice to initialize A ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) and B = 0
( Hu et al. (2022); Hayou et al. (2024). It is noteworthy that this parameterization, ∆W = AB,
effectively embeds a two-layer linear network within the language model. When r ≪ d, this initial-
ization scheme approximately adheres to our λ-balanced condition, with σ 2 playing the role of the
balance parameter λ. Investigating how the initialization scale of A and B influences fine-tuning
dynamics under LoRA, and connecting this to our work on λ-balanced two-layer linear networks
and their role in feature learning, represents an intriguing avenue for future exploration. This per-
spective aligns with recent studies suggesting that low-rank fine-tuning operates in a “lazy” regime,
as well as work examining how the initialization of A or B affects fine-tuning performance Malladi
et al. (2023); Hayou et al. (2024). Our framework offers a potential bridge to understanding these
phenomena more comprehensively. While a detailed exploration of fine-tuning performance lies
beyond the scope of this work, it remains an important direction for future research.

E    I MPLEMENTATION AND S IMULATIONS
The details of the simulation studies are described as follows. Specifically, Ni , Nh , and No represent
the dimensions of the input, hidden layer, and output (target), respectively. The total number of
training samples is denoted by N , and the learning rate is defined as η = τ1 .


                                                   49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.1 L AMBDA - BALANCED WEIGHT INITIALIZATION
In practice, to initialize the network with lambda-balanced weights, we use Algorithm E.1. In this
algorithm, α serves as a scaling factor that controls the variance of the weights, allowing for adjust-
ments between smaller and larger weight initializations.

Algorithm 1 Get λ-balanced
 1: function GET LAMBDA BALANCED(λ, in dim, hidden dim, out dim, σ = 1)
 2:    if out dim > in dim and λ < 0 then
 3:        raise Exception(’Lambda must be positive if out dim ¿ in dim’)
 4:    end if
 5:    if in dim > out dim and λ > 0 then
 6:        raise Exception(’Lambda must be positive if in dim ¿ out dim’)
 7:    end if
 8:    if hidden dim < min(in dim, out dim) then
 9:        raise Exception(’Network cannot be bottlenecked’)
10:    end if
11:    if hidden dim > max(in dim, out dim) and λ ̸= 0 then
12:        raise Exception(’hidden dim cannot be the largest dimension if lambda is not 0’)
13:    end if
14:    W1 ← σ · random normal matrix(hidden dim, in dim)
15:    W2 ← σ · random normal matrix(out dim, hidden dim)
16:    [U, S, V t] ← SVD(W2 · W1 )
17:    R ← random orthonormal
                       q √        matrix(hidden dim)

18:    S2equal dim ←         λ + 4 · S 2 + λ /2
                               2
                       q √
19:    S1equal dim ←         λ2 + 4 · S 2 − λ /2
20:    if out dim > in dim then
                    S2equal dim            0
21:        S2 ←
                        0        0
                                  hidden dim−in dim
                    S1equal dim
22:        S1 ←
                        0
23:    else if in dim
                     > out dim then
                    S1equal dim             0
24:        S1 ←
                        0        0hidden dim−out dim
25:        S2 ← [S2equal dim 0]
26:    end if
27:    init W2 ← U · S2 · RT
28:    init W1 ← R · S1 · V t
29:    return (init W1 , init W2 )
30: end function


E.2 TASKS
In the following, we describe the different tasks that are used throughout the simulation studies.
E.2.1 R ANDOM REGRESSION TASK
In the random regression task, the inputs X ∈ RNi ×N are generated from a standard normal dis-
tribution, X ∼ N (µ = 0, σ = 1). The input data X is then whitened to satisfy N1 XXT = I.
The target values Y ∈ RNo ×N are independently sampled from a normal distribution with variance
scaled according to the number of output nodes, Y ∼ N (µ = 0, α = √1N ). Consequently, the
                                                                          o
network inputs and target values are uncorrelated Gaussian noise, implying that a linear solution
may not always exist.
E.2.2 S EMANTIC HIERARCHY
We use the same task as in Braun et al. (2022) and modify it to match the theoretical dynamics.
The modification ensures that the inputs are whitened. In the semantic hierarchy task, input items
are represented as one-hot vectors, i.e., X = 8I . The corresponding target vectors, yi , encode the


                                                  50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


item’s position within the hierarchical tree. Specifically, a value of 1 indicates that the item is a left
child of a node, −1 denotes a right child, and 0 indicates that the item is not a child of that node.
For example, consider the blue fish: it is a blue fish, a left child of the root node, a left child of the
animal node, not part of the plant branch, a right child of the fish node, and not part of the bird,
algae, or flower branches, resulting in the label [1, 1, 1, 0, −1, 0, 0, 0]. The labels for all objects in
the semantic tree, as shown in Figure 4 A, are given by:

                             1          1     1    1     1      1      1     1
                                                                              
                            1          1     1    1     −1     −1    −1    −1
                            1
                                       1    −1    −1     0      0    0     0 
                            0          0     0    0     1      1     −1    −1
                       Y =8∗                                                  .                   (188)
                            1         −1     0     0    0      0     0      0
                                                   −1
                                                                              
                            0          0     1           0      0    0     0
                             0          0     0    0     1      −1     0     0
                                                                              
                             0          0     0    0     0      0      1    −1

The singular value decomposition (SVD) of the corresponding correlation matrix, Σ̃yx , is not unique
due to identical singular values: the first two, the third and fourth, and the last four values are the
same. To align the numerical and analytical solutions, this permutation invariance is addressed by
adding a small perturbation to each column yi , for i ∈ 1, ..., N , of the labels:

                                                         0.1
                                        yi = yi · 1 +           ,                                (189)
                                                          i
resulting in singular values that are nearly, but not exactly, identical.
E.3 F IGURE 1
Panels B illustrates three simulations conducted on the same task with varying initial λ-balanced
weights
√         respectively λ = −2, λ = 0, λ = 2. The regression task parameters were set with (σ =
  10). The network architecture consisted of Ni = 3, Nh = 2, No = 2,with a learning rate of
η = 0.0002. The batch size is N = 10. The zero-balanced weights are initialized √ with variance
σ = 0.00001. The lambda-balanced network are initialized with sigmaxy = 1 of a random
regression task with same architecture.
On Panel C , we plot the ballancedness W2 (0)T W2 (0) − W1 (0)W1 (0)T for a two layer network
initialised with Lecun initialization with dimension Ni = 40 ,Nh = 120 ,No =250
E.4 F IGURE 2
Panel A, B, C illustrates three simulations conducted on the same task with varying initial λ-balanced
weights respectively λ = −2, λ = 0, λ = 2 according√to the initialization scheme described in E.7.
The regression task parameters were set with (σ = 10). The network architecture consisted of
Ni = 3, Nh = 2, No = 2 with a learning rate of η = 0.0002. The batch size is N = 10. The
zero-balanced weights are initialized
                               √       with variance σ = 0.00001. The lambda-balanced network are
initialized with sigmaxy = 1 of a random regression task with same architecture.
E.5 F IGURE 3
Panel A, B, C illustrates three simulations conducted on the same task with varying initial λ-balanced
weights respectively λ = −2, λ = 0, λ = 2 according√to the initialization scheme described in E.7.
The regression task parameters were set with (σ = 12). The network architecture consisted of
Ni = 3, Nh = 3, No = 3 with a learning rate of η = 0.0002. The batch size is N = 5. The
zero-balanced weights are initialized
                               √        with variance σ = 0.0009. The lambda-balanced network are
initialized with sigmaxy = 12 of a random regression task with same architecture.
E.6 F IGURE 4
In Panel A presents a semantic learning task with the SVD of the input-output correlation matrix
of the task. U and V represent the singular vectors, and S contains the singular values. This
decomposition allows us to compute the respective RSMs as U SU ⊤ for the input and V SV ⊤ for
the output task. The rows and columns in the SVD and RSMs are ordered identically to the items in
the hierarchical tree.


                                                   51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The results in Panel B display simulation outcomes, while Panel C presents theoretical input and
output representation matrices at convergence for a network trained on the semantic task described
in Braun et al. (2022); Saxe et al. (2013),. These matrices are generated using varying initial λ-
balanced weights set at λ = −2, λ = 0, and λ = 2, following the initialization scheme outlined
in E.7. The network architecture includes Ni = 8, Nh = 8, and No = 8 with a learning rate
of η = 0.001 and a batch size of N = 8. Zero-balanced weights are initialized
                                                                            √        with a variance
of σ = 0.00001, while λ-balanced networks are initialized with σxy = 1 based on a random
regression task with the same architecture.
Panel D illustrates results from running the same task and network configuration but initialized with
randomly large weights having a variance of σ = 1.
In panel E, we trained a two-layer linear network with Ni = Nh = No = 4 on a random regression
task for λ ∈ [−5, −4, −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5] to convergence. Subsequently, we added Gaussian
noise with µ = 0, σ ∈ [0, 0.5, 1] to the inputs (top panel) or synaptic weights (bottom panel) and
calculated the expected mean squared error.
E.7 F IGURE 5
Panel A illustrates schematic representations of the network architectures considered: from left to
right, a funnel network (Ni = 4, Nh = 2, No = 2), a square network (Ni = 4, Nh = 4, No = 4),
and an inverted-funnel network (Ni = 2, Nh = 2, No = 4).
Panel B shows the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) distance from initialization, as defined in Fort et al.
(2020), across the three architectures shown schematically. The kernel distance is calculated as:
                                                   ⟨K0 , Kt ⟩
                                    S(t) = 1 −                 .
                                                 ∥K0 ∥F ∥Kt ∥F
The simulations conducted on the same task with eleven √     varying initial λ-balanced weights in
[−9, 9]. The regression task parameters were set with (σ = 3). The task has batch size N = 10.
        √ has with a learning rate of η = 0.01. The lambda-balanced network are initialized with
The network
σxy = 1 of a random regression task.
Panel C shows the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) distance from initialization for the funnel archi-
tectures shown schematically with dimensions Ni = 3, Nh = 2, and No = 2. The simulations
conducted on the same task with twenty one varying
                                              √      initial λ-balanced weights in [−9, 9]. The re-
gression task parameters were set with (σ = 3). The task has batch size N = 30. The network    √
has with a learning rate of η = 0.002. The lambda-balanced network are initialized with σxy = 1
of a random regression task.


                                                 52
