Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


TLDR: T OKEN -L EVEL D ETECTIVE R EWARD M ODEL
FOR L ARGE V ISION L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Deqing Fu1,2    Tong Xiao1      Rui Wang1      Wang Zhu1,2
 Pengchuan Zhang1       Guan Pang1       Robin Jia2  Lawrence Chen1
 1        2
   Meta     University of Southern California
 deqingfu@usc.edu, lawrencechen@meta.com



                                            A BSTRACT

         Although reward models have been successful in improving multimodal large lan-
         guage models, the reward models themselves remain brutal and contain minimal
         information. Notably, existing reward models only mimic human annotations by
         assigning only one binary feedback to any text, no matter how long the text is.
         In the realm of multimodal language models, where models are required to pro-
         cess both images and texts, a naive reward model may learn implicit biases toward
         texts and become less grounded in images. In this paper, we propose a Token-
         Level Detective Reward Model (TLDR) to provide fine-grained annotations to
         each text token. We first introduce a perturbation-based method to generate syn-
         thetic hard negatives and their token-level labels to train TLDR models. Then we
         show the rich usefulness of TLDR models both in assisting off-the-shelf models
         to self-correct their generations, and in serving as a hallucination evaluation tool.
         We show that TLDR automatically trains a token-level likelihood optimization,
         and can improve the base model’s performance significantly. Finally, we show
         that TLDR models can significantly speed up human annotation by 3 times to
         acquire a broader range of high-quality vision language data.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large vision language models (VLMs) are becoming increasingly powerful in generating human-
like text, exemplified by models like GPT-4 family (OpenAI, 2024), Gemini and PaliGemma
(Google, 2023; Beyer et al., 2024), LLaVA model family (Liu et al., 2024), and Llama 3 Vision mod-
els (Meta, 2024a). However, they are far from perfect and still suffer from generating hallucinated
texts that are not grounded to the reference image. The need for accurate and interpretable reward
models (RMs) to highlight the mistakes becomes increasingly critical. Traditional RMs, which
are often binary classification models to provide one single score to evaluate entire outputs, have
limitations in terms of interpretability and granularity. These models obscure the decision-making
process of the model, making it challenging for humans to diagnose and improve performance at a
fine-grained level.
To facilitate better interpretability and granularity, we propose a Token-Level Detective Reward
(TLDR) model to offer a more interpretable alternative. By evaluating and assigning rewards at
each token, rather than across entire sequences, TLDR enables greater transparency. This fine-
grained approach allows for clearer identification of where a model excels in its output generation.
Such interpretability is crucial not only for aligning model behavior with human expectations but
also for improving human-AI interaction – a human annotator can swiftly fix the highlighted errors
given by TLDR to make them correct because token-level evaluations allow for quicker identification
of errors and more targeted improvements.
Additionally, a naive binary reward model could be biased towards text modalities – the longer the
text, the higher the score, despite any internal hallucinations, making them less effective in multi-
modal contexts where visual information is essential. Our work aims to address this by constructing
a reward model that is more visually grounded, incorporating multimodal cues to better evaluate
model performance. The interpretability afforded by token-level granularity helps facilitate this
grounding, ensuring that visual and textual signals are both considered in reward calculations. Ab-


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Describe the image in detail.                                                       Token-Level
                                                                                                   Detective Reward
                                                                                                   (TLDR) Model

                                                                                                          ! Hallucination !
                                                                                     The image captures a bustling scene on a
                                                                                     highway, where the flow of traf ic is disrupted by
                                                                                     a construction zone. The highway, a four-lane
                                                                                     road, is illed with a variety of vehicles, including
                                                                                     cars, trucks, and buses. The cars are
                                                                                     predominantly black and white, while the trucks
                   The image captures a bustling scene on a highway, where           are white and red. The buses, painted in shades
                   the flow of traf ic is disrupted by a construction zone.          of blue and white, add a splash of color to the
                   The highway, a four-lane road, is illed with a variety of         scene. The construction zone, marked by
         VLM       vehicles, including cars, trucks, and buses. The cars are
                   predominantly black and white, while the trucks are
                                                                                     orange cones, is located on the right side of the
                   white and red. The buses, painted in shades of blue and           highway. It's a busy area with several
                   white, add a splash of color to the scene. The                    construction vehicles and workers diligently at
                   construction zone, marked by orange cones, is located
                                                                                     work. The highway is surrounded by lush green
                   on the right side of the highway. It's a busy area with
                   several construction vehicles and workers diligently at            ields and trees, providing a stark contrast to the
                   work. The highway is surrounded by lush green ields               concrete structures. The sky above is a clear
                   and trees, providing a stark contrast to the concrete             blue, dotted with fluffy white clouds. The image
                   structures. The sky above is a clear blue, dotted with
                   fluffy white clouds. The image is taken from an aerial
                                                                                     is taken from an aerial perspective, providing a
                   perspective, providing a comprehensive view of the                comprehensive view of the highway and its
                   highway and its surroundings. This perspective allows             surroundings. This perspective allows for a
                   for a detailed analysis of the traf ic flow and the ongoing
                                                                                     detailed analysis of the traf ic flow and the
                   construction work.
                                                                                     ongoing construction work.
     f         f      f                 ff f   f        f


Figure 1: Token-Level Detective Reward (TLDR) Model. It can be used as hallucination detection,
and to prompt models to self-correct with these detection. TLDR can also speed up human annota-
tion speed to fix slightly mistaken image captions, to create high-quality vision language data.

lation studies in training TLDR models shown in Tables 10 and 11 verifies the claim by showing
the sharp improvement of the RM’s performance by further finetuning the linear projection of the
VLM — projecting visual features given by the vision encoder to the textual embedding space.
Unlike existing token-level RL methods that primarily serve as auxiliary post-training evaluation
tools, TLDR is designed for on-policy RLHF training in vision-language models, bridging the gap
between fine-grained supervision and model optimization.
Moreover, token-level reward models have the potential to enhance existing methods for model
improvement. By providing detailed feedback on a token-by-token basis, these models enable more
effective self-correction and refinement in generated outputs. A more granular understanding of
errors can improve the performance of fine-tuning techniques such as DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024)
and PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), where strong and interpretable reward signals are essential for
optimizing model behavior. In Section 5.4, we show the TLDR model is automatically a likelihood
training objective, that simultaneously improve the base vision language model behind the RM.
In a summary, TLDR model aims to develop a reward model that not only reflects human preferences
more accurately but also enhances usability and interpretability. By improving the transparency of
the reward mechanism at the token level, we provide a tool that facilitates faster feedback, better
self-correction, simple likelihood finetuning, and a trustworthy hallucination evaluation metric. Our
work establishes the first token-level reward model specifically tailored for vision-language mod-
els, enabling both hallucination detection and self-correction, while also naturally integrating into
reinforcement learning frameworks. By unifying token-level reward modeling with vision-language
tasks, TLDR significantly improves grounding capabilities and reduces hallucination rates.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback and Reward Model. Using Reinforcement
Learning to align lan- guage models with human feedback or preferences (RLHF, Christiano et al.,
2017; Ziegler et al., 2020) has led to phenomenal improved large language models such as Chat-
GPT (Ouyang et al., 2022) and LLaMA 3 (Meta, 2024a). Similar RLHF techniques are used to


                                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


align large vision language models Liu et al. (2023) and text-to-image models (Lee et al., 2023;
Sun et al., 2023a) as well. In general, RLHF involves training a reward model on user preference
data collected from human annotators (Wang et al., 2024a). Given a reward model, a policy can be
learned using Reinforcement learnings algorithms like Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO, Schul-
man et al., 2017). Alternatively, recent works have developed Direct Policy optimization (DPO,
Rafailov et al., 2024) wherein reward models are mainly used for finding chosen and rejected pairs.
DPO alignment for vision-language models is also well studied (Yu et al., 2023b; 2024; Li et al.,
2024; Pi et al., 2024). Reward models themselves are also evolving including process reward models
(Luo et al., 2023), step-wise reward models (Havrilla et al., 2024), etc. Recent works also attempt
span-level or token-level detection but they are limited to the language domain (Yoon et al., 2024;
Yang et al., 2024), and they are mostly sentence-level (Wu et al., 2023; Niu et al., 2024; Mishra
et al., 2024) or need factual augmentations (Sun et al., 2023b). Unlike previous token-level reward
works (Yoon et al., 2024) on for offline RLHF, we propose the first unified token-level reward model,
TLDR, which establishes the stage for vision-language on-policy RLHF training with token-level re-
ward. TLDR facilitates image-to-text hallucination detection (Rohrbach et al., 2018; Li et al., 2023;
Jing et al., 2024; Lovenia et al., 2024) with efficient human correction, and improves downstream
vision-language grounding performance.
Synthetic Data and Hard Negative Mining. Several NLP datasets have gathered instances of the
negative class for their task. Many relied on human annotation, for example, unsupported claims in
fact verification (Aly et al., 2021; Wadden et al., 2020), non-entailed hypotheses in NLI (Bowman
et al., 2015), unanswerable questions (Rajpurkar et al., 2018). Some have used heuristics and ex-
ternal knowledge sources to automatically mine negative examples (Lee et al., 2021; Wright et al.,
2022). Finally, there are hybrid approaches where candidate negative examples are first automati-
cally generated and then manually verified (Wadden et al., 2022), or candidate negative examples
are synthesized by model perturbation and verified by the same model (Fu et al., 2023).
Large Vision Language Models and Evaluation. There has been a plethora of recent develop-
ments in VLMs; they can be broadly categorized by their methods for representing visual modalities.
A representative approach involves tokenizing visual inputs to be jointly trained with language in-
puts (Yu et al., 2023a; Google, 2023; Chameleon, 2024). Another line of work processes continuous
visual features by directly projecting them to the language embedding space via a learnable func-
tion (Liu et al., 2024; Bavishi et al., 2023). At the core of these design choices is the hardness
in representing visual features, which has been reported by several early studies (McKinzie et al.,
2024) to be the key bottleneck towards better vision-language foundation models. Various bench-
mark datasets beyond MMMU (Yue et al., 2024) were proposed targeting these bottlenecks, such
as BLINK (Fu et al., 2024b) and Vibe-Eval (Padlewski et al., 2024) for visual reasoning, IsoBench
(Fu et al., 2024a) and MathVista (Lu et al., 2024) for algorithmic visual problem solving. At the
essence of common mistakes made by VLMs, hallucination is a significant portion, and thus TLDR
is designed as an evaluation tool to measure models’ hallucination rate (see Table 2).

3    P ROBLEM S ETUP
A multimodal query-response instance x = (m, p, d) is usually equipped with three elements, an
image m, a user text prompt p, and a text response d. Training a reward model involves training a
classifier ρ(m, p, d) ∈ {0, 1} to predict human preference on the target response d given the image
m and prompt p. In contrast, to have better granularity for the reward model, a token-level version is
needed. Instead of training a point-wise scalar classifier, which only assigns a singular value to the
instance x, it assigns values for every token of the target response d = {e1 , · · · , eN } with N = |d|
tokens in total, where | · | denotes the number of tokens of any text sequence. It involves training the
TLDR model Pγ to match fine-grained rewards. TLDR model’s prediction can be written as

                    γ(m, p, d) = γ(e1 | m, p, d), · · · , γ(eN | m, p, d) ∈ [0, 1]N                    (1)

                                                                   1, if Pγ (e | mk , pk , dk ) > θ
where for any token e in text response d, γ(e | m, p, d) =                                          , with
                                                                   0, otherwise
some threshold θ usually set to 0.5 if not otherwise mentioned.
Given the image, prompt, and response tuples (mk , pk , dk ) in an evaluation set S, we design three
accuracy metrics on the TLDR model’s performance.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Token-Level Accuracy.
                                       xk = (mk , pk , dk ), we are given true token-level labels
                      For each instance
γ ⋆ (mk , pk , dk ) = γ ⋆ (e1 ), · · · , γ ⋆ (eN ) . Then we define token-level accuracy as

                                1                       1 X
                                                             1 {γ ⋆ (e) = γ(e | mk , pk , dk )}
                                           X
               AT (γ, S) =                                                                               (2)
                               |S|                     |dk |
                                     (mk ,pk ,dk )∈S        e∈dk

Sentence-Level Accuracy. Similar to the token-level accuracy but with each response d broken into
sentences d = {s1 , · · · , sc(d) } with sj = {enj−1 +1 , · · · , enj } where nj is the token position of the
j-th period. We also let n0 = 0 as the starting position. We also c(·) as the function of counting
number of sentences in any text response d. Then we define sentence-level accuracy as
                                                                                                      
                1                       1                                                             
                                                       1
                            X                  X                Y              Y
   AS (γ, S) =                                                      γ ⋆ (e) =     γ(e | mk , pk , dk )    (3)
               |S|                    c(dk )               e∈s               e∈s
                                                                                                       
                      (mk ,pk ,dk )∈S          j∈1,··· ,c(dk )      j             j


A visual illustration on grouping tokens into sentences is shown in Figure 3.
Response-Level Accuracy. We define response level prediction as
                              Y                                   Y
               ργ (m, p, d) =   γ(e | m, p, d) and ρ⋆ (m, p, d) =   γ ⋆ (e)                              (4)
                                     e∈d                                          e∈d

Then we compare with the ground truth labels ρ⋆ to define response-level accuracy as
                            1
                                            1 {ργ (mk , pk , dk ) = ρ⋆ (mk , pk , dk )}
                                   X
            AR (ργ , S) =                                                                                (5)
                           |S|
                                        (mk ,pk ,dk )∈S

Notably, the response-level accuracy also applies to response-level naive reward models ρ under the
same definition. We will further compare the response-level accuracy of TLDR model AR (ργ , S)
and that of the naive model AR (ρ, S) in Section 5.
Besides accuracy metrics, which could be biased when labels are imbalanced, especially in the
token-level cases where a majority of the tokens are neutral tokens – words that won’t affect response
quality, we report mean Average Precision (mAP). Together with normal mAP metrics, for which
we call mAP(pos) we also design a flipped version mAP(neg), where both the predicted labels
and the ground-truth labels are flipped so that we pay more attention to tokens with negative labels.
Because the token-level annotations are highly imbalanced, with more than 95% of them are positive
tokens (see the example in Figure 1), the mAP(neg) is a more meaningful average precision metric.
We report both mAP scores in the tuple format mAP(neg|pos).

4    S YNTHETIC DATA G ENERATION

Although aligning models toward user preference has become a standard post-training procedure,
open-sourced user preference data, especially multimodal ones, are increasingly difficult to source.
What is even worse, existing user preference data are mostly coarsely annotated as each instance is
only given one label: thumb down or thumb up. To gather large amounts of fine-grained token-level
preference data, we adopt the procedure by perturbing gold labels, inspired by Fu et al. (2023).
In this work, we mainly focus on two types of tasks: dense captioning and visual question answer-
ing (VQA). For VQA data, we synthesize hard negatives from Visual Genome (VG100K) dataset
(Krishna et al., 2016), which contains 108,077 images with over 1.7 million question-answer pairs.
For any VQA instance x with image m, question p and answer d, we prompt a pretrained large
language model ϕ, which takes the original question p and answer d, and is instructed to generate
a perturbed answer d′ = ϕ(p, d) so that it’s the wrong answer to the question p given the image m,
i.e., P(d′ | m, p) = 0. Notably, the model used for perturbation ϕ is text-only, without seeing the
image m to mitigate any visual biases. In this work, we use Llama-3.1-70B (Meta, 2024a) as
the perturbation model ϕ.
Admittedly, as dense captions are relatively longer than VQA samples, the amount of data avail-
able is more limited, and the hard negative synthesis process could be more versatile and more


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Token-Level
                                                               Rewards γ


                                                               Reward Model Head h

                                         Large Vision Language Model f



        Image m                 Prompt p                       Response d



          ￼   ￼ ￼ ￼        ￼         ￼


Figure 2: TLDR Model Architecture. For any instance with image m, prompt p, and a response
d, they are passed altogether into the large VLM backbone f without the language model head ℓ.
Then a shared reward model head h is applied to every token ek of the response d to have binary
predictions γ(ek ) to determine if ek is a good token or a bad token.

complicated. We synthesize hard negatives from DOCCI dataset (Onoe et al., 2024), which con-
tains over 15,000 images and their corresponding dense captions. However, the amount of cap-
tions here is much fewer than the amount of VQA instances. To compensate the imbalance, we
use Llama-3.1-70B to aggregate VQA instances to dense captions. For each image m in the
VG100K dataset, it’s equipped with on average 16 question-answer pairs {(p1 , d1 ), · · · , (pk , dk )}.
The text-only LLM is prompted to combine them into a dense caption d for image m. Now, com-
bining DOCCI and VG100K’s synthetic caption, we have over 120,000 image-caption pairs. As
prior work identifies (Lin et al., 2024), vision language models usually suffer in the following eight
taxonomies. We enumerate each of them with an illustrated example pair.
       I. S PATIAL R ELATIONSHIP : A is left to B ←→ A is right to B.
      II. V ISUAL ATTRIBUTE : A is yellow. ←→ A is blue.
     III. ATTRIBUTE B INDING : A is blue and B is yellow. ←→ A is yellow and B is blue.
     IV. O BJECT I DENTIFICATION : A dog chasing a ball. ←→ A cat chasing a ball.
      V. C OUNTING : One duck is swimming. ←→ Four ducks are swimming.
     VI. S MALL O BJECT: Cirrostratus cloud in the sky. ←→ Clear sky.
    VII. T EXT OCR: A shirt writes heavy fog. ←→ A shirt writes happy frog.
    VIII. C OUNTERFACTUAL : A soldier. ←→ A soldier has no sword in hand.
For each taxonomy t, and for each instance with image m and caption d, we use a prompt-engineered
text-only LLM ϕt to generate a perturbed caption d′ = ϕt (d) so that d′ is a minimal-edit from d.
Furthermore, we prompt-engineer another LLM ϕc (d, d′ , t) to check they are not paraphrases and
their difference lies in the desired taxonomy t. If they fail ϕc (d, d′ , t), we discard the perturbation.
For instance, not every image has text written in it, so there is no way to generate perturbations
focused on text OCR.
For either VQA or dense caption tasks, once we obtain successful perturbation d′ = {e′1 , · · · , e′|d′ | },
we compute the differences to the original text d = {e1 , · · · , e|d| } to obtain the token-level label
γ ∗ (e′k ) ∈ {0, 1} depending on whether e′k appear in the neighborhood of ek in d or not. Since the
original text d is human written, all of its tokens have positive label γ ⋆ (ek ) = 1, ∀ek ∈ d.
We include prompts for perturbation in Appendices A.1 to A.3 and the statistics of our synthetic
data in Table 7 at Appendix A.4.


5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1    T RAINING TLDR M ODELS

Model Architecture. As shown in Figure 2, we use PaliGemma-3B-Mix-448 (Beyer et al.,
2024) and Llama-3.2-11B-Vision (Meta, 2024b) as our backbone pretrained large Vision


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Base Model        Reward     Token-Level            Sentence-Level   Response-Level     mAP
                               Model      Accuracy AT             Accuracy AS      Accuracy AR     (neg|pos)
                               TLDR          98.6                     86.5             83.1        (41.3|99.8)
          PaliGemma-3B
                               Naive          —                        —               81.1            —
                               TLDR          98.9                     90.8             88.2        (45.7|99.8)
      Llama-3.2-11B-Vision
                               Naive          —                        —               86.7            —
              GPT-4o          Prompting      95.5                     66.9             52.9        (19.7|98.1)
          Random Guess           —            —                       —                50.0            —


Table 1: Performance of the TLDR model. As a reference, we include scores for the response-
level naive reward model trained on the same dataset. Best response-level accuracy are highlighted
in bold conditioning on the same base model. We find that the TLDR model has a slightly higher
response-level accuracy when compared to the naive binary RM. A break down of response-level
accuracy by taxonomy is shown in Table 10. Having a base model with larger number parameters
also gives higher accuracies across all granularity.


Language Model f . Instead of using the pretrained language modeling head ℓ which maps the last
hidden states to the vocabulary logits, we train a new reward model head h : RDhidden → R to map
the last hidden states with dimension Dhidden to a scalar logit for each token from the response d.
For any instance equipped with image m, prompt p and response d, we denote | · | as the number of
tokens after tokenization for either image or text modality. The backbone language model gives the
last hidden states H = f (m, p, d) ∈ R(|m|+|p|+|d|)×Dhidden and the probability of being positive for
k-th token ek in the response d is given by

         Pγ (ek | m, p, d) = σ h H⋆,(|m|+|p|+k)              ,     where σ is the Sigmoid function.              (6)

In our setup, the reward model head h is a simply linear layer with (Dhidden + 1) parameters. We
provide more detailed training setups and hyperparameters in Appendix B.
Training. As the PaliGemma report (Beyer et al., 2024) suggests, PaliGemma used full attention
between input images and input texts, and only has autoregressive attention at generation. Similar to
LLaVA model family (Liu et al., 2024), PaliGemma model f has four major components: a 400M
SigLIP (Zhai et al., 2023) vision encoder fenc , a linear projection module fproj to align the vision
features to the proper text embedding spacing, a Gemma-2B (Google, 2024) Transformer decoder
fdec , and a language model head ℓ. We train our randomly initialized reward model head h, together
with fproj and fdec . For efficient training, we use LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) technique to update
weights Θproj of fproj and Θdec of fdec , so that Θ′ = Θ + αtrain AB. We choose αtrain = 128
and r := rank(A) = rank(B) = 512 for all submodules Θ. Models are trained with respect
to the cross-entropy objective on every token of the response d, compared to the token-level label
generated following Section 4.
In contrast, we compare with a naive reward model trained on the same training data and with
the same hyperparameters. Although sharing the same architecture and parameter count, the naive
reward model differs from the TLDR model as its cross-entroy loss is only computed at the last
token of each response d, instead of on all tokens.
Evaluation. We evaluate TLDR model’s performance on the synthetic data generated from the test
split of the DOCCI dataset (Onoe et al., 2024). We measure the performance based on the metrics
discussed in Section 3. As shown in Table 1, the TLDR model has slightly higher response-level
accuracy than the naive binary RM. TLDR model has a 41.3 mAP(neg) and signals further room for
improvements. A break-down of response-level taxonomy in Table 10 at Appendix B shows that,
TLDR model performs the worst one spatial relationship taxonomy, and this resonances prior work
that image grounding to spatial relationship is one of the hardest task for both image-to-text VLMs
and text-to-image generations (Lin et al., 2024).
We conduct further human evaluation on token-level predictions on 100 samples from WinoGround
(Thrush et al., 2022) images with captions generated by MiniCPM , Phi-Vision-3.5 and
Qwen2-VL-7B. With a special focus on false negative (FN) type of errors and averaged among
three human annotators, we find the TLDR model has a sentence-level FN rate of 8.7% , 10.5% and
9.8%, respectively.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                             H ALLUCINATION R ATE (%) ↓
                      M ODELS                                           T OKEN -    S ENTENCE -    R ESPONSE -                         MMMU ↑             MEGA-Bench ↑
                                                                        L EVEL         L EVEL         L EVEL
          GPT-4o                                                         0.016                          0.23               1.62           69.1                 54.1
          Llama-3.2-90B-Vision                                           0.017                          0.19               1.23           60.3                  /
          GPT-4o-mini                                                    0.030                          0.38               2.12           59.4                 43.0
          GPT-4-Turbo-Vision                                             0.033                          0.62               3.12           56.8                  /
          Qwen2-VL-7B                                                    0.061                          0.48               1.96           54.1                 35.9
          Qwen2-VL-2B                                                    0.066                          0.72               1.70           41.1                 22.3
          MiniCPM-Llama-3-V2.5                                           0.067                          0.81               3.62           45.8                 22.8
          Llama-3.2-11B-Vision                                           0.073                          0.85               1.88           50.7                 18.0
          Phi-Vision-3.5-Instruct                                        0.261                          2.65               9.25           43.0                 25.3
          PaliGemma-3B-Mix-448                                           4.444                          5.96              17.50           27.3                  /

Table 2: Hallucination Evaluation. We prompt each model with image captioning instructions on
800 images from WinoGround (Thrush et al., 2022), and use TLDR to compute the hallucination
rates (the lower the better), with respect to various levels of granularity. Model performances are
sorted by token-level rate. We observe that GPT-4o is overall the best model with the least token-
level hallucinations but Llama-3.2-90B-Vision has better sentence-level and response-level
hallucinations. We also include self-reported MMMU (Yue et al., 2024) results to demonstrate
their significant correlation with hallucination rates: the Pearson correlation between − log HT and
MMMU score is 0.902 with a p-value of 3.45 × 10−4 . The correlation can also be visually observed
in Figure 6.
      The image captures a bustling scene on a highway, where the flow of traf ic is disrupted by a
      construction zone.                                                                                                   Hallucination Rate (%)
      The highway, a four-lane road, is illed with a variety of vehicles, including cars, trucks, and buses.
                                                                                                                  Token-Level        Sentence-Level        Response-Level
      The cars are predominantly black and white, while the trucks are white and red.

      The buses, painted in shades of blue and white, add a splash of color to the scene.                      # Tokens: 208       # Sentences: 10         This is a bad
      The construction zone, marked by orange cones, is located on the right side of the highway.              # Bad Tokens: 15    # Bad Sentences: 6      response.
      It's a busy area with several construction vehicles and workers diligently at work.

      The highway is surrounded by lush green ields and trees, providing a stark contrast to the concrete      Token-Level Rate:   Sentence-Level Rate:
      structures.
                                                                                                                  15                    6
                                                                                                                     ≈ 0.072 %            ≈ 60 %
      The sky above is a clear blue, dotted with fluffy white clouds.

      The image is taken from an aerial perspective, providing a comprehensive view of the highway and its       208                   10
      surroundings.

      This perspective allows for a detailed analysis of the traf ic flow and the ongoing construction work.
      ￼                                 f       f               f                f


Figure 3: Level of Granularity in Hallucination Rate. Using the example from Figure 1, we
can easily compute token-level hallucination rates following Eq. 7. Then tokens are grouped into
sentences which are separated by period marks. An entire sentence with at least one bad token is
highlighted as a bad sentence. Then the sentence-level hallucination rate of one response is calcu-
lated by counting the proportion of bad sentences. Similarly, if there is at least one bad token in the
response, the entire response is a bad one. Hallucination rates are averaged over an entire evaluation
set to determine the overall hallucination rates of a model.


Ablation Study. As discussed earlier, we finetune a randomly initialized reward model head h,
together with LoRA efficiently finetuning the multimodal projection layer fproj and the Transformer
decoder fdec . In the section, we ablate the necessity of LoRA finetuning fproj and fdec .
As shown in Table 11 at Appendix Appendix B.2, both linear projection module and the decoder
module are worth training and they work together to facilitate the performance of our TLDR model.
One interesting observation is training fproj on top of fdec barely improves token-level accuracy
or mAP(pos). But it helps with both sentence-level and response-level accuracy, and increases
mAP(neg) significantly. This could be explained by that finetuning fproj reduces the model’s false
negative rates on tokens because it’s more visually grounded by tuning the projection from visual
space to textual space.

5.2       H ALLUCINATION E VALUATION WITH TLDR M ODELS

Since our TLDR model provides token-level predictions, we can use it to compute a model’s hal-
lucination rates without requiring ground truth labels. Given image m, prompt p, and a model for
evaluation ξ. We first obtain model’s response dˆ = ξ(m, p) with tokens {ê1 , · · · , ê|d|
                                                                                          ˆ }. Then our

TLDR model gives its prediction γ(m, p, d)ˆ = γ(ê1 | m, p, d),ˆ · · · , γ(ê ˆ | m, p, d)ˆ . Then the
                                                                                                                                            |d|



                                                                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             GPT-4V Synthetic Caption                              GPT-4V Self-Correction
              Prompt: Describe the   Image
      Image   image in detail.               Flagged by TLDR Model                                 with TLDR’s Guidance

                                             The image depicts a stack of six books, each          The image depicts a stack of ive books, each
                                             varying in color and size, arranged in a slightly     varying in color and size, arranged in a slightly
                                             staggered formation. […]                              staggered formation. […]

              OOOXOOX
              OXOXO
                                             In the image, a young woman is seated at a dining     In the image, a young woman is seated at a dining
                                             table, […] focused expression as she uses             table, […] focused expression as she uses a fork to
      VLM                                    chopsticks to pick up food from her plate.            pick up food from her plate.



                                             […] The dog's face is characterized by its deep       […] The dog's face is characterized by its deep
                                             wrinkles and big, soulful eyes, which give it a       wrinkles and big, soulful eyes, which give it a
      OOOXOOX                                somewhat melancholic yet cute appearance. On          somewhat melancholic yet cute appearance. On
      OXOXO                                  top of its head, there are three biscuits stacked     top of its head, there are four biscuits stacked
                                             neatly, adding a playful and whimsical touch to the   neatly, adding a playful and whimsical touch to the
                                             scene. […]                                            scene. […]

                             TLDR
                                             […] Surrounding the map are essential travel items:   […] Surrounding the map are essential travel items:
                                             a digital camera, suggesting the intention to         a digital camera, suggesting the intention to
                                             capture memories; a pair of sunglasses, indicating    capture memories; a pair of sunglasses, indicating
              OOOOOOO                        sunny travel conditions; and a smartphone, likely     sunny travel conditions; and a smartphone, likely
              OOOOO                          used for additional navigation or communication.      used for additional navigation or communication.
                                             To the side, there's a cup of tea, providing a        To the side, there's a cup of coffee, providing a
                                             comforting element to the planning process. […]       comforting element to the planning process. […]
      VLM                f


Figure 4: TLDR model can guidance existing VLMs to Self-Correct their hallucination when gen-
erating captions for images from WinoGround (Thrush et al., 2022).

                                                     1
                                                        P                      ˆ
token-level hallucination rate for this instance is |d|
                                                     ˆ   êk ∈dˆ γ(êk | m, p, d). Similar to sentence-level
and response-level accuracy defined in Section 3, we can have sentence-level and response-level hal-
lucination rates as well. Their definitions are shown in Figure 3.
Now we can have the token-level hallucination rates for the model ξ given any dataset S as follows
                                  1 X             1       X
                                                                            ˆ
                    HT (ξ, S) =                               γ(êk | m, p, d)                  (7)
                                 |S|          | ξ(m, p) |
                                     (m,p)∈S | {z } êk ∈dˆ
                                                                   dˆ
We evaluate Llama-3.2-Vision (Meta, 2024b) with 11B and 90B versions, GPT-4o, 4o-min and
GPT-4 turbo vision (OpenAI, 2024), MiniCPM (Yao et al., 2024), PaliGemma (Beyer et al., 2024),
Qwen2-VL (Wang et al., 2024b) with 2B and 7B versions, and Phi 3.5 Vision (Abdin et al., 2024)
with our TLDR Model.
As shown in Table 2, GPT-4o is overall the best model with the least amount of hallucinations among
all granularity. We also observe a strong correlation between model’s hallucinate rates and its visual
understanding and reasoning performance evaluated by MMMU. We conjecture for any VLM ξ,
                                      Performance(ξ) ∝ − log HT (ξ)                                                                                      (8)

5.3   S ELF -C ORRECTION WITH TLDR M ODELS

Hallucination detection and evaluation (Zhou et al., 2024; Jing & Du, 2024; Yin et al., 2023) is a
small leap forward. The most exciting usage of TLDR model is to guide models with self-correction
and to be more grounded to the images by taking another guided look. Token-level annotations from
TLDR model can enhance a vision-language model’s ability to self-correct by providing detailed,
granular feedback on specific parts of its output. These annotations allow the model to break down
its response into smaller, interpretable units, aligning each token with visual and textual cues. By an-
alyzing where errors occur at the token level—whether in object recognition, attribute descriptions,
or language syntax—the model can more precisely identify the source of the mistake. Additionally,
token-level feedback can guide the model to better align its language generation with the visual
context, improving coherence and factual accuracy in its self-correction process. For self-correction
experiments, we chose GPT-4V because it provides a strong baseline for assessing reward-driven
refinements, while also including Llama-3.2-90B-Vision and Qwen2-VL-7B to showcase
TLDR’s effectiveness across diverse architectures.
In this section, we evaluate on WinoGround (Thrush et al., 2022) dataset to show whether given
extra token-level annotation cues, the vision language model is able to self-correct its own halluci-


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              M ODEL             Guidance Given By             # Samples      # Samples        # Self-Corrected   Win      Tie     Loss
                                                                           Flagged by RM
                                    TLDR (ours)                                                      21           12        7       2
              GPT-4V                                             800            25
                                      Naive                                                          15           2        11       2
                                    TLDR (ours)                                                       8            6           1    1
         Llama-3.2-90B                                           800            10
                                      Naive                                                           6            3           1    2
                                    TLDR (ours)                                                      16            9           5    2
          Qwen2-VL-7B                                            800            25
                                      Naive                                                           9            3           5    1


Table 3: Self-Correction with the Guidance of TLDR Model. A target model (GPT-4V,
Llama-3.2-90B or Qwen2-VL-7B) is used to generate captions for 800 images from
WinoGround, some of the captions are flagged by the reward model as containing bad tokens. When
prompted to self-correct, extra guidance from TLDR helps the target model correct more of its own
hallucinations with larger win rates.
                                           TASKS
                                BLINK ↑                  I SO B ENCH ↑
       M ODELS
                        Count   Spatial     Object    Function    Chess                                    H ALLUCINATION R ATE (%) ↓
                                                                                     M ODELS           T OKEN -   S ENTENCE - R ESPONSE -
                                Relation   Localize    Parity     Winner                               L EVEL        L EVEL       L EVEL
 PaliGemma-3B           69.2     78.3       45.9        41.4        45.1      PaliGemma-3B                4.444         5.96            17.50
 + TLDR (τ = 0.25)      71.7     80.4       47.5        45.1        45.1      + TLDR (τ = 0.10)           0.991         3.80            10.53
 + TLDR (τ = 0.5)       71.7     81.1       42.6        44.3        47.5      + TLDR (τ = 0.25)           0.172         1.13            3.96
 + TLDR (τ = 1)         12.5      2.1       42.6        34.4        44.8
                                                                              Llama-3.2-11B-Vision        0.073         0.85            1.88
 Llama-3.2-11B-Vision   55.0     61.5       60.7        34.9        45.5      + TLDR (τ = 0.10)           0.078         0.69            2.71
 + TLDR (τ = 0.25)      67.5     65.0       67.2        35.4        43.6      + TLDR (τ = 0.25)           0.066         0.74            1.72
 + TLDR (τ = 0.5)       65.8     65.7       59.0        33.3        47.9
 + TLDR (τ = 1)         61.7     65.7       56.6        35.1        39.4
                                                                             Table 5: Training TLDR model auto-
Table 4: Training TLDR model automatically gives                             matically gives a better vision language
a better vision language model for VQA. We eval-                             model with less hallucination rate. Sim-
uate 3 versions of TLDR backbone model with dif-                             ilar to Table 4 and the setup in Table 2,
ferent scales of LoRA α. They are distinguished by                           we evaluate TLDR backbone models’ hal-
τ = αinfer /αtrain , the proportion of α at inference and                    lucination rate on the dense image cap-
training time. We find that when τ = 0.25, it could                          tioning task. Models are able to reduce
improve the PaliGemma model’s performance by at                              the hallucination rates, especially for less-
most 3.7 points and could improve Llama 3.2 model’s                          performing models such as PaliGemma.
performace by at most 12.5 points.

nations. Out of 800 captions generated by GPT-4V for images in WinGround, TLDR model flags
25 of them as including hallucinated tokens. As shown in Table 3, when prompted with TLDR
guidance, GPT-4V attempts to self-correct 21 out of 25, and when evaluated by human annotators,
12 of them are improved, 7 of them are tied, and 2 of them are worsened. On the contrary, when
prompted to self-correct without TLDR’s guidance, GPT-4V attempts to self-correct 15 out of 25
with only 2 wins, 11 ties, and 2 losses. Examples of GPT-4V’s self-correction results are shown in
Figure 4. We include both prompt templates for self-correction, with and without TLDR’s guidance
in Appendix C.

5.4    TLDR AUTOMATICALLY T RAINS T OKEN -L EVEL L IKELIHOOD O PTIMIZATION

The purpose of building reward models is to improve the backbone large vision language model.
We find that, a free by-product of training the TLDR model is that the backbone model’s weights
are simultaneously updated together with the reward model head. As discussed in Section 5, the
linear projection fproj and the transformer decoder Gemma-2B fdec are both updated with LoRA
weights during training TLDR. Now we attach back the original pretrained language model head
ℓ to the backbone of the updated PaliGemma model with TLDR (by discarding the reward model
head h), we obtain an updated vision language model. Now we evaluate whether this new model
has improved from the orginal model, by evaluating on both in-distribution tasks from BLINK (Fu
et al., 2024b) and out-of-distribution tasks from IsoBench (Fu et al., 2024a). At inference time,
we adopt a different LoRA alpha to merge the weights, for weight Θ for any updated module,
Θ′ = Θ + αinfer AB, where A, B are trained LoRA weights. We find the proportion between
αinfer and αtrain could affect model performance significantly. We denote this proportion τ :=
αinfer /αtrain ∈ [0, 1]. With τ = 0, we are evaluating the original model before training TLDR,
and with τ = 1, we are evaluating the model trained to provide token-level rewards. As shown in
Table 4, a τ = 0.25 gives the best performance.


                                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Such automatic improvement is in fact that TLDR simultaneously trains the backbone VLM with
likelihood optimization. The binary cross entropy objective on P(e | m, p, d) for any token e simply
promotes the model to generate e if γ ⋆ (e) = 1, i.e., e is a good token; and suppresses the model to
generate it if γ ⋆ (e) = 0, i.e., e is a bad token. As the linear projection layer fproj is also finetuned,
the model is promoted to be more visually grounded, with an improvement for spatial relationship
and chess winner identification, both of which requires complex spatial reasoning on images.

5.5   S PEEDING U P H UMAN A NNOTATION WITH TLDR M ODELS

Human annotations, especially on dense captions, are costly and model generated captions are not
trustworthy. Recent work such as PixelProse (Singla et al., 2024) has started releasing model gen-
erated dense captions with an ambition to use these captions to train better models. However, on
a random sampling of 3,000 images from PixelProse, TLDR model detects 22.39% of the captions
have hallucinated tokens, with a token-level hallucination rate of 0.83% and a sentence-level hallu-
cination rate of 5.23%.
Nonetheless, it’s always easier and cheaper for human
annotators to correct an existing caption than writing                     AVERAGE A NNOTATION S PEED
long captions from scratch. Instead of using model’s                      ( SECONDS ) WITH G UIDANCE OF
                                                           A NNOTATOR ID
self-correction as designed in Section 5.3, human cor-                     Binary Reward      TLDR Model
                                                                               Model
rection could be more rigorous to provide better cap-
                                                             Annotator A       101.7             31.2
tions. Human annotators are given the similar instruc-       Annotator B       109.1             32.9
tion as model self-correction prompts. Instead of com-       Annotator C       121.3             34.4
paring their caption correction quality – corrected cap-      AVERAGE          110.7             32.8
tions are later cross checked by annotators to ensure
quality – annotators are asked to time their annota- Table 6: TLDR Speeds up Human An-
tion speed. Each annotator is assigned two set of dis- notation by 3 Times to Fix Synthetic Im-
tinct samples, one with TLDR guidance and the other age Caption in PixelProse (Singla et al.,
without, and is asked to fix the caption and time them- 2024).
selves. As shown in Table 6, all three annotators share
a similar annotation speed when if given TLDR guidance or no extra guidance. Most importantly,
all three annotators have a 3 times speed up, which could in the future help with creating large bulk
of vision language data with lower annotation costs.


6     D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduced a Token-Level Detective Reward Model (TLDR) to provide fine-
grained annotations for large vision language models. It is more interpretable than traditional naive
binary reward models as TLDR can inform the user not only the response could be wrong but also
where the response is wrong. Such feature enables many meaning usages, such as model’s self-
correction with TLDR guidance, and hallucination evaluation with TLDR annotations. We also
presented a naive baseline where TLDR model is automatically a likelihood optimization method
for its backbone vision language model, and the TLDR-tuned VLM is able to improve in several
benchmarks. We believe a strong RM is a crucial basis for token-level DPO and PPO post-training.
Finally, we show that, beyond guiding model’s to self-correct, TLDR can also assist human anno-
tators to fix synthetically generated image captions by improving the annotation speed by 3 times.
Although our evaluation primarily focuses on hallucination mitigation, TLDR’s token-level reward
framework could be extended to broader safety and alignment tasks in vision-language generation.
Avenues ahead, we aim to design better human annotation interfaces under the human-computer
interaction realm, to further reduce annotation overhead, to acquire large amount of high quality
image captioning data with both positive human-corrected caption and negative model-generated
caption. It will further facilitate us in designing token-level policy optimization methods. We believe
our approach has the potential to advance the field of reward modeling and automatic evaluation.
We hope that TLDR will make data annotation easier, and guide multimodal LLMs to hallucinate
less. We hope our work can inspire further research to rethink the roles of reward models, and
how their transparency, interpretability, and granularity can help advance the field of building better
multimodal foundation models.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

DF would like to thank Richard Yuanzhe Pang for the initial discussion on token-level predictions
and automated model critiques for large language models. The detective and robot figures used in
Figures 1 and 4 are from flaticon.com.
Getty Acknowledgement. Images in the paper that originated from the WinoGround dataset
(Thrush et al., 2022) are a compilation of assets, including ©Getty Images/Natasha Breen, Maki
Nakamura, Jessica Peterson, Kundanlall Sharma, lacaosa, Alberto Bogo, Vu Le, Toson Rueangsuk-
sut, Nisian Hughes, Tanja Walter, Douglas Sacha, PBNJ Productions, Glow Images, 10’000 Hours,
zoranm, Marlene Ford, Westend61.

R EFERENCES
Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Hany Awadalla, Ahmed Awadallah, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Nguyen
 Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Jianmin Bao, Harkirat Behl, Alon Benhaim, Misha Bilenko,
 Johan Bjorck, Sébastien Bubeck, Martin Cai, Qin Cai, Vishrav Chaudhary, Dong Chen, Dong-
 dong Chen, Weizhu Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Yi-Ling Chen, Hao Cheng, Parul Chopra, Xiyang
 Dai, Matthew Dixon, Ronen Eldan, Victor Fragoso, Jianfeng Gao, Mei Gao, Min Gao, Amit
 Garg, Allie Del Giorno, Abhishek Goswami, Suriya Gunasekar, Emman Haider, Junheng Hao,
 Russell J. Hewett, Wenxiang Hu, Jamie Huynh, Dan Iter, Sam Ade Jacobs, Mojan Javaheripi, Xin
 Jin, Nikos Karampatziakis, Piero Kauffmann, Mahoud Khademi, Dongwoo Kim, Young Jin Kim,
 Lev Kurilenko, James R. Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Yunsheng Li, Chen Liang, Lars Liden,
 Xihui Lin, Zeqi Lin, Ce Liu, Liyuan Liu, Mengchen Liu, Weishung Liu, Xiaodong Liu, Chong
 Luo, Piyush Madan, Ali Mahmoudzadeh, David Majercak, Matt Mazzola, Caio César Teodoro
 Mendes, Arindam Mitra, Hardik Modi, Anh Nguyen, Brandon Norick, Barun Patra, Daniel Perez-
 Becker, Thomas Portet, Reid Pryzant, Heyang Qin, Marko Radmilac, Liliang Ren, Gustavo
 de Rosa, Corby Rosset, Sambudha Roy, Olatunji Ruwase, Olli Saarikivi, Amin Saied, Adil Salim,
 Michael Santacroce, Shital Shah, Ning Shang, Hiteshi Sharma, Yelong Shen, Swadheen Shukla,
 Xia Song, Masahiro Tanaka, Andrea Tupini, Praneetha Vaddamanu, Chunyu Wang, Guanhua
 Wang, Lijuan Wang, Shuohang Wang, Xin Wang, Yu Wang, Rachel Ward, Wen Wen, Philipp
 Witte, Haiping Wu, Xiaoxia Wu, Michael Wyatt, Bin Xiao, Can Xu, Jiahang Xu, Weijian Xu, Ji-
 long Xue, Sonali Yadav, Fan Yang, Jianwei Yang, Yifan Yang, Ziyi Yang, Donghan Yu, Lu Yuan,
 Chenruidong Zhang, Cyril Zhang, Jianwen Zhang, Li Lyna Zhang, Yi Zhang, Yue Zhang, Yunan
 Zhang, and Xiren Zhou. Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on your
 phone, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14219.
Rami Aly, Christos Christodoulopoulos, Oana Cocarascu, Zhijiang Guo, Arpit Mittal, Michael
  Schlichtkrull, James Thorne, and Andreas Vlachos (eds.). Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on
  Fact Extraction and VERification (FEVER), Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.fever-1.0.
Rohan Bavishi, Erich Elsen, Curtis Hawthorne, Maxwell Nye, Augustus Odena, Arushi Somani,
  and Sağnak Taşırlar. Introducing our multimodal models, 2023. URL https://www.adept.
  ai/blog/fuyu-8b.
Lucas Beyer, Andreas Steiner, André Susano Pinto, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiao Wang, Daniel Salz,
  Maxim Neumann, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Michael Tschannen, Emanuele Bugliarello, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Daniel Keysers, Skanda Koppula, Fangyu Liu, Adam Grycner, Alexey Gritsenko,
  Neil Houlsby, Manoj Kumar, Keran Rong, Julian Eisenschlos, Rishabh Kabra, Matthias Bauer,
  Matko Bošnjak, Xi Chen, Matthias Minderer, Paul Voigtlaender, Ioana Bica, Ivana Balazevic,
  Joan Puigcerver, Pinelopi Papalampidi, Olivier Henaff, Xi Xiong, Radu Soricut, Jeremiah Harm-
  sen, and Xiaohua Zhai. Paligemma: A versatile 3b vlm for transfer, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2407.07726.
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D. Manning. A large anno-
  tated corpus for learning natural language inference. In Lluı́s Màrquez, Chris Callison-Burch, and
  Jian Su (eds.), Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 632–642, Lisbon, Portugal, September 2015. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D15-1075. URL https://aclanthology.org/D15-1075.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chameleon.    Chameleon:     Mixed-modal early-fusion foundation models.         arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.09818, 2024.

Paul Francis Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom B. Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei.
  Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. ArXiv, abs/1706.03741, 2017. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4787508.

Deqing Fu, Ameya Godbole, and Robin Jia. SCENE: Self-labeled counterfactuals for extrapolating
  to negative examples. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7832–7848,
  Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.
  emnlp-main.485. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.485.

Deqing Fu, Ruohao Guo, Ghazal Khalighinejad, Ollie Liu, Bhuwan Dhingra, Dani Yogatama, Robin
  Jia, and Willie Neiswanger. IsoBench: Benchmarking multimodal foundation models on isomor-
  phic representations. In First Conference on Language Modeling (COLM), 2024a.

Xingyu Fu, Yushi Hu, Bangzheng Li, Yu Feng, Haoyu Wang, Xudong Lin, Dan Roth, Noah A
  Smith, Wei-Chiu Ma, and Ranjay Krishna. Blink: Multimodal large language models can see but
  not perceive. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12390, 2024b.

Google. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models, 2023.

Google. Gemma: Open models based on gemini research and technology, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2403.08295.

Alex Havrilla, Sharath Raparthy, Christoforus Nalmpantis, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Maksym Zhuravin-
  skyi, Eric Hambro, and Roberta Raileanu. Glore: When, where, and how to improve llm reasoning
  via global and local refinements, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10963.

Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685.

Liqiang Jing and Xinya Du. Fgaif: Aligning large vision-language models with fine-grained ai
  feedback, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.05046.

Liqiang Jing, Ruosen Li, Yunmo Chen, and Xinya Du. FaithScore: Fine-grained evaluations of
  hallucinations in large vision-language models. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-
  Nung Chen (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pp.
  5042–5063, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-emnlp.290.

Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie
  Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A. Shamma, Michael S. Bernstein, and Li Fei-Fei.
  Visual genome: Connecting language and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations.
  International Journal of Computer Vision, 123:32 – 73, 2016. URL https://homes.cs.
  washington.edu/˜ranjay/visualgenome/index.html.

Jinhyuk Lee, Mujeen Sung, Jaewoo Kang, and Danqi Chen. Learning dense representations of
   phrases at scale. In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.), Proceed-
   ings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th
   International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
   6634–6647, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
   2021.acl-long.518. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.518.

Kimin Lee, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Aligning text-to-image models using human
  feedback, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.12192.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lei Li, Zhihui Xie, Mukai Li, Shunian Chen, Peiyi Wang, Liang Chen, Yazheng Yang, Benyou
  Wang, Lingpeng Kong, and Qi Liu. VLFeedback: A large-scale AI feedback dataset for large
  vision-language models alignment. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing, pp. 6227–6246, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.emnlp-main.358.
Yifan Li, Yifan Du, Kun Zhou, Jinpeng Wang, Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. Evaluating object hallu-
  cination in large vision-language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  292–305, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2023.emnlp-main.20. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.20.
Zhiqiu Lin, Deepak Pathak, Baiqi Li, Jiayao Li, Xide Xia, Graham Neubig, Pengchuan
  Zhang, and Deva Ramanan. Evaluating text-to-visual generation with image-to-text gener-
  ation. ArXiv, abs/2404.01291, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:268857167.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.08485.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Sheng Shen, and Yong Jae Lee.
  Llava-next: Improved reasoning, ocr, and world knowledge, January 2024. URL https://
  llava-vl.github.io/blog/2024-01-30-llava-next/.
Holy Lovenia, Wenliang Dai, Samuel Cahyawijaya, Ziwei Ji, and Pascale Fung. Negative ob-
  ject presence evaluation (NOPE) to measure object hallucination in vision-language models.
  In Jing Gu, Tsu-Jui (Ray) Fu, Drew Hudson, Asli Celikyilmaz, and William Wang (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Advances in Language and Vision Research (ALVR), pp.
  37–58, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2024.alvr-1.4. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.alvr-1.4.
Pan Lu, Hritik Bansal, Tony Xia, Jiacheng Liu, Chunyuan Li, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Hao Cheng, Kai-
  Wei Chang, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Mathvista: Evaluating mathematical reasoning
  of foundation models in visual contexts, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.
  02255.
Haipeng Luo, Qingfeng Sun, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Jianguang Lou, Chongyang Tao, Xiubo Geng,
  Qingwei Lin, Shifeng Chen, and Dongmei Zhang. Wizardmath: Empowering mathemati-
  cal reasoning for large language models via reinforced evol-instruct, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2308.09583.
Brandon McKinzie, Zhe Gan, Jean-Philippe Fauconnier, Sam Dodge, Bowen Zhang, Philipp Dufter,
  Dhruti Shah, Xianzhi Du, Futang Peng, Floris Weers, et al. Mm1: Methods, analysis & insights
  from multimodal llm pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09611, 2024.
Meta. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
Llama Team @ Meta.        Llama 3.2: Revolutionizing edge ai and vision with
  open, customizable models, 2024b.    URL https://ai.meta.com/blog/
  llama-3-2-connect-2024-vision-edge-mobile-devices/.
Abhika Mishra, Akari Asai, Vidhisha Balachandran, Yizhong Wang, Graham Neubig, Yulia
  Tsvetkov, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained hallucination detection and editing for language
  models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.06855.
Cheng Niu, Yuanhao Wu, Juno Zhu, Siliang Xu, Kashun Shum, Randy Zhong, Juntong Song, and
  Tong Zhang. Ragtruth: A hallucination corpus for developing trustworthy retrieval-augmented
  language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.00396.
Yasumasa Onoe, Sunayana Rane, Zachary Berger, Yonatan Bitton, Jaemin Cho, Roopal Garg,
  Alexander Ku, Zarana Parekh, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Garrett Tanzer, Su Wang, and Jason Baldridge.
  Docci: Descriptions of connected and contrasting images, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2404.19753.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


OpenAI. Gpt-4o, 2024. URL https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155.
Piotr Padlewski, Max Bain, Matthew Henderson, Zhongkai Zhu, Nishant Relan, Hai Pham, Dono-
  van Ong, Kaloyan Aleksiev, Aitor Ormazabal, Samuel Phua, Ethan Yeo, Eugenie Lamprecht,
  Qi Liu, Yuqi Wang, Eric Chen, Deyu Fu, Lei Li, Che Zheng, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Dani
  Yogatama, Mikel Artetxe, and Yi Tay. Vibe-eval: A hard evaluation suite for measuring progress
  of multimodal language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.02287.
Renjie Pi, Tianyang Han, Wei Xiong, Jipeng Zhang, Runtao Liu, Rui Pan, and Tong Zhang.
  Strengthening multimodal large language model with bootstrapped preference optimization. In
  Computer Vision – ECCV 2024: 18th European Conference, Milan, Italy, September 29–Octo-
  ber 4, 2024, Proceedings, Part XXXIII, pp. 382–398, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2024. Springer-Verlag.
  ISBN 978-3-031-73413-7. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-73414-4 22. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1007/978-3-031-73414-4_22.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and
  Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18290.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable ques-
  tions for SQuAD. In Iryna Gurevych and Yusuke Miyao (eds.), Proceedings of the 56th An-
  nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp.
  784–789, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/P18-2124. URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-2124.
Anna Rohrbach, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Kaylee Burns, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. Object hal-
  lucination in image captioning. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
  2018.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347.
Vasu Singla, Kaiyu Yue, Sukriti Paul, Reza Shirkavand, Mayuka Jayawardhana, Alireza Ganjdanesh,
  Heng Huang, Abhinav Bhatele, Gowthami Somepalli, and Tom Goldstein. From pixels to prose:
  A large dataset of dense image captions, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.
  10328.
Jiao Sun, Deqing Fu, Yushi Hu, Su Wang, Royi Rassin, Da-Cheng Juan, Dana Alon, Charles Her-
   rmann, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Ranjay Krishna, and Cyrus Rashtchian. Dreamsync: Aligning
   text-to-image generation with image understanding feedback, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.
   org/abs/2311.17946.
Zhiqing Sun, Sheng Shen, Shengcao Cao, Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yikang Shen, Chuang Gan,
  Liang-Yan Gui, Yu-Xiong Wang, Yiming Yang, Kurt Keutzer, and Trevor Darrell. Aligning large
  multimodal models with factually augmented rlhf. 2023b.
Tristan Thrush, Ryan Jiang, Max Bartolo, Amanpreet Singh, Adina Williams, Douwe Kiela, and
  Candace Ross. Winoground: Probing vision and language models for visio-linguistic composi-
  tionality. 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  5228–5238, 2022.
David Wadden, Shanchuan Lin, Kyle Lo, Lucy Lu Wang, Madeleine van Zuylen, Arman Co-
  han, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fact or fiction: Verifying scientific claims. In Bonnie Webber,
  Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and Yang Liu (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empir-
  ical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 7534–7550, Online, November
  2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.609. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.609.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


David Wadden, Kyle Lo, Bailey Kuehl, Arman Cohan, Iz Beltagy, Lucy Lu Wang, and Hannaneh
  Hajishirzi. Scifact-open: Towards open-domain scientific claim verification, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2210.13777.
Binghai Wang, Rui Zheng, Lu Chen, Yan Liu, Shihan Dou, Caishuang Huang, Wei Shen, Senjie Jin,
  Enyu Zhou, Chenyu Shi, Songyang Gao, Nuo Xu, Yuhao Zhou, Xiaoran Fan, Zhiheng Xi, Jun
  Zhao, Xiao Wang, Tao Ji, Hang Yan, Lixing Shen, Zhan Chen, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Xipeng Qiu,
  Xuanjing Huang, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Secrets of rlhf in large language models part
  ii: Reward modeling, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.06080.
Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu,
  Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Yang Fan, Kai Dang, Mengfei Du, Xuancheng Ren, Rui Men, Dayiheng
  Liu, Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s
  perception of the world at any resolution, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.
  12191.
Dustin Wright, David Wadden, Kyle Lo, Bailey Kuehl, Arman Cohan, Isabelle Augenstein, and
  Lucy Lu Wang. Generating scientific claims for zero-shot scientific fact checking. In Smaranda
  Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2448–2460,
  Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  acl-long.175. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.175.
Zeqiu Wu, Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Nouha Dziri, Alane Suhr, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Noah A. Smith,
  Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained human feedback gives better rewards for
  language model training, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01693.
Kailai Yang, Zhiwei Liu, Qianqian Xie, Jimin Huang, Erxue Min, and Sophia Ananiadou. Selective
  preference optimization via token-level reward function estimation, 2024.
Yuan Yao, Tianyu Yu, Ao Zhang, Chongyi Wang, Junbo Cui, Hongji Zhu, Tianchi Cai, Haoyu Li,
  Weilin Zhao, Zhihui He, Qianyu Chen, Huarong Zhou, Zhensheng Zou, Haoye Zhang, Shengding
  Hu, Zhi Zheng, Jie Zhou, Jie Cai, Xu Han, Guoyang Zeng, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong
  Sun. Minicpm-v: A gpt-4v level mllm on your phone. arXiv preprint 2408.01800, 2024.
Shukang Yin, Chaoyou Fu, Sirui Zhao, Tong Xu, Hao Wang, Dianbo Sui, Yunhang Shen, Ke Li,
  Xing Sun, and Enhong Chen. Woodpecker: Hallucination correction for multimodal large lan-
  guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16045, 2023.
Eunseop Yoon, Hee Suk Yoon, SooHwan Eom, Gunsoo Han, Daniel Nam, Daejin Jo, Kyoung-
  Woon On, Mark Hasegawa-Johnson, Sungwoong Kim, and Chang Yoo. TLCR: Token-level
  continuous reward for fine-grained reinforcement learning from human feedback. In Lun-Wei
  Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics ACL 2024, pp. 14969–14981, Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 2024.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.889. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.889.
Lili Yu, Bowen Shi, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Benjamin Muller, Olga Golovneva, Tianlu Wang, Arun
  Babu, Binh Tang, Brian Karrer, Shelly Sheynin, et al. Scaling autoregressive multi-modal models:
  Pretraining and instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02591, 2023a.
Tianyu Yu, Yuan Yao, Haoye Zhang, Taiwen He, Yifeng Han, Ganqu Cui, Jinyi Hu, Zhiyuan Liu,
  Hai-Tao Zheng, Maosong Sun, et al. Rlhf-v: Towards trustworthy mllms via behavior alignment
  from fine-grained correctional human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00849, 2023b.
Tianyu Yu, Haoye Zhang, Yuan Yao, Yunkai Dang, Da Chen, Xiaoman Lu, Ganqu Cui, Taiwen He,
  Zhiyuan Liu, Tat-Seng Chua, and Maosong Sun. Rlaif-v: Aligning mllms through open-source ai
  feedback for super gpt-4v trustworthiness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17220, 2024.
Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang, Tianyu Zheng, Ruoqi Liu, Ge Zhang, Samuel Stevens,
  Dongfu Jiang, Weiming Ren, Yuxuan Sun, Cong Wei, Botao Yu, Ruibin Yuan, Renliang Sun,
  Ming Yin, Boyuan Zheng, Zhenzhu Yang, Yibo Liu, Wenhao Huang, Huan Sun, Yu Su, and
  Wenhu Chen. Mmmu: A massive multi-discipline multimodal understanding and reasoning
  benchmark for expert agi, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.16502.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid loss for language
  image pre-training, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.15343.
Yiyang Zhou, Chenhang Cui, Jaehong Yoon, Linjun Zhang, Zhun Deng, Chelsea Finn, Mohit
  Bansal, and Huaxiu Yao. Analyzing and mitigating object hallucination in large vision-language
  models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=oZDJKTlOUe.
Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences, 2020.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.08593.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A Synthetic Data Generation                                                                        17
    A.1 Prompt for Synthesizing Image Caption from VQA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           17
    A.2 Prompts for Synthesizing VQA Negatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         18
    A.3 Prompts for Synthesizing Image Caption Negatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         19
    A.4 Statistics of Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24

B Training and Model Performance                                                                   26
    B.1 Model Training Setup and Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         26
    B.2 Performance Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     26
    B.3 Correlation Between Model Performance and Token-Level Hallucination Rate . . .             28

C Self Correction                                                                                  30

D Limitations                                                                                      32


A     S YNTHETIC DATA G ENERATION

A.1   P ROMPT FOR S YNTHESIZING I MAGE C APTION FROM VQA

      S YNTHESIZE C APTION FROM V ISUAL Q UESTION A NSWERING
    Your task is to convert a list of question-answer pairs to a
    descriptive paragraph.
    Keep in mind these rules:
    Do not start with greetings or salutations. Simply return
    the new caption.
    Do not write anything else at the end of your response.
    Your crafted descriptive caption should be very faithful to
    the given question-answer pairs.
    Do not add any additional information that is not in the
    question-answer pairs.
    The parapgraph should not start with the photo, the image,
    the picture etc.
    Instead of saying, for example, the photo shows a cute koala
    bear sleeping on the tree, you should just say a cute koala
    bear is sleeping on the tree.
    For example, you are given the following question-answer
    pairs:
    Question: What is the color of the mug? Answer: red.
    Question: Where is the mug at? Answer: on the table.
    Question: Is there anything written on the mug? Answer:
    Yes.
    Question: What is written on the mug? Answer: Hello World.
    Question: What is the color of the texts? Answer: yellow.
    Your response should be a descriptive paragraph that
    aggregate the information from the question-answer pairs:
    Paragraph:
    A red mug sitting on the table has yellow texts written on
    it: Hello World.



                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Now you are given the following question-answer pairs and are
   asked to generate a paragraph:
   Question: ⟨Question⟩ Answer: ⟨Answer⟩
   Question: ⟨Question⟩ Answer: ⟨Answer⟩
   .
   .
   .
   Paragraph:



A.2   P ROMPTS FOR S YNTHESIZING VQA N EGATIVES

      P ROMPT T EMPLATE FOR G ENERATING VQA N EGATIVES
   You are provided with a visual question-answer pair. Your
   task is to generate a wrong answer that is subtly different
   from the original answer.
   Keep in mind the following rules:
   Keep formatting the same, such as sentence structure,
   paragraph blocks, or newlines.
   The changes should be subtle but concrete, replacing words
   and phrases with opposite meanings or alternative options.
   Do not start with greetings or salutations. Simply return
   the new answer.
   Do not write anything else at the end of your response.
   Do not fix any typos or grammar errors. If there are any,
   please ignore them.
   The new answer should be nearly identical, other than 1 or 2
   very small changes.
   The changes should be very visually different. The new
   answer should be realistic.
   More importantly, keep the wrong answer within the same
   taxonomy as the original answer.
   Here are some examples.
   Question: What color is the apple? Answer: red. Wrong
   answer: green.
   Question: What is the spatial relationship between the man
   and the chair? Answer: The man is sitting on a brown chair.
   Wrong answer: The man is sitting next to a brown chair.
   Question: How many apples are there? Answer: There are 5
   apples. Wrong answer: There are 6 apples.
   Now write your new answer:
   Question: ⟨Question⟩ Answer: ⟨Answer⟩ Wrong answer:


      C HECK IF VQA N EGATIVE IS VALID
   You are provided with a paragraph, and a question-answer
   pair. Your task is to determine if the answer is a valid
   answer to the question given the paragraph.
   The answer should be a simple yes or no. Do not write
   anything else at the end of your response. Here are some
   examples.
   Paragraph: The man is sitting on a brown chair. Question:
   What is the spatial relationship between the man and the
   chair? Answer: The man is sitting on a brown chair. Valid
   answer: yes.



                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Paragraph: There are six apples on the table and they are
   all red. One of the apples is rotten and is at the left side
   of the table. Question: How many apples are there? Answer:
   There are 5 apples. Valid answer: no.
   Paragraph: On a sunny day, a man sailing a boat on the ocean
   sees a fish jumping out of the water. Question: What is the
   man doing? Answer: The man is fishing. Valid answer: no.
   Now check this paragraph and the question answer pair:
   Paragraph: ⟨Paragraph⟩ Question: ⟨Question⟩ Answer: ⟨Answer⟩
   Valid answer:

Note: we discard the synthetic negatives that are marked as valid because the perturbation is unsuc-
cessful.

A.3   P ROMPTS FOR S YNTHESIZING I MAGE C APTION N EGATIVES

We first present the general prompt for perturbation and then break these down into taxonomy-
specific rules and in-context examples on all 8 taxonomies described in Section 4.

      G ENERAL P ROMPT
   You are provided with a caption to an image. Your task is
   to generate a new caption that is subtly different from the
   original caption.
   Keep in mind the following rules:
   Keep formatting the same, such as sentence structure,
   paragraph blocks, or newlines.
   The changes should be subtle but concrete, replacing words
   and phrases with opposite meanings or alternative options.
   Do not start with greetings or salutations. Simply return
   the new caption.
   Do not write anything else at the end of your response.
   Do not fix any typos or grammar errors. If there are any,
   please ignore them.
   The new caption should be nearly identical, other than 1 or 2
   very small changes.
   The changes should be very visually different.
   The new caption should be realistic.
   Most importantly, make the change with the following
   taxonomy: ⟨Taxonomy⟩
   Here are the additional rules for the taxonomy
   ⟨Taxonomy-Specific Rules and In-Context Examples⟩
   Here is the original caption: ⟨Caption⟩
   Now write your new caption:


      S PATIAL R ELATIONSHIP RULES AND I N -C ONTEXT E XAMPLES
   Change the spatial relationship of two objects in the given
   caption.
   The new spatial relationship should be different from the
   original spatial relationship.
   The new spatial relationship should be realistic, and is
   visually different from the original spatial relationship.
   You should fix the consistency of the caption. If you change
   the spatial relationship, you should also change the noun,



                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   verb, etc. so that there is no grammar error.
   Do not change anything not related to spatial relationship,
   even there are spatial relationship present.
   Do not change other attributes of objects, such as color,
   texture, material, etc.
   If there are no spatial relationship present in the caption,
   you should simply copy the original caption.

   For example,
   Original caption: A man is sitting on the left to a coffee
   table.
   New caption: A man is sitting on the right to a coffee
   table.

   Original caption: A duck is swimming in a pool and a fish is
   swimming underneath.
   New caption: A duck is swimming in a pool and a fish is
   swimming on top of it.

   Original caption: A man is sitting in front of a car.
   New caption: A man is sitting in a car.

   Original caption: An apple is placed on an open book.
   New caption: An apple is placed under an open book.

   Original caption: There is a black cat.
   New caption: There is a black cat.


     V ISUAL ATTRIBUTE RULES AND I N -C ONTEXT E XAMPLES
   Change the visual attributes of objects in the given caption.
   The new visual attributes should be different from the
   original visual attributes.
   The new visual attributes should be realistic, and is
   visually different from the original visual attributes.
   You should fix the consistency of the caption. If you change
   the visual attributes, you should also change the noun, verb,
   etc. so that there is no grammar error.
   Do not change anything not related to visual attributes, even
   there are visual attributes present.

   For example,
   Original caption: A man is sitting on a marble bench.
   New caption: A man is sitting on a wooden bench.

   Original caption: A red apple is placed on a table.
   New caption: A green apple is placed on a table.

   Original caption: A corgi dog is sitting on a chair.
   New caption: A corgi dog is sitting on a couch.


     ATTRIBUTE B INDING RULES AND I N -C ONTEXT E XAMPLES
   Change the attribute bindings of many objects in the given
   caption.



                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Definition of attribute binding is that the attribute of
   an object is bound to the object. Changing the attribute
   binding means swap the attributes of many different objects.
   The new attribute bindings should be different from the
   original attribute bindings.
   The new attribute bindings should be realistic, and is
   visually different from the original attribute bindings.
   You should fix the consistency of the caption. If you change
   the attribute bindings, you should also change the noun,
   verb, etc. so that there is no grammar error.
   Do not change anything not related to attribute bindings,
   even there are attribute bindings present.
   Do not add or deletes any objects and attributes other than
   changing the attribute bindings.

   For example,
   Original caption: A man is sitting on a bench and a woman is
   sitting on a chair.
   New caption: A man is sitting on a chair and a woman is
   sitting on a bench.

   Original caption: A red apple and a stack of blue books are
   on a table.
   New caption: A blue apple and a stack of red books are on a
   table.

   Original caption: An apple made of aluminum and a chair made
   of wood are on display at the art museum.
   New caption: An apple made of wood and a chair made of
   aluminum are on display at the art museum.

   Original caption: Two yellow cats are chasing one flurry
   blue ball of yarn.
   New caption: Two blue cats are chasing one flurry red ball
   of yarn.


     O BJECT I DENTIFICATION RULES AND I N -C ONTEXT E XAMPLES
   Change the object identifications in the given caption.
   Definition for object identification is that the entity of an
   object, e.g., a book, a man, a dog, a table, etc.
   The new object should be different from the original object.
   The new object should be realistic, and is visually different
   from the original object.
   If possible, you can make the new object subtly different
   from the original object. For example, change a corgi dog to
   a dachshund dog.
   You should fix the consistency of the caption. If you change
   the object, you should also change the noun, verb, etc. so
   that there is no grammar error.
   Do not change anything not related to object identification,
   even there are object identifications present.
   Do not add or deletes any objects and attributes other than
   changing the object identification.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Here are some valid examples
   Original caption: A man is sitting on a bench.
   New caption: A man is sitting on a chair.

   Original caption: A red apple is placed on a table.
   New caption: A red apple is placed on a bench.

   Original caption: A corgi dog is sitting on a chair.
   New caption: A dachshund dog is sitting on a couch.


     C OUNTING RULES AND I N -C ONTEXT E XAMPLES
   Change the counting of one object in the given caption to a
   different number.
   The new number should be different from the original number.
   The new number should be realistic, and is not so different
   from the original number.
   You should fix the consistency of the caption. If you change
   the number, you should also change the noun, verb, etc. so
   that there is no grammar error.
   Only change the counting of one object in the caption. Do
   not change the number of other objects.
   Do not change anything not related to counting, even there
   are numbers present.
   Do not change things related to written texts in quotation
   marks. For example, the original caption has A man wears a
   shirt with text ’cute cat’ written on it. DO NOT change the
   caption to A man wears a shirt with text ’cute cats’ written
   on it.
   Do not change things ralated to time in the caption. For
   example, the original caption has The clock reads 13:00. DO
   NOT change the caption to The clock reads 14:00.
   Do not change things related to proportions. For example,
   the orginal caption has The book covers 2/3 of the table. Do
   NOT change the caption to The book covers 3/4 of the table.
   You can change the caption to Two books cover 2/3 of the
   table instead.
   If there are no counting in the caption, you should simply
   copy the original caption.

   Here are some valid examples
   Original caption: There are five cats on the table and they
   are black.
   New caption: There are seven cats on the table and they are
   black.

   Original caption: There are two dogs standing on the chairs,
   one is white and one is black.
   New caption: There are three dogs standing on the chairs,
   one is white and the other two are brown.

   Original caption: A side view of a Rouen duck that is brown
   and tan and in some water. It is facing to the right.
   New caption: A side view of two Rouen ducks that are brown
   and tan and in some water. They are facing to the right.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Original caption: A pair of stop sign poles on a street.
   New caption: Three stop sign poles on a street.

   Original caption: The sky is blue.
   New caption: The sky is blue.


     S MALL O BJECTS RULES AND I N -C ONTEXT E XAMPLES
   Change the small and background objects in the given caption.
   The new small and background objects should be subtly
   different. You can change their counts, size, shape, color,
   etc.
   You should ONLY change very small, neglible, background
   objects, that are explictly described as so in the caption.
   For example, you can pay attention to words like tiny, small,
   mini, micro, nano, pico, femto, nano, micro, milli, etc.
   If there are no small objects in the caption, you should
   simply copy the original caption.

   For example,
   Original caption: A man is sitting on a bench, in a library
   with a white background board. On the bookshelf, there is a
   tiny crystal superman figure standing on a stack of books.
   New caption: A man is sitting on a bench, in a library with
   a black background board. On the bookshelf, there is a tiny
   plastic batman figure standing in front of a stack of books.

   Original caption: A man is sitting on a bench, in a library
   with a white background board.
   New caption: A man is sitting on a bench, in a library with
   a black background board.


     T EXT OCR RULES AND I N -C ONTEXT E XAMPLES
   Change the text OCR in the image caption to a different text.
   The new text should be different from the original text.
   The new text should be realistic to the context, and is
   visually different from the original text.
   You should fix the consistency of the caption. If you change
   the text, you should also change the noun, verb, etc. so
   that there is no grammar error.
   Do not change anything not related to text, even there are
   texts present.
   If there are no texts OCR present in the caption, you should
   find a place to put some reasonable text OCR. If you can’t
   find a place to put some reasonable text OCR, you should
   simply copy the original caption.

   For example,
   Original caption: A man is wearing a shirt with texts
   ’SUPERMAN’.
   New caption: A man is wearing a shirt with texts ’BATMAN’.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Original caption: The digital clock reads 12:00 AM.
   New caption: The digital clock reads 12:08 PM.

   Original caption: The road sign says ’STOP’.
   New caption: The road sign says ’YIELD’.

   Original caption: The board says ’Best College in the US’.
   New caption: The board says ’Best College in the World’.

   Original caption: A man wearing yellow shirt is sitting on
   the bench.
   New caption: A man wearing yellow shirt with words ’Hello
   World’ is sitting on the bench.


      C OUNTERFACTUAL RULES AND I N -C ONTEXT E XAMPLES
   Change the caption with counterfactuals.
   The new caption should be different from the original
   caption.
   The new caption should be realistic, and is visually
   different from the original caption. You should fix the
   consistency of the caption. If you change the caption, you
   should also change the noun, verb, etc. so that there is no
   grammar error.
   Do not change anything not related to counterfactuals, even
   there are counterfactuals present.
   Do not add or deletes any objects and attributes other than
   changing the counterfactuals.
   If it’s hard to put in counterfactual, you should simply copy
   the original caption.

   For example,
   Original caption: A man is sitting on a bench.
   New caption: A man is not sitting on a bench.

   Original caption: A red apple is placed on a table.
   New caption: A red apple is not placed on a table.

   Original caption: A soldier.
   New caption: A soldier has no sword in hand.


A.4   S TATISTICS OF DATA


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                           T RAIN S ET
      TASK          Data Source         TAXONOMY            # P OSITIVE   # N EGATIVE
                                                                                        P ROPORTION (%)
      VQA            VG100K                  —              1,179,007      1,179,007
                                     Spatial Relation                       45,225
                                     Visual Attribute                       86,366
                                     Attribute Binding                      59,219
    Image          Synthetic        Object Identification                   75,328           80%
                   Caption from                               94,684
    Caption                              Counting                           75,156
                   VG100K              Small Object                         80,455
                                         Text OCR                           84,164
                                      Counterfactual                        57,153
                                     Spatial Relation                        8,867
                                     Visual Attribute                       13,811
                                     Attribute Binding                      13,561
    Image                           Object Identification                   10,618
                      DOCCI                                   14,639                         65%
    Caption                              Counting                           10,491
                                       Small Object                         11,680
                                         Text OCR                           13,366
                                      Counterfactual                        12,844

Table 7: Statistics of Data. Overall, we have over 1M VQA data with both positive and negative
answers, and over 100K caption datapoints with 650K negative captions. We oberserve that we have
the least amount of spatial relationship data, because spatial relationship negatives are the hardest to
synthesize and not every caption has spatial relationship descriptions.


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     T RAINING AND M ODEL P ERFORMANCE
B.1   M ODEL T RAINING S ETUP AND H YPERPARAMETERS

In the section, we present all the (hyper-)paramters we used to training TLDR model.

                           Hyperparameters for training TLDR Model
                  Base Model                     PaliGemma-3B-Mix-448
                  Image Resolution                        448 × 448
                  Number of Image Tokens                    1024
                  Hidden Dimension Size                     2048
                  LoRA Rank                                  512
                  LoRA α                                     128
                  LoRA dropout                               0.1
                  GPU                                 8 × NVIDIA H100
                  Batch Size                                  8
                  Gradient Accumulation Steps                 8
                  Warmup Steps                               200
                  Learning Rate                             0.001
                  Learning Rate Scheduler                  Cosine

      Table 8: Hyperparameters for training TLDR Model with PaliGemma Backbone.


                           Hyperparameters for training TLDR Model
                  Base Model                     Llama-3.2-11B-Vision
                  Image Resolution                       1120 × 1120
                  Number of Image Tokens                    1024
                  Hidden Dimension Size                     4096
                  LoRA Rank                                  512
                  LoRA α                                     128
                  LoRA dropout                               0.1
                  GPU                                 8 × NVIDIA H100
                  Batch Size                                  8
                  Gradient Accumulation Steps                 8
                  Warmup Steps                               200
                  Learning Rate                             0.001
                  Learning Rate Scheduler                  Cosine

      Table 9: Hyperparameters for training TLDR Model with Llama Vision Backbone.


B.2   P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION

In this section, we present TLDR model’s performance by taxonomy, and its comparison to the
naive binary RM and TLDR’s ablations discussed in Section 5. We also provide the ablation study
on TLDR’s design choices in Table 11.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                         A BLATION
    Taxonomy                         Naive RM           TLDR (ours)
                                                                                  Only fproj     Only fdec
    Spatial Relationship               74.1                  60.2                 50.0 (-10.2)       51.8 (-8.4)
    Visual Attribute                   89.8                  89.8                 54.7 (-35.1)       89.8 (±0.0)
    Attribute Binding                  88.1                  90.6                 55.0 (-35.6)       85.0 (-5.6)
    Object Identification              73.2                  90.6                 51.4 (-39.2)       86.9 (-3.7)
    Counting                           71.0                  73.9                 50.7 (-23.2)       68.1 (-5.8)
    Small Object                       79.0                  75.0                 51.6 (-23.4)       71.8 (-3.2)
    Text OCR                           82.6                  86.5                 52.2 (-34.3)       83.7 (-2.8)
    Counterfactual                     87.3                  90.0                 53.3 (-36.7)       89.3 (-0.7)
    OVERALL                            81.1                  83.1                 52.5 (-30.6)        79.4 (-3.7)

Table 10: Response-Level Accuracy by Taxonomy. We find that overall TLDR models have higher
response-level accuracy except for spatial relationship and small objects. We suspect the cause is
from a brutal conversion
               Q           of prediction from token-level to response level: by taking the product
ργ (m, p, d) = e∈d γ(e | m, p, d), any single token e has the power to veto the entire response d.
In delicate and subtle instances such as spatial relationship and small objects, such veto power by
any single token is too brutal, and a more elegant conversion from token-level probabilities Pγ (e |
m, p, d) could be interesting for future work.


           Multimodal       Gemma Decoder     Token-Level        Sentence-Level    Response-Level     mAP
         Projection fproj       fdec          Accuracy AT         Accuracy AS       Accuracy AR     (neg|pos)
                ✓                ✓               98.6                 86.5              83.1        (41.3|99.8)
                ✓                                97.4                 80.0              52.5        (18.2|99.2)
                                 ✓               98.3                 84.8              79.4        (38.2|99.7)


Table 11: Ablation Study on PaliGemma-3B Base Model. It shows that unfreezing gradients on
both linear projection layer fproj and the transformer decoder layers fdec are meaningful. Without
tuning fdec , the model barely works, and without fproj , as shown in Table 10, the model is less
visually grounded, especially on spatial relationship and counting.


                                                            27
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  B.3         C ORRELATION B ETWEEN M ODEL P ERFORMANCE AND T OKEN -L EVEL
              H ALLUCINATION R ATE

 This section, we draw plots to back our conjecture in Eq. 7 that,for any VLM ξ,
                                           Performance(ξ) ∝ − log HT (ξ)
 As shown in Figure 6, the linear correlation is very significant both visually and backed by the small
 p-value.


                      MMMU = -6.51 × log( TokenLevel) + 3.96 (p-value: 3.458e-04)
             70       Models                                                                       GPT-4o


                                                                                                        Llama 3.2 90B
             60                                                                           GPT-4o Mini
                                                                                         GPT-4 Vision
                                                                                  Qwen2-VL 7B
MMMU Score


             50                                                                 Llama 3.2 11B
                                                                                MiniCPM V2.5
                                                               Phi Vision

             40                                                                  Qwen2-VL 2B


             30
                            PaliGemma-3B



             20
                  2     3            4            5            6            7           8               9           10
                                                      -log( TokenLevel)
 Figure 5: There is a strong linear correlation between model performance (evaluated by MMMU)
 and the negative log hallucination rate − log(HT ), which is an approxy to model’s negative log-
 likelihood of producing a correct token. The p-value of this linear correlation is 3.458e-4.


                                                          28
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                Models
                   60                           MEGA-Bench = -11.51 × log( TokenLevel) - 53.57
                                                                                          GPT-4o


                   50
MEGA-Bench Score


                                                                           GPT-4o Mini

                   40
                                                         Qwen2-VL 7B


                   30
                           Phi Vision                 MiniCPM V2.5
                                                       Qwen2-VL 2B

                   20                               Llama 3.2 11B


                   10
                     5.5                6.0   6.5       7.0        7.5           8.0     8.5       9.0
                                                       -log( TokenLevel)
   Figure 6: There is a strong linear correlation between model performance (evaluated by MEGA-
   Bench) and the negative log hallucination rate − log(HT ), which is a proxy to model’s negative
   log-likelihood of producing a correct token. The p-value of this linear correlation is 0.047.


                                                             29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    S ELF C ORRECTION

In the section, we present two exemplar prompts used for self-correction – one with TLDR’s guid-
ance and the other with only naive binary RM’s guidance saying the original generation is wrong.
The displayed image is from WinoGround.
Note: For better visualization, we highlight the TLDR Model’s annotations in red when presenting
the TLDR prompts.

     S ELF C ORRECTION WITH TLDR’ S G UIDANCE


    Image:
    You task to make the provided ‘Response’ to the ‘Text Query’
    better aligned with the given image.
    The ‘Response’ has several sentences with issues that you
    need to take a closer look at. Focus on the image more
    when looking at the highlighted words or phrases in these
    sentences.
    Here are some rules to keep in mind:

    1. Your edited response should be as close as possible to
    the original response (minimal edits) but without the errors.
    2. You should try to fix the errors by only changing
    the highlighted words. If you think these words are
    hallucinated, after looking closely at the image again, you
    can delete them.
    3. If you think you can’t do minimal edits, you can rewrite
    the whole sentences with errors. However, do not rewrite
    sentences without any annotated errors.
    4. For sentences not enumerated, you can simply copy them
    if your changes won’t affect them. If you changes to other
    marked sentences will also change the meaning of the unmarked
    sentences, you can change them as well. Please make the
    whole paragraph coherent.
    5. The highlighted words that require extra attention are
    not necessarily always incorrect. If you think they align
    well with the image, you can keep them as is. After you
    look closer to the image, use your own judgement to decide
    if they need to be changed, deleted, or kept. You may change
    or delete the highlighted tokens if you think they are not
    aligned with the image. Otherwise, you can keep them as is.

    Text Query:       Describe the image in details.

    Response: The image shows a creative arrangement of colorful
    Lego bricks forming a shape that resembles a cat. The bricks
    are in various colors such as yellow, pink, and green. There
    are two white paper boats placed on top of the Lego cat,
    one on the left and one on the right side. The background



                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   is a plain, light color, providing a neutral backdrop that
   highlights the colorful Lego cat.

   Please take a closer look at these words or phrases:        Lego,
   Lego bricks, Lego cat, bricks, cat.

   Now we break them into their corresponding sentences to
   provide you with more context.

   Please fix the sentence "The image shows a creative
   arrangement of colorful Lego bricks forming a shape that
   resembles a cat" with more attention to the following words:
   Lego bricks, cat.

   Please fix the sentence "The bricks are in various colors
   such as yellow, pink, and green" with more attention to the
   following words: bricks.

   Please fix the sentence "There are two white paper boats
   placed on top of the Lego cat, one on the left and one on
   the right side" with more attention to the following words:
   Lego.

   Please fix the sentence "The background is a plain, light
   color, providing a neutral backdrop that highlights the
   colorful Lego cat" with more attention to the following
   words: Lego cat.

   Please correct all the errors. Do not start or end the
   edited response with anything extra.

   Corrected Response:


     S ELF C ORRECTION WITH NAIVE RM’ S G UIDANCE ( NO TLDR)


   Image:
   You task to make the provided ‘Response’ to the ‘Text Query’
   better aligned with the given image.
   Here are some rules to keep in mind:

   1. Your edited response should be as close as possible to
   the original response (minimal edits) but without the errors.
   2. If you think you can’t do minimal edits, you can rewrite
   the whole sentences with errors. However, do not rewrite
   sentences without any annotated errors.

   Text Query:        Describe the image in details.



                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Response: The image shows a creative arrangement of colorful
    Lego bricks forming a shape that resembles a cat. The bricks
    are in various colors such as yellow, pink, and green. There
    are two white paper boats placed on top of the Lego cat,
    one on the left and one on the right side. The background
    is a plain, light color, providing a neutral backdrop that
    highlights the colorful Lego cat.

    Please correct all the errors. Do not start or end the
    edited response with anything extra.

    Corrected Response:


D    L IMITATIONS
In this work, we mainly studied natural images, and whether training on natural images can extend
robustly to diagrams, OCR, and more complex text-rich images is still unknown. However, we
believe that as long as the training and testing distributions are similar, i.e., extending TLDR training
set to text-rich images, it should also succeed. We will leave this thoughtful extension to future
works. Although self-correcting smaller and less powerful models with TLDR guidance shows
success, we also acknowledge the potential limitations of self-correcting more powerful models
such as GPT-4o, which hallucinate less frequently, and running TLDR on each of its outputs could
be costly and unrewarding. Nonetheless, it would also be nice and interesting to study if a much
smaller model (e.g. Qwen2-VL-7B) with the TLDR guidance, can self-correct itself to reach GPT-4o
level performance.


                                                   32
