Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D IVIDE AND T RANSLATE : C OMPOSITIONAL F IRST-
O RDER L OGIC T RANSLATION AND V ERIFICATION FOR
C OMPLEX L OGICAL R EASONING
 Hyun Ryu1 Gyeongman Kim1 Hyemin S. Lee2 Eunho Yang1
 1
  KAIST 2 MIT
 {ryuhyun1905,gmkim,eunhoy}@kaist.ac.kr, hmstella@mit.edu



                                              A BSTRACT
           Complex logical reasoning tasks require a long sequence of reasoning, which a
           large language model (LLM) with chain-of-thought prompting still falls short.
           To alleviate this issue, neurosymbolic approaches incorporate a symbolic solver.
           Specifically, an LLM only translates a natural language problem into a satisfiabil-
           ity (SAT) problem that consists of first-order logic formulas, and a sound symbolic
           solver returns a mathematically correct solution. However, we discover that LLMs
           have difficulties to capture complex logical semantics hidden in the natural lan-
           guage during translation. To resolve this limitation, we propose a Compositional
           First-Order Logic Translation. An LLM first parses a natural language sentence
           into newly defined logical dependency structures that consist of an atomic sub-
           sentence and its dependents, then sequentially translate the parsed subsentences.
           Since multiple logical dependency structures and sequential translations are pos-
           sible for a single sentence, we also introduce two Verification algorithms to ensure
           more reliable results. We utilize an SAT solver to rigorously compare semantics of
           generated first-order logic formulas and select the most probable one. We evaluate
           the proposed method, dubbed CLOVER, on seven logical reasoning benchmarks
           and show that it outperforms the previous neurosymbolic approaches and achieves
           new state-of-the-art results.1

1        I NTRODUCTION
Logical reasoning involves reaching conclusions through a structured process. It entails drawing
inferences by converting information provided in a set of premises into a final conclusion (Nunes,
2012; Bronkhorst et al., 2020). Logical reasoning ability is one of the most challenging metrics to
measure intelligence. As a model size grows exponentially, large language models (LLMs) (Brown
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Thoppilan et al., 2022) unlock the ability of machine to reason.
Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting (Wei et al., 2022) significantly improve the performance of
LLMs on simple logical reasoning tasks that require few forward reasoning steps. However, CoT
falls short in complex logical reasoning tasks which need longer sequence of reasoning (Ye et al.,
2024; Pan et al., 2023). To resolve this issue, several neurosymbolic approaches (Ye et al., 2024; Pan
et al., 2023; Kirtania et al., 2024; Olausson et al., 2023) utilize an LLM with a symbolic solver (e.g.,
an SAT solver) on these complex logical reasoning tasks by the following two steps: 1) an LLM
translates the natural language logical reasoning problem into a set of first-order logic formulas, 2)
a symbolic solver automatically plans the reasoning steps and executes those to predict an answer of
the logical reasoning problem. These approaches take advantages by considering an LLM only as
a semantic parser (i.e., a first-order logic translator), which can avoid planning and execution errors
by using a symbolic solver.
However, we have discovered that LLMs still cannot translate sentences that represent complex
first-order logic. Our experimental evidence in Fig. 1a presents the drastic performance drop of the
previous work (Pan et al., 2023) on complex first-order logic translation.2 The result indicates that an
     1
    The source code used in the paper is available at https://github.com/Hyun-Ryu/clover.
     2
    To evaluate the complexity and performance of each first-order logic formula, we sample the first problem
from each set of problems that share the same context in the AR-LSAT test set and manually annotate the


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



(a)                                                                      (b)
                                                                          The Sales division is toured on two consecutive days, and on no other days.
                                           Logic-LM     CLOVER
                                                                                                                             Directly translate
                            100
                                                                                                                       Logic-LM
 Translation accuracy (%)    90                                                                ∃𝑑 ∶ 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 𝑡𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑑 = 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠 ∧ 𝑡𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑑 + 1 = 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠
                                                                                              ∧ (∀𝑑 ∶ 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠)( 𝑡𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑑 ≠ 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠 ∧ 𝑡𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑑 + 1 ≠ 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠 →
                             80                                                                𝑡𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑑 ≠ 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠 )
                                                                               1. Divide
                             70
                                                                                                            CLOVER
                             60
                                                                          1) The Sales division is toured.
                             50                                           2) The Sales division is toured on two consecutive days.
                                                                          3) The Sales division is toured on two consecutive days, and on no other days.
                             40
                                                                               2. Translate
                             30
                                  0   2    4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20    1) ∃𝑑 ∶ 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 𝑡𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑑 = 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠
                                          First-Order Logic Complexity    2) ∃𝑑 ∶ 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 𝑡𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑑 = 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠 ∧ 𝑡𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑑 + 1 = 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠
                                                                          3) ∃𝑑 ∶ 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 (𝑡𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑑 = 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠 ∧ 𝑡𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑑 + 1 = 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠 ∧ ∀𝑥 ∶ 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 ((𝑥 ≠ 𝑑 ∧
                                                                          𝑥 ≠ 𝑑 + 1) → 𝑡𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑥 ≠ 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠 ))


Figure 1: Comparison of a first-order logic translation of the proposed CLOVER and Logic-LM with
gpt-4o on AR-LSAT. (a) Translation accuracy at different levels of first-order logic complexity.
We group the formulas in one of five complexity ranges and report the averaged performance for
each range. (b) A representative example. Given declarations of sorts and functions, each method
translates the natural language sentence into the corresponding first-order logic formula. We colorize
incorrect translation as red for visualization purpose.
LLM performs first-order logic translation faithfully to a certain degree of complexity but falls short
beyond that limit. A representative example in Fig. 1b presents an incorrect output of the previous
work (Pan et al., 2023) on complex first-order logic translation. The task is to translate a sentence
“The Sales division is toured on two consecutive days, and on no other days.” into a corresponding
first-order logic formula given declarations. An LLM correctly translates a natural language clause
“The Sales division is toured on two consecutive days.” into a subformula (∃d : days) (toured(d) =
Sales) ∧ (toured(d + 1) = Sales) which contains simple logic, but fails to translate “and on no other
days” which represents more complex logic. Specifically, the incorrectly translated subformula
is always true, which has no semantic meaning. After further extensive qualitative error analysis
(Appendix K), we conclude that LLMs show promising performance on simple first-order logic
translations but does not on complex ones, and the reason is that LLMs have difficulties to discover
complex logical structures hidden behind the natural language.
To resolve this limitation, we take a hint from how humans perceive a complex logical sentence to
their mind and how they translate it to a first-order logic formula. Since it is hard to immediately
comprehend the semantics of a complex logical sentence, humans first understand the semantics
of a simpler subsentence and then understand the whole (Montague et al., 1970; Frazier & Fodor,
1978; Sweller, 1988). Inspired by this observation, we use LLM to find the atomic subsentence that
does not contain any complex logic and understand other sentence components as dependents of the
atomic subsentence. Then, starting with the atomic subsentence, we use LLM to translate subsen-
tences by accumulating sentence components. This could help LLM to preserve first-order logic
semantics during translation. To rigorously define the atomic subsentence and sentence compo-
nents with logical meaning, we introduce a new parsing method for natural language that represents
first-order logic, called logical dependency parsing (Section 3.1).
Based on logical dependency parsing, we propose a compositional first-order logic translation (Sec-
tion 3.2) by few-shot learning with an LLM. It consists of the following three steps: logical depen-
dency parsing, component accumulation, and sequential translation. First, a target sentence is parsed
into logical dependency structures which consist of components of the sentence and their logical
dependencies. Second, components are accumulated while preserving their logical dependencies,
where the last accumulated sentence is the target sentence. Finally, each accumulated sentence is
sequentially translated into first-order logic formula in the order of accumulations, where the last
formula is an estimated formula of the target sentence.
Not only that, since there could be multiple outputs on logical dependency parsing and sequential
translation, we introduce verification algorithms to ensure more reliable first-order logic transla-
ground truth formulas. Detailed information of measuring complexity is in Appendix B and the process of the
annotated subset construction is described in Appendix F.


                                                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tion (Section 3.3). We propose two verification algorithms: logical consistency and disproving by
counter-interpretation. To fully leverage the deterministic nature of first-order logic, we use an SAT
solver to compare any two formulas. Logical consistency selects the most frequent logically equiv-
alent formulas. However, we observe that an LLM sometimes make logically consistent translation
errors. To overcome such a limitation, we devise disproving by counter-interpretation. It sequen-
tially compares two formulas and disprove one of them by determining if a counter-interpretation to
equivalence of two formulas satisfies the target sentence. The last formula remained is then selected.
To save computational cost, we compare each one of logically equivalent formulas.
We evaluate the proposed CLOVER, a Compositional First-Order Logic Translation and
Verification, on seven logical reasoning benchmarks (Section 4). CLOVER outperforms the pre-
vious neurosymbolic approaches and achieves the new state-of-the-art performance. It also signif-
icantly enhances the first-order logic translation accuracy across all levels of complexity and the
largest performance gain occurs at the highest first-order logic complexity (Fig. 1a).
To summarize our contributions,
 1. We introduce CLOVER, a novel neurosymbolic approach that enhances complex logical rea-
     soning in LLMs by compositional translation of natural language into first-order logic and
     verification of logical semantics.
 2. We newly define a logical dependency structure to decompose logical sentences while preserv-
     ing an underlying first-order logic semantics.
 3. We also propose two SAT-based first-order logic verification algorithms that can faithfully se-
     lect a correctly translated formula.
 4. We evaluate CLOVER on seven logical reasoning benchmarks and show that CLOVER out-
     performs the previous neurosymbolic apporoaches and achieves the new state-of-the-art per-
     formance.

2       P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Through the lens of (many-sorted) first-order logic3 , a logical reasoning problem x is a natural
language description of a Σ-theory T 4 , constraints Φ, and a query q, denoted as x = N L(T , Φ, q).
A Σ-theory T is a non-empty set of any Σ-structure where a signature Σ = (S, F, P ) consists of
sorts S, function symbols F , and predicate symbols P . Hereinafter, we denote the vocabulary of
first-order logic as italic for clarity, and omit the prefix “Σ-” for simplicity. A structure of a theory
indicates the semantics of formulas. Constraints Φ are a set of formulas that are true, denoted as
Φ = {ϕ1 , ϕ2 , · · · , ϕK }. A query q is also a formula which is yet determined as true, false, or
unknown given the constraints Φ.

Prior works. Prior neurosymbolic approaches (Ye et al., 2024; Pan et al., 2023; Kirtania et al.,
2024; Olausson et al., 2023) directly translate the logical reasoning problem x into a set of first-
order logic using an LLM and then employ a symbolic solver (e.g., an SAT solver) to solve an SAT
problem. In these methods, an LLM performs a single inference for the first-order logic translation
as follows:
                      T̂ , {φ̂k , NˆL(φk )}K+1                              K+1
                                            k=1 ∼ PLLM (T , {φk , N L(φk )}k=1 | x, xfs )             (1)
where φk = ϕk for 1 ≤ k ≤ K and φK+1 = q, and a few-shot exemplar set xfs =
                  (i)          (i)    (i)
{x(i) , T (i) , {φk , N L(φk )}K     k=1
                                          +1 N
                                            }i=1 with the size of the set N . However, it often generates
more than one formulas for a single target sentence or generates a formula which is a translation of
combination of a target sentence and part of other sentences. Though it might be logically correct
as a whole, we cannot further analyze and verify the translation at a sentence-level.

First-order logic translation. To resolve this drawback, we perform first-order logic translation
for each sentence. Since sentence-level translations require a pre-defined theory and target sen-
tences, we first generate a theory T̂ and a set of natural language sentences {NˆL(φk )}K+1
                                                                                        k=1 from
    3
     Many-sorted first-order logic is one of the variants of the standard first-order logic that allows variables to
have different domains, which is called sorts S. We provide related preliminaries in Appendix A.
   4
     A theory assigns specific meanings to symbols of formulas. For simplicity, we presume that a theory T
incorporates the most commonly applied theories (e.g., theory of equality, arithmetic, etc.).


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


x, and then generate T̂ -satisfiable formula φ̂k for each sentence NˆL(φk ). To be specific, the sin-
gle inference by the LLM in Eq. 1 is separated into the following two steps: 1) given a logical
                                                                                      (i)  (i)
reasoning problem x and a few-shot exemplar set xprep    fs  = {x(i) , T (i) , {N L(φk )}Kk=1
                                                                                               +1 N
                                                                                                 }i=1 , the
LLM generates a tuple of an estimated theory and a set of natural language sentences, denoted
xprep = (T̂ , {NˆL(φk )}K+1 k=1 ), 2) given the theory T̂ and a set of few-shot exemplar sets Xfs , the
proposed CLOVER translates each natural language sentence NˆL(φk ) into the estimated formula
φ̂k that is T̂ -satisfiable as follows:
                                                                     prep
              T̂ , {NˆL(φk )}K+1                            K+1
                              k=1 ∼ PLLM (T , {N L(φk )}k=1 | x, xfs )
                                                                                                        (2)
                                φ̂k = CLOVER(T̂ , NˆL(φk ), Xfs ), ∀k ∈ {1, 2, · · · , K + 1}.
A detailed description of the set of few-shot exemplar sets Xfs = {xparse   accum
                                                                      fs , xfs     , xtrans disprv
                                                                                      fs , xfs     } and
the proposed CLOVER for xprep = (T̂ , {NˆL(φk )}K+1
                                                  k=1  ) will be discussed in  the  following  section.

SAT problem solving. Once estimations of the theory T̂ , constraints Φ̂ = {φ̂1 , φ̂2 , · · · , φ̂K }, and
a query q̂ = φ̂K+1 are completed for the logical reasoning problem x, these form an SAT problem
P = (T̂ , Φ̂, q̂). An automated SAT solver then determines the T̂ -satisfiability5 of the query q̂ under
the constraints Φ̂, which is a final prediction of an answer of the logical reasoning problem x. We
use a Z3 theorem prover (De Moura & Bjørner, 2008) as an SAT solver in the implementation.

3       CLOVER
In this section, we propose CLOVER, a Compositional First-Order Logic Translation and
Verification for complex logical reasoning. To fully capture first-order logic semantics in natural
language, it first parses a single natural language sentence into logical dependency structures. Then,
it sequentially translates parsed subsentences with an LLM. Since there are multiple ways to parse
and translate the sentences, we also introduce two SAT-based verification algorithms to thoroughly
compare semantics of translated first-order logic formulas.

3.1       L OGICAL D EPENDENCY S TRUCTURES

Logical dependency structure A of a sentence N L(φ) under the theory T where φ is T -satisfiable
is defined by components and their logical dependencies. First, components are natural language
building blocks of logical dependency structures of a sentence, which consist of logic units U , logic
couplers C, and logic dependents D. The following definitions formally describe each of them.
Definition 1 (Logic units). Given a sentence N L(φ) and a theory T where φ is T -satisfiable, logic
units U are the natural language descriptions of an atom of φ.
Definition 2 (Logic couplers). Logic couplers C are either conjunctions or an operator named
merge. Merge combines two logic units which contain the natural language describing the same
term without adding any conjunction.
Definition 3 (Logic dependents). Logic dependents D are components neither logic units nor logic
couplers which logically depend on another component.
Second, we define logical dependency between two components, and the following definition for-
mally describes it.
Definition 4 (Logical dependency). The component X is said to logically depend on the component
Y in the given sentence if and only if the meaning of Y is (or includes) a predicate and the meaning
of X is an argument of this predicate in the sentence.
We also introduce properties of logical dependency structure stemmed from its definition.
Remark 1. A given sentence and theory can have multiple logical dependency structures.
Remark 2. All components except for one should logically depend on another component.
Remark 3. No logic dependent logically depends on a logic coupler.
We present examples of logical dependency structures in Fig. 2 and in Appendix D.
    5
        For AR-LSAT, we need to check the T̂ -validity depending on the problem. More details in Appendix E.


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Overview of CLOVER. Given declarations of a theory, CLOVER parses a target sentence
to several possible logical dependency structures, accumulates components according to logical de-
pendencies, and sequentially translates subsentences to first-order logic formulas. Then, CLOVER
verifies a set of estimated formulas. Logical consistency selects the most frequent logically equiv-
alent formulas. Disproving by counter-interpretation sequentially compares two formulas and dis-
prove one by determining if a counter-interpretation satisfies the target sentence.
3.2   C OMPOSITIONAL F IRST-O RDER L OGIC T RANSLATION

To compositionally translate natural language sentences to first-order logic formulas under given
theory for xprep = (T̂ , {NˆL(φk )}K+1
                                   k=1 ), we adhere to the following three steps by few-shot learning
with an LLM. We describe the following steps for a single target sentence NˆL(φ) of a formula
φ ∈ {φk }K+1
          k=1 .

Logical Dependency Parsing. In the first step, a target sentence is parsed into different possi-
ble logical dependency structures. An LLM is given a definition of logical dependency struc-
tures (Section 3.1), a target sentence NˆL(φ) and its theory T̂ , and a few-shot exemplar set
                                (i)  (i)
xparse
  fs   = {T (i) , N L(φ(i) ), {Al }L     N
                                    l=1 }i=1 for logical dependency parsing. L
                                                                              (i)
                                                                                  is a size of a set


                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of different possible logical dependency structures of a sentence N L(φ(i) ) under the theory T (i) ,
and N is a size of the few-shot exemplar set. Then, LLM generates a set of different possible logical
dependency structures {Âl }L̂
                             l=1 of the target sentence with the size of the set L̂ as follows:

                                                                  ˆ       parse
                        L̂, {Âl }L̂                  L
                                  l=1 ∼ PLLM (L, {Al }l=1 | T̂ , N L(φ), xfs ).
                                                                                                       (3)

Component Accumulation. In the second step, components of a logical dependency structure
are accumulated to gradually compose new sentences until those reach the target sentence. We
present the rules for component accumulation in Appendix C. An LLM is given a definition of
logical dependency structures (Section 3.1), rules for component accumulation (Appendix C), a
target sentence NˆL(φ) and one of its logical dependency structures Âl where l ∈ {1, 2, · · · , L̂}, and
                                                        (i)   (i)
a few-shot exemplar set xaccum
                          fs    = {N L(φ(i) ), A(i) , (Sm )M       N
                                                            m=1 }i=1 for component accumulation.
   (i) M (i)                                                 (i)
(Sm )m=1 is a sequence of accumulated sentences where M is the length of the sequence. Then,
LLM generates a sequence of sentences (Ŝl,m )M̂m=1 where M̂l is the length of the estimated sequence
                                                 l

as follows:
        M̂l , (Ŝl,m )M̂                      Ml     ˆ             accum                               (4)
                      m=1 ∼ PLLM (Ml , (Sl,m )m=1 | N L(φ), Âl , xfs    ), ∀l ∈ {1, 2, · · · , L̂}.
                         l



The last sentence of accumulation Ŝl,M̂l is the target sentence NˆL(φ). We present examples of
component accumulation in Appendix D.

Sequential Translation. In the last step, accumulated natural language sentences are sequentially
translated into first-order logic formulas, which the target sentence is finally translated. An LLM is
given a sequence of accumulated sentences (Ŝl,m )M̂m=1 of a target sentence where l ∈ {1, 2, · · · , L̂},
                                                      l

                                                               (i)   (i)    (i) M (i) N
a theory T̂ , and a few-shot exemplar set xtrans
                                             fs   = {T (i) , (Sm )Mm=1 , (φm )m=1 }i=1 for first-order
logic translation. Then, LLM generates a sequence of formulas (φ̂l,m )M̂l
                                                                      m=1 as follows:

            (φ̂l,m )M̂                 M̂l                M̂l    trans
                    m=1 ∼ PLLM ((φl,m )m=1 | T̂ , (Ŝl,m )m=1 , xfs ), ∀l ∈ {1, 2, · · · , L̂}.
                      l                                                                                (5)
The last formula of the sequence is the first-order logic translation of the target sentence (i.e., φ̂l =
φ̂l,M̂l ). For ∀l ∈ {1, 2, · · · , L̂}, we could generate a set of estimated formulas Ψ̂ = {φ̂l }L̂
                                                                                                 l=1 for
a target sentence NˆL(φ). In practice, we randomly sample multiple times to enrich the pool of
estimated formulas that benefits the second stage of CLOVER, first-order logic verification.

3.3   F IRST-O RDER L OGIC V ERIFICATION

To select the most probable formula in a set of compositionally translated first-order logic formulas
Ψ̂, we introduce the following two algorithms using an SAT solver (and few-shot learning with an
LLM). As in Section 3.2, we describe the following algorithms for a single target sentence NˆL(φ)
under the theory T̂ (i.e., The algorithms select a verified formula φ∗ in a set of estimated formulas
Ψ̂). Prior to describing the detailed algorithms, we filter out the formulas that are syntactically
incorrect or T̂ -unsatisfiable in Ψ̂ using an SAT solver and call the processed set Ψ̂sat .

Logical Consistency. We select the most frequent logically equivalent formulas, which we call
this algorithm logical consistency. It presumes an LLM utilizes different logical dependency struc-
tures to generate several formulas that are logically equivalent. An LLM might also make mistake
in intermediate steps of compositional first-order logic translation and generate incorrect formulas,
but these are less likely to be logically equivalent. For each pair of formulas (φp , φq ) such that
φp ∈ Ψ̂sat , φq ∈ Ψ̂sat , and p ̸= q, an SAT solver determines their T̂ -equivalence. Then, we group
T̂ -equivalent formulas and select any formula in the group that has the largest number of elements.
However, we observe that an LLM sometimes makes consistent mistakes in the last step of compo-
sitional first-order logic translation, which leads to logically equivalent incorrect formulas.

Disproving by Counter-Interpretation. To resolve this issue, we introduce an advanced algo-
rithm that sequentially disproves incorrect formulas by counter-interpretation. Following this al-


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 First-Order Logic Verification (Disproving by Counter-Interpretation)
    Input: Theory T , a natural language sentence N L(φ) of a first-order logic formula φ, and a set
    of estimated T -satisfiable formulas Ψ̂sat
    Output: Verified formula φ∗
    φ̂0 ∼ Ψ̂sat                                                   ▷ Select an element φ̂0 in Ψ̂sat randomly
    φ∗ ← φ̂0                                                        ▷ Initialize φ∗ to a random element φ̂0
    for each φ̂ ∈ Ψ̂sat \ {φ̂0 } do
       φtemp ← φ∗                                          ▷ Use a temporary variable φtemp for the update
       for each (φp , φq ) ∈ {(φ∗ , φ̂), (φ̂, φ∗ )} do
         if (φp ∧ ¬φq ) is T -satisfiable then
            find T -interpretation I such that I ⊨ (φp ∧ ¬φq )                ▷ SAT solver finds I if it exists
                                            disprv
            ê ∼ PLLM (e | N L(φ), I, xf s         ), e ∈ {⊤, ⊥}                 ▷ LLM determines if I ⊨ φ
            if (φp = φ∗ ∧ ¬ê) or (φp = φ̂ ∧ ê) then
               φtemp ← φ̂
            end if
         end if
       end for
       φ∗ ← φtemp                            ▷ Update φ∗ after checking T -interpretations from both side
    end for
    return φ∗



gorithm, an accurate formula remains the last if it exists in Ψ̂sat . Specifically, we select a ran-
dom element φ̂0 in Ψ̂sat and initialize the verified formula φ∗ to φ̂0 . For each estimated for-
mula φ̂ in Ψ̂sat \ {φ̂0 }, an SAT solver determines if (φ∗ ∧ ¬φ̂) is T̂ -satisfiable. First, if it is T̂ -
satisfiable, an SAT solver finds a counter-interpretation I to a T̂ -equivalence of φ∗ and φ̂ that
satisfies (φ∗ ∧ ¬φ̂). Given a target sentence NˆL(φ), a counter-interpretation I, and a few-shot ex-
emplar set xdisprv
               fs    = {N L(φ)(i) , I (i) , e(i) }N
                                                  i=1 for disproving, an LLM decides if I satisfies φ, which
returns a boolean value ê. If ê is True, then φ̂ is disproved since I does not satisfy φ̂ but satisfies φ.
If ê is False, then φ∗ is disproved since I satisfies φ∗ but does not satisfy φ. Second, if (φ∗ ∧ ¬φ̂) is
T̂ -unsatisfiable, it is equivalent to (φ∗ → φ̂) is T̂ -satisfiable, and no I exists. After repeating this
decision process for (φ̂ ∧ ¬φ∗ ), we can consider a counter-interpretation I that satisfies (φ̂ ∧ ¬φ∗ )
and disproves accordingly. We select the verified formula φ∗ that remains the last. Algorithm 1
summarizes the whole process.


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1    S ETUP

Tasks. We evaluate CLOVER on seven logical reasoning tasks: AR-LSAT (Zhong et al., 2022),
ZebraLogic (Lin et al., 2025), Logic grid puzzle (Puzzle), Symbol interpretation (Symbol), and Log-
ical deduction (Deduction) from the BigBench collaborative benchmark (Srivastava et al., 2022),
FOLIO (Han et al., 2022), and ProofWriter (Tafjord et al., 2021). AR-LSAT consists of analytical
reasoning problems of the law school admission test, and ZebraLogic is a benchmark for zebra puz-
zles. Puzzle, Symbol, and Deduction are tasks from logical reasoning category in the BigBench.
FOLIO6 is an expert-written first-order logic reasoning task, and ProofWriter is a deductive reason-
ing benchmark. Note that all tasks except ZebraLogic are multiple choice problems, and Appendix
F describes details of each task.

Language Models. We perform our experiments mainly on gpt-4o (Achiam et al., 2023), a
current state-of-the-art LLM for complex, multi-step tasks, unless stated. We also evaluate CLOVER

  6
    We use a revised version of FOLIO that improves sample quality and fixes errors, which is released on:
https://huggingface.co/datasets/yale-nlp/FOLIO.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Table 1: Performance on logical reasoning tasks using CLOVER and the baseline methods.

                AR-LSAT         ZebraLogic       Puzzle       Symbol    Deduction       FOLIO    ProofWriter
 Standard         30.3             0.4            63.0          74.7          84.7        70.9      53.7
 CoT              36.8             0.4            51.0          80.8          94.0        73.9      78.0
 SymbCoT          34.2             0.8            66.5          55.6          90.7        76.9      80.2
 Logic-LM         42.4             45.4           64.0          81.8          95.3        75.4      95.3
 CLOVER           62.8             75.4           83.5          89.9          99.3        78.8      96.7

Table 2: Comparison of program accuracy, execution rate, and execution accuracy of CLOVER and
Logic-LM.

                          Program Acc                  Execution Rate                   Execution Acc
                      Logic-LM CLOVER               Logic-LM CLOVER                  Logic-LM CLOVER
        AR-LSAT          17.3             46.8           33.8          59.7            51.3      78.3
        Puzzle           60.0             79.0           79.5          80.0            75.5      98.8
        Symbol           49.5             76.8           52.5          82.8            94.2      92.7
        Deduction        92.7             99.0           97.3          99.7            95.2      99.3
        FOLIO            51.2             62.6           65.5          74.9            78.2      83.6
        ProofWrtier      94.2             96.5           96.8          99.2            97.2      97.3


and the baselines using a smaller model, gpt-4o-mini (Achiam et al., 2023).7 To reproduce our
experiments, we set the temperature to 0 and select the highest probability response from the model.

Baselines. We compare CLOVER primarily to Logic-LM (Pan et al., 2023), a state-of-the-art neu-
rosymbolic approach for logical reasoning. There are few more works (Ye et al., 2024; Olausson
et al., 2023) nearly the same to Logic-LM, but we focus on Logic-LM since their difference is
marginal. We also compare CLOVER to another neurosymbolic approach (Xu et al., 2024) which
uses an LLM to solve SAT problems instead of using a symbolic solver. In addition, we compare to
the standard prompting and CoT prompting that leverages in-context learning capability of the base
LLMs. For fair comparison, we manually sample or derive our few-shot exemplar sets from those
in the previous works (Pan et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024) if it is possible. Since the previous works do
not evaluate their models on ZebraLogic, Puzzle, and Symbol, we randomly select a single exemplar
problem outside the test set. We demonstrate exemplar few-shot prompts in Appendix J.

Evaluation metrics. We measure the performance of CLOVER and the baselines primarily by the
correctness of logical reasoning problems. For neurosymbolic approaches with a symbolic solver,
if the solver cannot execute the translated SAT problem, we fall back to CoT predictions. From this
unique property, following Pan et al. (2023), we use three additional evaluation metrics: program
accuracy, execution rate, and execution accuracy, for multiple choice problems. Program accuracy
does not include the CoT predictions for unexecutable problems. Execution rate measures the por-
tion of executable problems, and execution accuracy indicates the accuracy for executable problems.

4.2    R ESULTS

We present the performance of CLOVER and the baselines on different tasks, different evaluation
metrics, and different language model scales. First, Table 1 compares the performance of CLOVER
and the baselines on seven logical reasoning tasks. CLOVER outperforms Logic-LM and other
baselines by a significant margin across different logical reasoning tasks. CLOVER shows marked
improvement on hard logical reasoning tasks. Specifically, it enhances the performance of Logic-
LM on AR-LSAT by 20.4% and ZebraLogic by 30.0%. Overall, neurosymbolic approaches with a
symbolic solver (CLOVER and Logic-LM) show remarkable improvement on these hard reasoning
tasks. The inference time costs of CLOVER and the baselines are reported in Appendix H.
  7
    To specify language model versions provided by OpenAI, we use gpt-4o-2024-05-13 and
gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 on our experiments.


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Ablation of CLOVER on AR-LSAT and ZebraLogic. The first three rows are ablations of
CLOVER, and the last two rows correspond to CLOVER.

           Is CLOVER?       Translation        Verification       AR-LSAT     ZebraLogic
                  ✗            direct                ✗              53.3         45.4
                  ✗         direct (5×)     logical consistency     54.6         59.6
                  ✗        compositional             ✗              55.0         70.0
                 ✓         compositional    logical consistency     61.9         74.2
                 ✓         compositional        disproving          62.8         75.4


Second, Table 2 presents three additional evaluations for the neurosymbolic approaches with a sym-
bolic solver. CLOVER shows higher execution rate on every task, which indicates that CLOVER
has better capability to generate syntactically correct first-order logic formulas than Logic-LM.
CLOVER also shows higher execution accuracy on most tasks, which indicates that CLOVER has
better capability to generate logically (or semantically) correct formulas than Logic-LM. These two
observations lead to an outperforming program accuracy of CLOVER across different logical rea-
soning tasks. Specifically, CLOVER increases the execution rate of Logic-LM on AR-LSAT by
25.9% and the execution accuracy by 27.0%, which finally leads to more than doubled program ac-
curacy of Logic-LM. Lastly, we compare the performance of CLOVER and the baselines on different
languange models in Appendix G.

4.3   A BLATIONS

We conduct ablation studies of CLOVER on two perspectives: compositional translation and veri-
fication, in Table 3. Ablating verification from CLOVER (i.e., random selection) shows 6.9% and
4.2% performance degradation on AR-LSAT and ZebraLogic, respectively. It clearly supports the
effectiveness of the verification. Ablating compositional translation from CLOVER (i.e., direct
translation) shows 7.3% and 14.6% performance degradation on AR-LSAT and ZebraLogic, respec-
tively. It also clearly supports the effectiveness of the compositional translation. To maintain the
verification stage as is, we repeat the sampling of direct translation five times, which is slightly
larger than the average number of estimated formulas of CLOVER. Ablating both compositional
translation and verification from CLOVER shows further performance loss. Additionally, disprov-
ing by counter-interpretation yields better performance than logical consistency.

4.4   A NALYSIS

Types of Errors. We analyze error types of CLOVER on AR-LSAT and compare those to Logic-
LM’s in Figure 3. Since an SAT solver is sound and does not cause any error, our error analysis
focuses on the first-order logic translation. Logic-LM’s errors are mainly caused by incorrect logic
(or semantic) and incorrect syntax, which take 53.7% of the total errors. There are preprocessing
errors and other errors caused by an incorrect selection of a satisfiability function and limited ex-
pressiveness of a Z3 theorem prover. In contrast, we highlight that CLOVER has nearly no logic or
syntax error. CLOVER’s errors are primarily caused by preprocessing and other errors, which takes
78.6% of the total errors. This analysis indicates that CLOVER significantly enhances the ability of
a language model to generate both syntactically and semantically precise first-order logic formulas.

Robustness on Reasoning Length. We present robustness of CLOVER on long sequence of rea-
soning and compare the results with CoT-based reasoning LLMs (Jaech et al., 2024)8 in Figure 4.
We also add the results of Logic-LM to measure the effect of neurosymbolic approach on reasoning
length. We observe a noticeable performance drop of CoT-based reasoning LLMs on long sequence
of reasoning, which is a frequently pointed-out drawback of the CoT-based approaches. However,
neurosymbolic approaches show robustness to the reasoning length. Specifically, CLOVER shows
only 12.5% performance drop between the tasks of the shortest and longest sequence of reasoning.
  8
    We use CoT-based reasoning LLMs that were recently released from OpenAI, specifically
o1-preview-2024-09-12 and o1-mini-2024-09-12, for our analysis.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Logic-LM     CLOVER                            o1-preview   o1-mini    Logic-LM       CLOVER
                 30                                                     100

                                                                         75


                                                         Accuracy (%)
    Occurences   20
                                                                         50
                 10
                                                                         25

                 0                                                        0
                      logic   syntax   prep    others                           2       3         4         5      6
                      error    error   error                                                # of features

Figure 3: Occurences of different error                 Figure 4:     Performance on different reasoning
types of CLOVER and Logic-LM on AR-                     lengths using CoT-based reasoning LLMs and neu-
LSAT annotated subset.                                  rosymbolic approaches on ZebraLogic. Each exam-
                                                        ple is a puzzle of five houses with varying # of fea-
                                                        tures.


5                R ELATED W ORKS
LLM-based neurosymbolic approach for reasoning. Previous works (Ye et al., 2024; Pan et al.,
2023; Olausson et al., 2023; Kirtania et al., 2024) utilize an LLM as a semantic parser which trans-
lates the natural language logical reasoning problems into first-order logic formulas, and then use a
symbolic solver to automatically solve an SAT problem. There is another work (Xu et al., 2024) that
utilizes an LLM as not only a semantic parser but also a symbolic solver and a verifier for semantic
parsing and symbolic solving. However, these previous works share a common drawback that an
LLM cannot faithfully perform complex first-order logic translation, which fundamentally limits the
performance of neurosymbolic approaches on complex logical reasoning tasks.

LLM-based problem decomposition. To solve natural language tasks, previous works explore
decomposing complex problems into several simpler ones using LLMs. Drozdov et al. (2022) use
an LLM to syntactically parse the natural language sentence into several subsentences and performs
compositional semantic parsing for simple tasks such as text-to-SQL. However, since a syntactic
parsing cannot preserve the semantic of logic, Drozdov et al. (2022) is not applicable to complex
logical reasoning tasks. Other works (Zhou et al., 2023; Khot et al., 2023; Press et al., 2023; Dua
et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2023) focus on decomposing simple question-answering problems by prompt-
ing LLMs with few-shot examples. However, if LLMs simply rely on few-shot examples for decom-
posing complex logical reasoning problems, then the problems might be incorrectly decomposed,
which leads to an unexpected performance loss.

LLM-generated formal language verification. There are lines of works to verify formal lan-
guage generated by LLMs. Chen et al. (2024) and Madaan et al. (2024) first generate a code from
natural language, get feedback from an LLM, and refine the code based on the feedback. Chen et al.
(2024) additionally utilizes an external feedback signal from an executor. Ni et al. (2023) first gen-
erates candidate codes from natural language and then verify by predicting their correctness using
a trained neural network. However, these model-based verifications show limited performance on
complex logical reasoning tasks (Appendix I).

6                C ONCLUSION
We propose CLOVER, a compositional first-order logic translation and verification for complex
logical reasoning. CLOVER first parses the natural language sentence into newly defined logical
dependency structures, which reflect first-order logic semantics hidden in the natural language, and
then compositionally translates the sentence. We also introduce two verification algorithms us-
ing satisfiability to fully cover first-order logic semantics. Empirical results show that CLOVER
achieves state-of-the-art performance on seven logical reasoning benchmarks.



                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partly supported by Institute for Information & communications Technology Pro-
motion(IITP) (No.RS-2019-II190075, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program(KAIST),
No.2022-0-00713, Meta-learning applicable to real-world problems, No.RS-2024-00457882, AI Re-
search Hub Project) and National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) (No.RS-2023- 00209060,
A Study on Optimization and Network Interpretation Method for Large-Scale Machine Learning)
grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT).

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Marta Arias and Roni Khardon. Complexity parameters for first-order classes. In Inductive
 Logic Programming: 13th International Conference, ILP 2003, Szeged, Hungary, September 29-
 October 1, 2003. Proceedings 13, pp. 22–37. Springer, 2003.

Hugo Bronkhorst, Gerrit Roorda, Cor Suhre, and Martin Goedhart. Logical reasoning in formal
  and everyday reasoning tasks. International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 18:
  1673–1694, 2020.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.

Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models
  to self-debug. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Leonardo De Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. Z3: An efficient smt solver. In International conference
  on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, pp. 337–340. Springer,
  2008.

Andrew Drozdov, Nathanael Schärli, Ekin Akyürek, Nathan Scales, Xinying Song, Xinyun Chen,
  Olivier Bousquet, and Denny Zhou. Compositional semantic parsing with large language models.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Dheeru Dua, Shivanshu Gupta, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. Successive prompting for de-
  composing complex questions. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 1251–1265, 2022.

Lyn Frazier and Janet Dean Fodor. The sausage machine: A new two-stage parsing model. Cogni-
  tion, 6(4):291–325, 1978.

Simeng Han, Hailey Schoelkopf, Yilun Zhao, Zhenting Qi, Martin Riddell, Luke Benson, Lucy
  Sun, Ekaterina Zubova, Yujie Qiao, Matthew Burtell, et al. Folio: Natural language reasoning
  with first-order logic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00840, 2022.

Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec
  Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney, et al. Openai o1 system card. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2412.16720, 2024.

Dejan Jovanović and Clark Barrett. Sharing is caring: Combination of theories. In Frontiers of
  Combining Systems: 8th International Symposium, FroCoS 2011, Saarbrücken, Germany, Octo-
  ber 5-7, 2011. Proceedings 8, pp. 195–210. Springer, 2011.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish
  Sabharwal. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Shashank Kirtania, Priyanshu Gupta, and Arjun Radhakirshna. Logic-lm++: Multi-step refinement
  for symbolic formulations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02514, 2024.

Bill Yuchen Lin, Ronan Le Bras, Kyle Richardson, Ashish Sabharwal, Radha Poovendran, Peter
  Clark, and Yejin Choi. Zebralogic: On the scaling limits of llms for logical reasoning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2502.01100, 2025.

Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Richard Montague et al. Universal grammar. 1974, pp. 222–46, 1970.

Ansong Ni, Srini Iyer, Dragomir Radev, Veselin Stoyanov, Wen-tau Yih, Sida Wang, and Xi Victoria
  Lin. Lever: Learning to verify language-to-code generation with execution. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 26106–26128. PMLR, 2023.

Terezinha Nunes. Logical reasoning and learning. Encyclopedia of the sciences of learning, pp.
  2066–2069, 2012.

Theo X Olausson, Alex Gu, Benjamin Lipkin, Cedegao E Zhang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Joshua B
  Tenenbaum, and Roger Levy. Linc: A neurosymbolic approach for logical reasoning by combin-
  ing language models with first-order logic provers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15164, 2023.

Liangming Pan, Alon Albalak, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang Wang. Logic-lm: Empower-
  ing large language models with symbolic solvers for faithful logical reasoning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.12295, 2023.

Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring
  and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. In Findings of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 5687–5711, 2023.

Silvio Ranise, Christophe Ringeissen, and Calogero G Zarba. Combining data structures with non-
   stably infinite theories using many-sorted logic. In International Workshop on Frontiers of Com-
   bining Systems, pp. 48–64. Springer, 2005.

Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.

John Sweller. Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on learning. Cognitive science, 12(2):
  257–285, 1988.

Oyvind Tafjord, Bhavana Dalvi, and Peter Clark. Proofwriter: Generating implications, proofs, and
  abductive statements over natural language. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pp. 3621–3634, 2021.

Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.

Jundong Xu, Hao Fei, Liangming Pan, Qian Liu, Mong-Li Lee, and Wynne Hsu. Faithful logical
  reasoning via symbolic chain-of-thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18357, 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xi Ye, Qiaochu Chen, Isil Dillig, and Greg Durrett. Satlm: Satisfiability-aided language models
  using declarative prompting. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Yunhu Ye, Binyuan Hui, Min Yang, Binhua Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. Large language models
  are versatile decomposers: Decomposing evidence and questions for table-based reasoning. In
  Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
  Information Retrieval, pp. 174–184, 2023.
Wanjun Zhong, Siyuan Wang, Duyu Tang, Zenan Xu, Daya Guo, Yining Chen, Jiahai Wang, Jian
 Yin, Ming Zhou, and Nan Duan. Analytical reasoning of text. In Findings of the Association for
 Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2022, pp. 2306–2319, 2022.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
  mans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, et al. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
  reasoning in large language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     F IRST-O RDER L OGIC P RELIMINARIES
To clarify the first-order logic vocabularies used in the paper, we give basic definitions as prelim-
inaries based on Ranise et al. (2005) and Jovanović & Barrett (2011). To help understanding, we
also provide an example of the definitions, where the example is sampled from the AR-LSAT test
set (Zhong et al., 2022). In this work, we use many-sorted first-order logic, which is one of the vari-
ants of the standard first-order logic, to better reflect the scenarios of the real-world logical reasoning
problems.

A.1    S YNTAX

The syntax of many-sorted first-order logic is built on signatures. We first define signatures, and on
top of that, we define variables, terms, atoms, literals, clauses, and formulas.
Definition 5 (Signatures). A signature Σ = (S, F, P ) consists of countable sets of sorts S, function
symbols F , and predicate symbols P . Each function symbol f is associated with a type s1 × · · · ×
sn → s, where n ≥ 0 and s1 , · · · , sn , s ∈ S. Function symbols with n = 0 (i.e. zero arity) are
called constants of sort s. Each predicate symbol p is associated with a type s1 × · · · × sn , where
n ≥ 1 and s1 , · · · , sn ∈ S.

Let Σ be a signature. A set X of Σ-variables (or simply variables) is a countable set of variable
names. Each variable name is associated with a sort in Σ. Based on variables, we define terms.
Intuitively, terms are variables or functions applied to a tuple of other terms.
Definition 6 (Terms). Σ-terms over X (or simply terms) are defined as follows. Each variable
x ∈ X of sort s is a term of sort s. If t1 , · · · , tn are terms of sorts s1 , · · · , sn , respectively, and f is
a function symbol of type s1 × · · · × sn → s, then f (t1 , · · · , tn ) is a term of sort s.

Based on terms, we define atoms. Intuitively, atoms are predicates applied to a tuple of terms.
Definition 7 (Atoms). Σ-atoms over X (or simply atoms) are defined as follows. If t1 , · · · , tn
are Σ-terms over X of sorts s1 , · · · , sn , respectively, and p is a predicate symbol with the type
s1 × · · · × sn , then p(t1 , · · · , tn ) is an atom.

Additionally, literals are atoms or negation of atoms, and clauses are disjunctions of literals. We
finally define formulas by using above definitions with logical connectives and quantifiers.
Definition 8 (Formulas). Σ-formulas over X (or simply formulas) are defined as follows. Each
Σ-atom over X is a formula. If α and β are formulas, then so are ¬α, α ∧ β, and α ∨ β. If x ∈ X
is a variable of sort s and α is a formula, then so are ∃x α and ∀x α.

We give an example of the definitions of first-order logic syntax with the following formula in the
AR-LSAT test set.
Example 1. A signature is given as
                                      Σ1 = ({positions, potters}, F, P )
where F = {displayed, Reigel, 1, 6} such that displayed has the type positions → potters, Reigel is
a constant of sort potters, and 1 and 6 are constants of sort positions, and P = {≈} such that ≈ is
of the type positions × positions. We note that the equality symbol ≈ is always implicit from the
context. If p is a variable of sort positions, then p and displayed(p) are Σ1 -terms of sort positions.
Then, displayed(p) ≈ Reigel, p ≈ 1, and p ≈ 6 are Σ1 -atoms. Finally, the following is one example
of a Σ1 -formula
                      (∀p : positions) (displayed(p) ≈ Reigel) → (p ≈ 1 ∨ p ≈ 6)
which is the first-order logic translation of the natural language sentence “Reigel’s bowl can be
displayed only in either position 1 or position 6”.

A.2    S EMANTICS

The semantics of many-sorted first-order logic is indicated by structures. We first define structures
and extend its concept to define interpretations. On top of those, we define theories with models and
consequences.


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A signature Σ = (S, F, P ) only describes the names of sorts, functions, and predicates. However, it
does not describe assignments of elements to each sort and evaluations of functions and predicates
on the elements of sorts. Structures add this information.
Definition 9 (Structures). A Σ-structure I assigns a non-empty domain set Ds to each sort s ∈ S, a
function f I : Ds1 ×· · ·×Dsn → Ds for each function symbol f ∈ F of type s1 ×· · ·×sn → s, and
a predicate pI : Ds1 × · · · × Dsn → {F, T} for each predicate symbol p ∈ P of type s1 × · · · × sn .
Note that each constant c of sort s is mapped to an element cI ∈ Ds .

To evaluate terms and formulas, we extend structures to variables and define interpretations.
Definition 10 (Interpretations). Σ-interpretation I over X (or simply interpretation) is a Σ-structure
that additionally assigns a value xI ∈ Ds to each variable x ∈ X of sort s.

We denote I ⊨ ϕ if an interpretation I evaluates a formula ϕ to true. However, we are not usually
interested in the evaluation of formulas in a given structure, but interested in specific meaning of
functions and predicates. Theories deal with this problem.
Definition 11 (Theories). A Σ-theory T (or simply theory) is a non-empty set of Σ-structures.

To solve practical problems, we additionally define the followings. A T -interpretation is a Σ-
interpretation I that extends some structure in the theory T . A formula ϕ is T -satisfiable if I ⊨ ϕ for
some T -interpretation I. A formula ϕ is T -valid, denoted by ⊨T ϕ, if I ⊨ ϕ for all T -interpretations
I. We also introduce definitions to describe the relationship between an interpretation and a formula,
and between two formulas.
Definition 12 (Models). A T -interpretation I such that I ⊨ ϕ is called a T -model of ϕ.
Definition 13 (Consequences). A formula ϕ is a T -consequence of a formula ψ, denoted by ψ ⊨T ϕ,
if I ⊨ ψ implies I ⊨ ϕ for all T -interpretations I.

We give an example of the definitions of first-order logic semantics by continuing Example 1.
Example 2. Let us consider the extended signature Σ2 = ({positions, potters}, F, {≈}) where
    F = {displayed, Larsen, Mills, Neiman, Olivera, Park, Reigel, Serra, Vance, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}.
There are many possible Σ2 -structures, and one exemplar structure I2 is:
       · Dpositions = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6},
       · Dpotters = {Larsen, Mills, Neiman, Olivera, Park, Reigel, Serra, Vance},
       · LarsenI2 = Larsen, MillsI2 = Mills, NeimanI2 = Neiman, OliveraI2 = Olivera,
         ParkI2 = Park, ReigelI2 = Reigel, SerraI2 = Serra, VanceI2 = Vance,
       · 1I2 = 1, 2I2 = 2, 3I2 = 3, 4I2 = 4, 5I2 = 5, 6I2 = 6, and
       · displayedI2 (1) = Reigel, displayedI2 (2) = Larsen, displayedI2 (3) = Reigel,
         displayedI2 (4) = Reigel, displayedI2 (5) = Reigel, displayedI2 (6) = Reigel.
Since we do not consider any additional variable here, Σ2 -interpretation I2′ is the same as I2 .
Now, let the theory T2 be the Σ2 -theory consisting only of the Σ2 -structure I which has the same
domain assignment to each sort and the same constant function assignments with I2 . I2 is a T2 -
interpretation. If we consider the formula ϕ in Example 1, ϕ is T2 -satisfiable, but not T2 -valid.
Lastly, let us determine if I2 satisfies ϕ. Reigel’s bowl is displayed in the positions 1 and 6, but it is
also displayed in positions 3, 4, and 5. A T2 -interpretation I2 does not satisfy the formula ϕ, which
means I2 is not a T2 -model of ϕ.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    F IRST-O RDER L OGIC C OMPLEXITY
To quantitatively measure the complexity of first-order logic formulas, we use a parameter following
Arias & Khardon (2003). The target formula is first transformed into an expression in a conjunctive
normal form (CNF). Then, the complexity parameter is defined as a sum of three components, the
number of clauses in the CNF expression, the maximum number of distinct terms in any clause of
the CNF expression, and the maximum number of literals in any clause of the CNF expression. We
implement the parameter by using a Z3 theorem prover (De Moura & Bjørner, 2008).
We present two exemplar formulas and their complexity from the AR-LSAT test set. The first
example is as follows:
               (∃C : children) (¬(C ≈ Juan) ∧ (assigned(C) ≈ assigned(Juan))).
The formula is already in the CNF expression. It contains two clauses; ¬(C ≈ Juan) and
assigned(C) ≈ assigned(Juan). The first clause has two distinct terms; C and Juan, and one
literal; ¬(C ≈ Juan). The second clause has four distinct terms; C, Juan, assigned(C), and
assigned(Juan), and one literal; assigned(C) ≈ assigned(Juan). The measured complexity is
2 + 4 + 1 = 7.
The second example is as follows:
        (onSale(newPop) ∧ onSale(usedPop)) → (onSale(newSoul) ∧ onSale(usedSoul)).
The formula is first transformed into a CNF expression as follows:
                  (onSale(newSoul) ∨ ¬onSale(newPop) ∨ ¬onSale(usedPop))∧
                  (onSale(usedSoul) ∨ ¬onSale(newPop) ∨ ¬onSale(usedPop)).
It contains two clauses. The first clause has three distinct terms; newSoul, newPop, and usedPop,
and three literals; onSale(newSoul), ¬onSale(newPop), and ¬onSale(usedPop). The second clause
has the same number of distinct terms and literals. The measured complexity is 2 + 3 + 3 = 8.

C    C OMPONENT ACCUMULATION RULES
We describe rules for component accumulation according to a logical dependency structure. It aims
to add components on simple subsentences to compose more complex subsentences in a specific
order that preserves the underlying first-order logic semantics. We note that the rules are deduced
from the definition of logical dependency structure (Section 3.1). The followings are the rules for
component accumulation:
Rule 1. Start with copying logic units.
Rule 2. If a logic dependent D is the only dependent of a logic unit U , then integrate D into U and
        add the updated U.
Rule 3. If a logic dependent D1 depends on another logic dependent D2 , then integrate D1 into a
        logic unit U that includes D2 and add the updated U .
Rule 4. If more than one logic dependents D1 , D2 , · · · , Dk depend on a logic unit U , then add
        k sentences that include U and each logic dependent Di (i = 1, 2, · · · , k). After that,
        integrate all logic dependents into U and add the updated U .
Rule 5. If more than one components X1 , X2 , · · · , Xk depend on a logic coupler C, then integrate
        all components into C and add the updated C.

We present three examples of component accumulation given sentences and their logical dependency
structures in the following section.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     E XAMPLES OF L OGICAL D EPENDENCY PARSING AND C OMPONENT
      ACCUMULATION

We present three examples of logical dependency parsing and component accumulation. For compo-
nent accumulation, the applied rules and corresponding logical dependencies are indicated for each
accumulation step. (Integration) is additionally inserted for Rule 4 to maintain consistency.



 Input
 Target sentence:
 Each story is assigned a team of two interns—one photographer’s assistant and one writer’s assistant.

 Declarations:
 interns = {Farber, Gombarick, Hall, Jackson, Kanze, Lha}
 stories = {Romania, Spain, Tuscany}
 assistants = {photographer, writer}
 assigned = Function(interns → stories)
 trained = Function(interns → assistants)

 Output
 Logical dependency parsing:
 U1 =“Each story is assigned an intern.”, U2 =“There is an intern—a photographer’s assistant.”,
 U3 =“There is an intern—a writer’s assistant.”, C1 =“(merge)”, C2 =“(merge)”, C3 =“a team of two ...
 and”
 U1 → C1 , U2 → C1 , U1 → C2 , U3 → C2 , C1 → C3 , C2 → C3

 Component accumulation:
 Rule 1: Each story is assigned an intern. (U1 )
 Rule 1: There is an intern—a photographer’s assistant. (U2 )
 Rule 1: There is an intern—a writer’s assistant. (U3 )
 Rule 5: Each story is assigned an intern—a photographer’s assistant. (U1 → C1 , U2 → C1 )
 Rule 5: Each story is assigned an intern—a writer’s assistant. (U1 → C2 , U3 → C2 )
 Rule 5: Each story is assigned a team of two interns—one photographer’s assistant and one writer’s
 assistant. (C1 → C3 , C2 → C3 )



 Input
 Target sentence:
 Xena and at least three other technicians repair radios.

 Declarations:
 technicians = {Stacy, Urma, Wim, Xena, Yolanda, Zane}
 machines = {radios, televisions, VCRs}
 repairs = Function(technicians, machines → bool)

 Output
 Logical dependency parsing:
 U1 =“Xena repairs radios.”, D1 =“and three other technicians”, D2 =“exactly”
 D1 → U1 , D2 → D1

 Component accumulation:
 Rule 1: Xena repairs radios. (U1 )
 Rule 2: Xena and three other technicians repair radios. (D1 → U1 )
 Rule 3: Xena and at least three other technicians repair radios. (D2 → D1 )

    Figure 5: Example of logical dependency parsing and component accumulation on AR-LSAT.


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Input
 Target sentence:
 Each candidate must speak either first or second at at least one of the meetings.

 Declarations:
 candidates = {Q, R, S, T, U}
 meetings = {1, 2, 3}
 orders = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
 speaks = Function(candidates, meetings → orders)

 Output
 Logical dependency structure:
 U1 =“Each candidate speaks at one of the orders at one of the meetings.”, D1 =“must”, D2 =“at least”,
 D3 =“either first or second”
 D1 → U1 , D2 → U1 , D3 → U1

 Component accumulation:
 Rule 1: Each candidate speaks at one of the orders at one of the meetings. (U1 )
 Rule 4: Each candidate must speak at one of the orders at one of the meetings. (D1 → U1 )
 Rule 4: Each candidate speaks at one of the orders at at least one of the meetings. (D2 → U1 )
 Rule 4: Each candidate speaks either first or second at one of the meetings. (D3 → U1 )
 Rule 4: Each candidate must speak either first or second at at least one of the meetings. (Integration)

Figure 6: Another example of logical dependency parsing and component accumulation on AR-
LSAT.


E    SAT S OLVER F UNCTION P REDICTION ON AR-LSAT
For the AR-LSAT dataset, we additionally need to predict a solver function fsolver according to the
question of the logical reasoning problem. For instance, if the question is “Which of the queries
CAN be true?”, then we need to assign a function that checks a satisfiability of the query given the
constraints. If the question is “Which of the queries MUST be true?”, then we need to assign a
function that checks a validity of the query given the constraints.
Logic-LM predicts a solver function together with the first-order logic translation by a single infer-
ence as follows:
           T̂ , {φ̂k , NˆL(φk )}K+1   ˆ                                  K+1
                                k=1 , fsolver ∼ PLLM (T , {φk , N L(φk )}k=1 , fsolver | x, xfs ).         (6)

For CLOVER, to incorporate solver function prediction in our problem formulation in Eq. 2, we
perform this prediction at the preprocessing step as follows:
                              ˆ                                                 prep
         T̂ , {NˆL(φk )}K+1                                 K+1
                        k=1 , fsolver ∼ PLLM (T , {N L(φk )}k=1 , fsolver | x, xfs )
                                                                                                           (7)
                                 φ̂k = CLOVER(T̂ , NˆL(φk ), Xfs ), ∀k ∈ {1, 2, · · · , K + 1}.


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    DATASET S TATISTICS
In this section, we present dataset statistics of the logical reasoning tasks in Table 4. We describe
the details in the following paragraphs. If not mentioned, we use the entire test set provided by the
dataset.

AR-LSAT-annotated. We annotate a representative subset of AR-LSAT test set (Zhong et al.,
2022) to measure first-order logic translation accuracy at a formula-level. First, we sample the first
problem from each set of problems that share the same context in the AR-LSAT test set. Then,
we preprocess the logical reasoning problem to generate a theory T̂ and a set of natural language
sentences, following the steps in Section 2. For each problem, we note that the sentences for con-
straints represent diverse first-order logic semantics while the sentences for five queries represent
(nearly) the same first-order logic semantics. We therefore exclude other four queries and leave only
the first one. For each sentence, we carefully annotate T̂ -satisfiable first-order logic formula and
double-check its correctness. If a T̂ cannot express the context of the logical reasoning problem, we
exclude the sentences in that problem. As a result, we collect a total of 305 annotated formulas.

ZebraLogic. The ZebraLogic test test (Lin et al., 2025) consists of 1,000 zebra puzzles where the
puzzle size varies from 2 × 2 to 6 × 6. There are 25 different puzzle sizes, and each size has 40
samples. To evaluate the models on the most challenging puzzles, we use six hardest puzzle sizes
(4 × 6, 5 × 5, 5 × 6, 6 × 4, 6 × 5, and 6 × 6) for our test set, which yields a total of 240 puzzles.

Puzzle. The entire dataset (Srivastava et al., 2022) consists of 1,000 samples. To split a test set,
we sample the last 200 samples in the order of the samples listed in the dataset.

Symbol. The entire dataset (Srivastava et al., 2022) includes 990 samples, which are categorized
into five subsets (plain, adversarial, tricky, agnostic name-side, and agnostic emoji-side) with the
same size. All examples in different subsets share the same logical meaning with each other where
the only difference is the semantic link between the emojis and their names. To focus on a first-order
logic translation, we evaluate the models on the plain subset which includes 198 samples. The plain
subset consists of three subgroups with the same size categorized by their difficulties. To construct a
test set, we sample the second half of each subgroup in the order of the samples listed in the dataset,
which yields a total of 99 samples.

Deduction. The entire dataset (Srivastava et al., 2022) consists of 1,500 samples. We use the test
set following Pan et al. (2023) which consists of 300 samples.

ProofWriter. We use the test set following Pan et al. (2023), which is a set of randomly sampled
600 examples from the most challenging depth-5 subset.

Table 4: Number of few-shot examples, test examples, and options, and license of the logical rea-
soning tasks used in the paper.

      Dataset                               # Shot    # Test    # Options         License
      AR-LSAT (Zhong et al., 2022)            5           231       5           MIT license
      AR-LSAT-annotated                      N/A          305     N/A           MIT license
      ZebraLogic (Lin et al., 2025)           1           240     N/A           Apache 2.0
      Puzzle (Srivastava et al., 2022)        1           200    2,3,4,5        Apache 2.0
      Symbol (Srivastava et al., 2022)        1            99       5           Apache 2.0
      Deduction (Srivastava et al., 2022)     2           300     3,5,7         Apache 2.0
      FOLIO (Han et al., 2022)                2           203       3       CC-BY-SA-4.0 license
      ProofWriter (Tafjord et al., 2021)      1           600       3           CC BY 4.0


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    P ERFORMANCE ON D IFFERENT L ANGUAGE M ODELS
Table 5 compares the performance of CLOVER and the neurosymbolic approach baselines on dif-
ferent languange models. We include three additional language models including gpt-4o-mini,
gpt-3.5-turbo, and gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct, which the first two are chat-focused
models and the other one is an instruction-following model. We evaluate these models on the Puz-
zle and Symbol datasets. If the symbolic solver cannot execute the solution, then we take random
guesses. We exclude the performance of SymbCoT using gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct since
the prompt including few-shot examples exceeds the context window of the language model. The
results show that CLOVER clearly outperforms the baselines across different language models.

Table 5: Performance with different language models using CLOVER and neurosymbolic approach
baselines.

                                        Puzzle                                 Symbol
                          Logic-LM     SymbCoT      CLOVER       Logic-LM     SymbCoT      CLOVER
 gpt-4o-mini                 42.5         60.0         60.5         38.4         46.5         71.7
 gpt-3.5-turbo               42.5         35.0         63.5         24.2         27.3         60.6
 gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct      46.0         N/A          59.0         50.5         N/A          70.7



H    I NFERENCE T IME C OSTS
It is difficult to measure inference time costs for methods that use LLMs with API calls. Specifically,
inference time significantly depends on the current network traffic of an API, and the number of
parameters are unknown. Despite this limitation, we compare CLOVER and the baselines by their
API usage costs, which is a reliable way to measure inference time costs.
For comparison, we use gpt-4o-mini as a language model and measure the costs on the AR-
LSAT annotated subset. We report the results in Table 6. CLOVER requires larger amount of
inference costs compared to the baselines since the compositional first-order logic translation gen-
erates formulas for each logical dependency structure of a target sentence. However, the increased
inference time cost is worth for the significant performance gain in Table 1.

Table 6: Comparison of inference time costs using CLOVER and the baselines with
gpt-4o-mini.

                                                   Costs (USD)
                                     Standard           0.02
                                     CoT                0.02
                                     Logic-LM           0.08
                                     SymbCoT            0.15
                                     CLOVER             0.30


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I   I MPACT OF SAT- BASED F IRST-O RDER L OGIC V ERIFICATION
To further analyze an impact of using satisfiability in the verification algorithms, we compare those
to two baselines: syntax consistency and LLM with instruction. First, we select the most frequent
syntactically same formulas, which we call syntax consistency. Compared to logical consistency,
logically equivalent but syntactically different formulas count as different formulas here. Second,
we prompt LLM to select the most probable formula with reasoning, which we call LLM with
instruction. LLM-based first-order logic verification is inspired by the previous works (Pan et al.,
2023; Kirtania et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Madaan et al., 2024; Ni et al., 2023).
We report the results in Table 7. The baselines show poor performance than the proposed SAT-
based verification algorithms. Compared to a random selection, syntax consistency show 4.7%
performance increment on AR-LSAT, but 0.8% marginal increment on ZebraLogic. LLM with
instruction does not show any performance improvement on both tasks, which points out the limited
capability of LLM to verify first-order logic formulas. These results show that SAT-based first-order
logic verification is the most appropriate algorithm that fully covers first-order logic semantics.

Table 7: Comparison of different first-order logic verification approaches on AR-LSAT and Ze-
braLogic.

                           Verification           AR-LSAT      ZebraLogic
                           Random                      55.0        70.0
                           Syntax consistency          59.7        70.8
                           LLM w/ instruction          53.3        70.0
                           Logical consistency         61.9        74.2
                           Disproving                  62.8        75.4


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J     F EW- SHOT P ROMPT E XAMPLES

    Prompt for Logical Dependency Parsing
    ### Definition
    (Explain definition of logical dependency structures)
    ### Instruction
    Given declarations and a sentence, generate different possible logical dependency structures of the sen-
    tence. When generating a logical dependency structure, first declare each component and indicate the
    dependency of one and another. The followings rules must be satisfied:
    1. All components except for one should be dependent on another component.
    2. Conjunctions could be included in logic units or logic dependents, while not being allocated as logic
    couplers.
    3. No logic coupler can be a head of logic dependent.
    4. If a logic coupler or a logic dependent includes sets of words that are not adjacent, then separate
    them with “...”.
    5. Any logic dependent cannot be a conjunction itself.

    ### Declarations
    technicians = EnumSort([Stacy, Urma, Wim, Xena, Yolanda, Zane])
    machines = EnumSort([radios, televisions, VCRs])
    repairs = Function([technicians, machines] -> [bool])
    ### Sentence
    Xena and exactly three other technicians repair radios
    ### Structures
    ### 1:
    U1=“Xena repairs radios”, U2=“exactly three technicians repair radios”, D1=“other”, C1=“and”
    D1 → U2; U1 → C1; U2 → C1
    ### 2:
    U1=“Xena repairs radios”, D1=“and three other technicians”, D2=“exactly”
    D1 → U1; D2 → D1
    ### 3:
    U1=“Some technicians repair radios”, D1=“Xena and exactly three other technicians”
    D1 → U1

    ### Declarations
    technicians = EnumSort([Stacy, Urma, Wim, Xena, Yolanda, Zane])
    machines = EnumSort([radios, televisions, VCRs])
    repairs = Function([technicians, machines] -> [bool])
    ### Sentence
    Stacy does not repair any type of machine that Yolanda repairs
    ### Structures
    ### 1:
    U1=“Stacy repairs any type of machine”, U2=“Yolanda repairs any type of machine”, D1=“does not”,
    C1=“that”
    D1 → U1; U1 → C1; U2 → C1
    ### 2:
    U1=“Stacy repairs any type of machine”, D1=“does not”, D2=“that Yolanda repairs”
    D1 → U1; D2 → U1

                                                    ...

                   Figure 7: Prompt used for logical dependency parsing on AR-LSAT.


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Prompt for Component Accumulation
 ### Definition
 (Explain definition of logical dependency structures)
 ### Instruction
 Given a sentence and its logical dependency structure, accumulate each component of the logical de-
 pendency structure to finally reach the original sentence. The followings are rules for accumulation:
 1. Start with copying logic units.
 2. If a logic dependent D is the only dependent of a logic unit U, then integrate D into U and accumu-
 late the updated U.
 3. If a logic dependent D1 depends on another logic dependent D2, then integrate D1 into a logic unit
 U that includes D2 and accumulate the updated U.
 4. If more than one logic dependents D1, D2, ... Dk depend on a logic unit U, then accumulate k se-
 tences that include U and each logic dependent Di (i=1, 2, ..., k). After that, integrate all logic depen-
 dents into U and accumulate the updated U.
 5. If more than one components X1, X2, ... Xk depend on a logic coupler C, then integrate all compo-
 nents into C and accumulate the updated C.

 ### Sentence
 Xena and exactly three other technicians repair radios
 ### Structure
 U1=“Xena repairs radios”, U2=“exactly three technicians repair radios”, D1=“other”, C1=“and”
 D1 → U2; U1 → C1; U2 → C1
 ### Accumulation
 Xena repairs radios
 exactly three technicians repair radios
 exactly three other technicians repair radios
 Xena and exactly three other technicians repair radios

 ### Sentence
 Stacy does not repair any type of machine that Yolanda repairs
 ### Structure
 U1=“Stacy repairs any type of machine”, U2=“Yolanda repairs any type of machine”, D1=“does not”,
 C1=“that”
 D1 → U1; U1 → C1; U2 → C1
 ### Accumulation
 Stacy repairs any type of machine
 Yolanda repairs any type of machine
 Stacy does not repair any type of machine
 Stacy does not repair any type of machine that Yolanda repairs

 ### Sentence
 each candidate must speak either first or second at at least one of the meetings
 ### Structure
 U1=“each candidate must speak first at one of the meetings”, U2=“each candidate must speak second
 at one of the meetings”, D1=“at least”, C1=“either ... or”
 D1 → U1; D1 → U2; U1 → C1; U2 → C1
 ### Accumulation
 each candidate must speak first at one of the meetings
 each candidate must speak second at one of the meetings
 each candidate must speak first at at least one of the meetings
 each candidate must speak second at at least one of the meetings
 each candidate must speak either first or second at at least one of the meetings

                                                  ...

                 Figure 8: Prompt used for component accumulation on AR-LSAT.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Prompt for Sequential Translation
 ### Instruction
 Given declarations, the task is to translate a sentence into a first order logic program. In order to do
 that, translate the given accumulation of components step by step to finally translate the original sen-
 tence.

 ### Declarations
 technicians = EnumSort([Stacy, Urma, Wim, Xena, Yolanda, Zane])
 machines = EnumSort([radios, televisions, VCRs])
 repairs = Function([technicians, machines] -> [bool])
 ### Sentence
 Stacy does not repair any type of machine that Yolanda repairs
 ### Accumulation
 Stacy repairs any type of machine
 Stacy does not repair any type of machine
 Stacy does not repair any type of machine that Yolanda repairs
 ### Translation
 ForAll([m:machines], repairs(Stacy, m))
 ForAll([m:machines], Not(repairs(Stacy, m)))
 ForAll([m:machines], Implies(repairs(Yolanda, m), Not(repairs(Stacy,
 m))))

 ### Declarations
 people = EnumSort([Vladimir, Wendy])
 meals = EnumSort([breakfast, lunch, dinner, snack])
 foods = EnumSort([fish, hot cakes, macaroni, omelet, poached eggs])
 eats = Function([people, meals] -> [foods])
 ### Sentence
 At no meal does Vladimir eat the same kind of food as Wendy
 ### Accumulation
 At no meal does Vladimir eat the same kind of food as Wendy
 ### Translation
 ForAll([m:meals], eats(Vladimir, m) != eats(Wendy, m))

 ### Declarations
 candidates = EnumSort([Q, R, S, T, U])
 meetings = EnumSort([1, 2, 3])
 speaks = Function([meetings, candidates] -> [int])
 ForAll([m:meetings, c:candidates], And(1 <= speaks(m, c), speaks(m, c) <=
 5))
 ### Sentence
 R speaks fourth and fifth at meeting 1
 ### Accumulation
 R speaks fourth at meeting 1
 R speaks fifth at meeting 1
 R speaks fourth and fifth at meeting 1
 ### Translation
 speaks(1, R) == 4
 speaks(1, R) == 5
 And(speaks(1, R) == 4, speaks(1, R) == 5)

                                                  ...

                   Figure 9: Prompt used for sequential translation on AR-LSAT.


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



 Prompt for Disproving by Counter-Interpretation
 ### Instruction
 Your task is to determine whether the given solution can be included in any of the possible scenarios
 that arise when the given sentence is set as a condition. First, you need to calculate all possible scenar-
 ios that can occur under the given sentence as a condition, and then check if the situation obtained by
 interpreting the solution through the given declarations falls into one of those scenarios. As shown in
 the various examples below, you should provide your answer along with a logical explanation for the
 reasoning behind it. Keep in mind that you should focus on logical conditions rather than relying on
 commonsense when performing the task.

 ### Input
 Declarations:
 people = EnumSort([Vladimir, Wendy])
 meals = EnumSort([breakfast, lunch, dinner, snack])
 foods = EnumSort([fish, hot cakes, macaroni, omelet, poached eggs])
 eats = Function([people, meals] -> [foods])
 Solution:
 eats: Vladimir, breakfast -> fish
 eats: Vladimir, lunch -> poached eggs
 eats: Vladimir, dinner -> macaroni
 eats: Vladimir, snack -> hot cakes
 eats: Wendy, breakfast -> fish
 eats: Wendy, lunch -> poached eggs
 eats: Wendy, dinner -> omelet
 eats: Wendy, snack -> fish
 Sentence:
 Neither of them eats the same kind of food more than once during the day
 ### Response
 Analysis:
 Vladimir eats fish, poached eggs, macaroni, and hot cakes on a single day. Vladimir does not eat the
 same kind of food more than once during the day. Wendy eats fish, poached eggs, omelet, and fish on
 a single day. Wendy eats fish more than once during the day. Therefore, the solution does not logically
 satisfy the sentence, “Neither of them eats the same kind of food more than once during the day”.
 Answer:
 No

 ### Input
 Declarations:
 candidates = EnumSort([Q, R, S, T, U])
 meetings = EnumSort([1, 2, 3])
 speaks = Function([meetings, candidates] -> [int])
 ForAll([m:meetings, c:candidates], And(1 <= speaks(m, c), speaks(m, c) <=
 5))
 Solution:
 speaks: 1, Q -> 1
 speaks: 1, R -> 3
 speaks: 1, S -> 2
 speaks: 1, T -> 4
 speaks: 1, U -> 5
 ...
 Sentence:
 no two candidates will speak in the same time slot as each other at any meeting
 ### Response
 Analysis:
 At meeting 1, each candidate speaks 1st, 3rd, 2nd, 4th, and 5th. No two candidates speak in the same
 time slot as each other at meeting 1. At meeting 2, each candidate speaks 2nd, 5th, 3rd, 4th, and 1st.
 No two candidates speak in the same time slot as each other at meeting 2. At meeting 3, each candi-
 date speaks 5th, 1st, 2nd, 4th, and 3rd. No two candidates speak in the same time slot as each other at
 meeting 3. Therefore, the solution logically satisfies the sentence, “no two candidates will speak in the
 same time slot as each other at any meeting”.
 Answer:
 Yes

                                                   ...

          Figure 10: Prompt used for disproving by counter-interpretation on AR-LSAT.

                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K    E XTENSIVE E RROR A NALYSIS OF L OGIC -LM
We present in-depth error analysis of Logic-LM (Pan et al., 2023) for first-order logic translation
and the corresponding results of CLOVER on the AR-LSAT annotated subset. We follow Pan et al.
(2023) and Ye et al. (2024) for the specification of declarations and formulas of first-order logic. We
colorize incorrect translations as red and describe the reason in the following.

 Input
 Target sentence:
 Each locker must be assigned to either one or two children, and each child must be assigned to exactly
 one locker.

 Declarations:
 children = EnumSort([Fred, Juan, Marc, Paul, Nita, Rachel, Trisha])
 lockers = EnumSort([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
 assigned = Function([children] -> [lockers])

 Output
 CLOVER:
 And(ForAll([l:lockers], Or(Count([c:children], assigned(c) == l) ==
 1, Count([c:children], assigned(c) == l) == 2)), ForAll([c:children],
 Exists([l:lockers], assigned(c) == l)))

 Logic-LM:
 ForAll([l:lockers], Or(Count([c:children], assigned(c) == l) == 1,
 And(Count([c:children], assigned(c) == l) == 2, Exists([b:boys, g:girls],
 And(assigned(b) == l, assigned(g) == l)))))

 Error Analysis of Logic-LM
 It contains an additional constraint that the locker assigned to two children should contain one boy and
 one girl.

                       Figure 11: Example #1 of error analysis of Logic-LM.


 Input
 Target sentence:
 Juan must share a locker.

 Declarations:
 children = EnumSort([Fred, Juan, Marc, Paul, Nita, Rachel, Trisha])
 lockers = EnumSort([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
 assigned = Function([children] -> [lockers])

 Output
 CLOVER:
 Exists([c:children], And(c != Juan, assigned(c) == assigned(Juan)))

 Logic-LM:
 Exists([c:children], assigned(Juan) == assigned(c))

 Error Analysis of Logic-LM
 The formula is always true. The variable c should not be equal to Juan.

                       Figure 12: Example #2 of error analysis of Logic-LM.


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Input
 Target sentence:
 Nita’s locker cannot be adjacent to Trisha’s locker.

 Declarations:
 children = EnumSort([Fred, Juan, Marc, Paul, Nita, Rachel, Trisha])
 lockers = EnumSort([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
 assigned = Function([children] -> [lockers])

 Output
 CLOVER:
 ForAll([l1:lockers, l2:lockers], Implies(And(assigned(Nita) == l1,
 assigned(Trisha) == l2), Abs(l1 - l2) != 1))

 Logic-LM:
 ForAll([l:lockers], Implies(assigned(Nita) == l, And(assigned(Trisha) !=
 l, assigned(Trisha) != l+1, assigned(Trisha) != l-1)))

 Error Analysis of Logic-LM
 It means Nita’s locker cannot be adjacent and the same to Trisha’s locker. The additional constraint
 should be eliminated.

                        Figure 13: Example #3 of error analysis of Logic-LM.


 Input
 Target sentence:
 Each division is toured at least once.

 Declarations:
 days = EnumSort([Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday])
 divisions = EnumSort([Operations, Production, Sales])
 toured = Function([days] -> [divisions])

 Output
 CLOVER:
 ForAll([d:divisions], Exists([day:days], toured(day) == d))

 Logic-LM:
 ForAll([d:divisions], Exists([d:days], toured(d) == d))

 Error Analysis of Logic-LM
 Variable d is simultaneously assigned to two sorts.

                        Figure 14: Example #4 of error analysis of Logic-LM.


                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Input
 Target sentence:
 Each building was owned by exactly one of the families.

 Declarations:
 families = EnumSort([Trents, Williamses, Yandells])
 buildings = EnumSort([forge, granary, inn, mill, stable])
 owned = Function([families, buildings] -> [bool])

 Output
 CLOVER:
 ForAll([b:buildings], Exists([f:families], And(owned(f, b),
 ForAll([f2:families], Implies(f2 != f, Not(owned(f2, b)))))))

 Logic-LM:
 ForAll([b:buildings], Exists([f:families], owned(f, b)))

 Error Analysis of Logic-LM
 It means each building was owned by at least one of the families, not exactly one of the families.

                       Figure 15: Example #5 of error analysis of Logic-LM.


 Input
 Target sentence:
 Neither the inn nor the mill belonged to the owner of the forge.

 Declarations:
 families = EnumSort([Trents, Williamses, Yandells])
 buildings = EnumSort([forge, granary, inn, mill, stable])
 owned = Function([families, buildings] -> [bool])

 Output
 CLOVER:
 ForAll([f:families], Implies(owned(f, forge), And(Not(owned(f, inn)),
 Not(owned(f, mill)))))

 Logic-LM:
 ForAll([b:buildings], Implies(owned(forge, b), Not(Or(owned(inn, b),
 owned(mill, b)))))

 Error Analysis of Logic-LM
 The domain of the function does not match with the declarations.

                       Figure 16: Example #6 of error analysis of Logic-LM.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Input
 Target sentence:
 Reigel’s bowl can be displayed only in either position 1 or position 6.

 Declarations:
 potters = EnumSort([Larsen, Mills, Neiman, Olivera, Park, Reigel, Serra,
 Vance])
 positions = EnumSort([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6])
 displayed = Function([positions] -> [potters])

 Output
 CLOVER:
 ForAll([p:positions], Implies(displayed(p) == Reigel, Or(p == 1, p == 6)))

 Logic-LM:
 Or(displayed(1) == Reigel, displayed(6) == Reigel)

 Error Analysis of Logic-LM
 It means Reigel’s bowl is displayed in either position 1 or position 6. We note that Reigel’s bowl can-
 not be displayed.

                       Figure 17: Example #7 of error analysis of Logic-LM.


 Input
 Target sentence:
 If Nash is assigned to a committee, Nash must be the leader for that committee.

 Declarations:
 volunteers = EnumSort([Haddad, Joslin, Kwon, Molina, Nash])
 committees = EnumSort([X, Y, Z])
 positions = EnumSort([leader, secretary, treasurer])
 assigned = Function([committees, positions] -> [volunteers])

 Output
 CLOVER:
 ForAll([c:committees], Implies(Exists([p:positions], assigned(c, p) ==
 Nash), assigned(c, leader) == Nash))

 Logic-LM:
 ForAll([c:committees], Implies(assigned(c, leader) == Nash,
 ForAll([p:positions], assigned(c, p) != Nash)))

 Error Analysis of Logic-LM
 The formula is always false. Variable p should not be leader.

                       Figure 18: Example #8 of error analysis of Logic-LM.


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Input
 Target sentence:
 Nottingham and Sunnyside are both visited, but not on consecutive days.

 Declarations:
 days = EnumSort([Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday])
 neighborhoods = EnumSort([Hidden Hills, Lakeville, Nottingham, Oldtown,
 Park Plaza, Sunnyside])
 visited = Function([days] -> [neighborhoods])

 Output
 CLOVER:
 And(Exists([d:days], visited(d) == Nottingham), Exists([d:days],
 visited(d) == Sunnyside), ForAll([d1:days, d2:days],
 Implies(And(visited(d1) == Nottingham, visited(d2) == Sunnyside), Abs(d1 -
 d2) > 1)))

 Logic-LM:
 And(Exists([d:days], visited(d) == Nottingham), Exists([d:days],
 visited(d) == Sunnyside), Not(Exists([d:days], And(visited(d) ==
 Nottingham, visited(d+1) == Sunnyside))))

 Error Analysis of Logic-LM
 It means that Nottingham is visited the day before Sunnyside is visited. We note that the opposite
 should be also possible.

                       Figure 19: Example #9 of error analysis of Logic-LM.


                                                   30
