Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


U NIVERSAL GENERALIZATION GUARANTEES FOR
WASSERSTEIN DISTRIBUTIONALLY ROBUST MODELS
 Tam Le         Jérôme Malick
 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK
 Grenoble, 38000, France



                                             A BSTRACT

         Distributionally robust optimization has emerged as an attractive way to train ro-
         bust machine learning models, capturing data uncertainty and distribution shifts.
         Recent statistical analyses have proved that generalization guarantees of robust
         models based on the Wasserstein distance have generalization guarantees that do
         not suffer from the curse of dimensionality. However, these results are either ap-
         proximate, obtained in specific cases, or based on assumptions difficult to verify
         in practice. In contrast, we establish exact generalization guarantees that cover a
         wide range of cases, with arbitrary transport costs and parametric loss functions,
         including deep learning objectives with nonsmooth activations. We complete our
         analysis with an excess bound on the robust objective and an extension to Wasser-
         stein robust models with entropic regularizations.


1     I NTRODUCTION

1.1   WASSERSTEIN ROBUSTNESS : MODELS AND GENERALIZATION

Machine learning models are challenged in practice by many obstacles, such as biases in data, adver-
sarial attacks, or data shifts between training and deployment. Towards more resilient and reliable
models, distributionally robust optimization has emerged as an attractive paradigm, where training
no longer relies on minimizing the empirical risk but rather on an optimization problem that takes
into account potential perturbations in the data distribution; see e.g., the review articles Kuhn et al.
(2019); Blanchet et al. (2021a).
More specifically, the approach consists in minimizing the worst-risk among all distributions in a
neighborhood of the empirical data distribution. A natural way (Mohajerin Esfahani & Kuhn, 2018)
to define such a neighborhood is to use the optimal transport distance, called the Wasserstein distance
(Cédric & Villani, 2009). Between two suitable distributions Q and Q′ on a sample space Ξ, we may
define the optimal transport cost among all coupling π on Ξ × Ξ having Q and Q′ as marginals:
                           Wc (Q, Q′ ) =         inf          E(ξ,ζ)∼π [c(ξ, ζ)],                    (1)
                                              π∈P(Ξ×Ξ)
                                           [π]1 =Q,[π]2 =Q′

where c : Ξ × Ξ → R is a non-negative cost function. When c is the power p ≥ 1 of a distance on
Ξ, this corresponds to the p-Wasserstein distance. For a class of loss functions F, the Wasserstein
distributionally robust counterpart of the standard empirical risk minimization (ERM) then writes
                               min             sup             Eξ∼Q [f (ξ)],                         (2)
                               f ∈F
                                      Q∈P(Ξ),Wc (P
                                                 bn ,Q)≤ρ


for a chosen radius ρ of the Wasserstein ball centered at the empirical data distribution, denoted Pbn .
This procedure is often referred to as Wasserstein Distributionally Robust Optimization (WDRO).
In the degenerate case ρ = 0, we have Q = Pbn and (2) boils down to ERM. If ρ > 0, the training
captures data uncertainty and provides more resilient learning models; see e.g. the discussions and
illustrations in Shafieezadeh-Abadeh et al. (2015); Sinha et al. (2018); Zhao & Guan (2018); Kwon
et al. (2020); Li et al. (2020); Taskesen et al. (2021); Gao et al. (2022); Arrigo et al. (2022); Belbasi
et al. (2023).


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To support theoretically the modeling versatility and the practical success of these robust models,
some statistical guarantees have been proposed in the literature. For a population distribution P ,
                                                                                                 Pn
i.i.d. samples ξ1 , . . . , ξn drawn from P , and the associated empirical distribution Pbn := n1 i=1 δξi ,
the best concentration results for the Wasserstein distance (Fournier & Guillin, 2015) gives that if
the radius ρ is large enough, then the Wasserstein ball around Pbn contains the true distribution
P with high probability, which in turn gives directly (see Mohajerin Esfahani & Kuhn (2018)) a
generalization bound of the form

                                   sup         Eξ∼Q [f (ξ)] ≥ Eξ∼P [f (ξ)].                            (3)
                          Q∈P(Ξ),Wc (P
                                     bn ,Q)≤ρ



This bound is exact in the sense that it introduces no approximation term between the true risk and
the robust risk, unlike standard generalization bounds of ERM (Vapnik (1999); Bartlett & Mendel-
son (2006)). This property (3) is specific to WDRO and highlights its potential to give more resilient
models: the left-hand-side, which is the quantity that we compute from data and optimize by train-
ing, provides a control on the right-hand-side which is the idealistic population risk.
In order to obtain such an attractive guarantee, Mohajerin Esfahani & Kuhn (2018) needs to take a
large radius ρ. Indeed, the direct application of concentration results of Fournier & Guillin (2015)
                                    1
requires a radius scaling as O(1/n d ), where d is the data dimension. Due to the exponential depen-
dence, in high dimension, this value is almost constant with respect to n, hence suggesting that the
exact bound (3) can hold only for conservative values of ρ.
Recent works have proposed various statistical guarantees for WDRO by establishing generalization
bounds that do not suffer from the above curse of the dimension; we further discuss them in    √the
related work section in section 1.3. These results generally feature a radius ρ scaling as O(1/ n),
which is the standard rate in ERM generalization bounds.√Yet, no existing result on robust models
precisely retrieve the original exact bound (3) with the 1/ n rate, in a general setting.


1.2   C ONTRIBUTIONS AND OUTLINE

In this paper, we establish exact generalization guarantees of the form (3) under general assumptions
that cover many machine learning situations. Our results apply to any kind of data lying in a metric
space (e.g. classification and regression tasks with mixed features) and general classes of continuous
loss functions (e.g. from standard regression tasks to deep learning models) as long as standard
compactness conditions are satisfied. For instance, our results cover nonsmooth objectives that
are particularly present in deep learning with the use of ReLU activation function, max-pooling
operator, or optimization layers.
To avoid using concentration results of Fournier & Guillin (2015) involving a radius scaling as
       1
O(1/n d ), we develop a novel optimization-based proof, directly tackling the nonsmoothness of
the robust objective function (2) with tools from variational analysis (Clarke, 1990; Rockafellar
                                                                                              √ &
Wets, 1998; Aliprantis & Border, 2006). We thus obtain general results with ρ scaling as O(1/ n),
capturing all possible nonsmoothness and coinciding with previous study for robust linear models
(Shafieezadeh-Abadeh et al., 2019).
Moreover, our approach is systematic enough to (i) provide estimates of the excess errors quantifying
by how much the robust objective may exceed the true risk, and (ii) extend to the recent versions of
Wasserstein/Sinkhorn distributionally robust problems that involve (double) regularizations (Azizian
et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2023). We thus complete the only existing analysis of regularized WDRO
(Azizian et al., 2023a) by obtaining generalization results for double regularization (Azizian et al.,
2023b) when dealing with arbitrary costs and nonsmooth objectives.
The paper is structured as follows. First, Section 2 introduces and illustrates the setting of this work.
Then Section 3 presents and discusses the main results: the generalization guarantees (Theorem 3.1
and Theorem 3.2), the excess risk bounds (Proposition 3.1 and Proposition 3.3) and the specific
case of linear models (Section 3.2). This section ends with Section 3.4 discussing the limitations of
our study and potential extensions. Finally, Section 4 highlights our proof techniques, combining
classical concentration lemma and advanced nonsmooth analysis.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1.3   R ELATED WORK

The majority of papers studying generalization bounds of Wasserstein distributionally robust models
establish approximate generalization bounds. These approximate bounds introduce vanishing terms
depending on n and ρ which embody the bias of WDRO. One of the first papers on such approximate
bounds is Lee & Raginsky (2018), and important results in this direction include Blanchet et al.
(2021b); Blanchet & Shapiro (2023) about asymptotical results for smooth losses, and Chen &
Paschalidis (2018) about non-asymptotically results for linear models and for smooth loss functions.
Let us also mention Yang & Gao (2022) which deals with 0-1 loss, and Gao (2022) which focuses
on Wasserstein-1 uncertainty and the connection with Lipschitz norm regularization. In this paper,
we rather focus of exact bounds of the form of (3), which are out of reach of ERM-based models,
and thus capture the essence of WDRO.
The literature about exact bounds is scarcer than the one about approximate bounds and signifi-
cantly different in terms of proof techniques. Let us mention Shafieezadeh-Abadeh et al. (2019)
which establishes exact guarantees for linear regression models, and Gao (2022) which proposes
tighter results for linear regression and Wasserstein-1 uncertainty. The closest work to our paper is
Azizian et al. (2023a), which initiates a general study on exact bounds. There, the authors establish
                                                                                              √
generalization results similar to ours, namely: exact bounds (3) in a regime where ρ > O(1/ n). In
sharp contrast with our work, the results from Azizian et al. (2023a) rely on restrictive assumptions
to overcome the nonsmoothness of the robust objective: the squared norm for the cost c, a Gaussian
reference distribution, additional growth conditions, and abstract compactness conditions. We will
further compare the setting and the results, in Section 2 and Section 3 and in the supplemental. In
our work, we directly deal with nonsmoothness, thanks to tools from nonsmooth analysis, and thus
we are able to alleviate extra assumptions and capture nonsmooth losses.
The only other work regarding nonsmooth objectives is An & Gao (2021) which derives results on
piece-wise smooth losses, at the price of abstract approximating constants. We underline that none
of the existing results properly covers nonsmooth losses, in particular deep learning objectives with
nonsmooth activations.
Finally, let us mention that there exist many works studying generalization guarantees for other
distributionally robust models, involving different uncertainty quantification. For instance, Zeng &
Lam (2022) studies nonparametric families and divergence-based ambiguity, and Bennouna et al.
(2023) considers deep learning models with ambiguity sets that combine KL divergence and ad-
versarial corruptions. Though duality is always an important tool, we face in our framework to
the specific difficulty of dealing with Wasserstein distances, so that the technicalities as well as the
results of our paper are essentially different and disjoint from these works.


1.4   N OTATIONS

Throughout the paper (Ξ, d) is a metric space, where d is a distance, F is a family of loss functions
f : Ξ → R and c : Ξ × Ξ → R is a cost function.


On probability spaces. We denote the space of probability measures on Ξ by P(Ξ). For all
π ∈ P(Ξ × Ξ), i ∈ {1, 2}, we denote the ith marginal of π by [π]i . We denote the Dirac mass at
ξ ∈ Ξ by δξ . Given a measurable function g : Ξ → R, we denote the expectation of g with respect
to Q ∈ P(Ξ) by Eξ∼Q [g(ξ)] and we may also use the shorthand EQ [g].


On function spaces. For a function f : Ξ → R, we denote the uniform norm by ∥f ∥∞ :=
supξ∈Ξ |f (ξ)|. By extension, we use the notation ∥F∥∞ := supf ∈F ∥f ∥∞ . Whenever well-defined,
we denote the set of maximizers of f on Ξ by arg maxΞ f := {ζ ∈ Ξ : f (ζ) = maxξ∈Ξ f (ξ)}.
We say f is Lipschitz with constant L > 0 if for all ξ, ζ ∈ Ξ, |f (ξ) − f (ζ)| ≤ Ld(ξ, ζ). For a
function ϕ, we denote ∂λ+ ϕ the right-sided derivative with respect to λ ∈ R, and ∂λ ϕ its derivative,
whenever well-defined.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2       A SSUMPTIONS AND EXAMPLES
In this section, we present the general framework and illustrate it by standard examples. We make
the following assumptions on the sample space Ξ, the space of loss functions F and the cost c.
Assumption 2.1.
        1. (Ξ, d) is compact.
        2. c is jointly continuous with respect to d, non-negative, and c(ξ, ζ) = 0 if and only if ξ = ζ.
        3. Every f ∈ F is continuous and (F, ∥ · ∥∞ ) is compact. Furthermore, if N (t, X , ∥ · ∥∞ ) is
           the t-packing number of F 1 , then Dudley’s entropy of F,
                                              Z ∞p
                                    IF :=           log N (t, X , ∥ · ∥∞ )dt,
                                                      0
           is finite.
Our setting encompasses many machine learning scenarios, with parametric models, general loss
functions, and general transport costs as illustrated in the two paragraphs below. In Section 3.4, we
will also come back on these assumptions to discuss their reach and limitations.
Before this, let us underline that this set of assumptions is quite general and allows us to conduct a
unified study and to relieve several restrictions found in previous works. In particular, we mention
that the results of the closest work Azizian et al. (2023a) require convexity of Ξ, differentiability
of losses f ∈ F, restriction to the squared Euclidean distance, together with a strong2 structural
property on F (Azizian et al., 2023a, Assumption 5), aimed at overcoming the nonsmoothness of
the WDRO objective. In our sketch of proof in Section 4, we explain how we deal directly with
nonsmoothness.

Parametric models and loss functions. Our setting covers a wide range of machine learning
models. Consider a parametric family F = {f (θ, ·) : θ ∈ Θ}, where the parameter space Θ ⊂ Rp
is compact and the loss function f : Θ × Ξ → R is jointly Lipschitz continuous.
                                                                           √ Since Ξ is compact,
such a family is compact regarding ∥ · ∥∞ and IF is finite, proportional to p. This situation covers
regression models, k-means clustering, and neural networks. For example: least-squares regression
                              f (θ, (x, y)) = (⟨θ, x⟩ − y)2 ,        Ξ ⊂ Rm × R,
logistic regression

                        f (θ, (x, y)) = log 1 + e−y⟨θ,x⟩ ,           Ξ ⊂ Rm × {−1, 1},
and support vector machines with hinge loss
                        f (θ, (x, y)) = max {0, 1 − y⟨θ, x⟩} , Ξ ⊂ Rm × {−1, 1}.
Note that the latter is not differentiable, due to the max term. The k-means model also introduces a
non-differentiable loss function:
                         f (θ, x) =      min        ∥θi − x∥22 ,   Θ ⊂ RK×m, Ξ ⊂ Rm .
                                      i∈{1,...,K}

Finally, most deep learning models fall in our setting. Indeed, they involve loss functions of the form
                                          f (θ, (x, y)) = ℓ(h(θ, x), y),
where ℓ is a dissimilarity measure and h is a parameterized prediction function, built as a compo-
sition of affine transformations (which are the parameters to train) with activation functions (see
e.g. Krizhevsky et al. (2012); LeCun et al. (2015); Redmon et al. (2016)). Our setting is gen-
eral enough to encompass all continuous activation functions, even non-differentiable ones (as
ReLU = max(0, ·)) as well as other nonsmooth elementary blocks (as max-pooling (He et al.,
2016), sorting procedures (Sander et al., 2023), and optimization layers (Amos & Kolter, 2017)).
As already underlined in introduction, these examples involving non-differentiable terms are not
covered by existing results.
    1
    The maximal number of functions in F that are at least at a distance t from each other.
    2
    We show in Proposition F.5 in the appendix that the compactness assumptions (Azizian et al., 2023a,
Assumption 5) hide strong conditions on the maximizers.


                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sample space and transport costs. The choice of the transport cost c depends on the nature of the
data and of the potential data uncertainty. For instance, if the variables are continuous with Ξ ⊂ Rm ,
we consider the distance d = ∥ · − · ∥p induced by ℓp -norm (p ∈ [1, ∞]) and the cost as a power
(q ∈ [1, ∞)) of the distance
                                         c(ξ, ξ ′ ) = ∥ξ − ξ ′ ∥qp .
                                                             m
If the variables are discrete with Ξ ⊂ {1, . . . , J} , we consider the distance
                                                             m
                                                             X
                                              d(ξ, ξ ′ ) =         1{ξi ̸=ξ′ }
                                                                           i
                                                             i=1

and the cost as a power of this distance. If we deal with mixed data, i.e. they contain both continuous
and discrete variables, a sum of the previous costs can be considered. In classification, for instance,
with the samples composed of features x ∈ Rm and a target y ∈ {−1, 1}, we may take
                                   c((x, y), (x′ , y ′ )) = ∥x − x′ ∥qp + κ1{y̸=y′ }
for a chosen κ > 0. This cost is obviously continuous with respect to the natural distance
                                   d((x, y), (x′ , y ′ )) = ∥x − x′ ∥p + 1{y̸=y′ } .
This extends to mixed data with categorical, binary and continuous variables; see e.g. Belbasi et al.
(2023).

3       M AIN RESULTS
3.1       WASSERSTEIN ROBUST MODELS

Our main result establishes a generalization bound (3) for Wasserstein distributionally robust opti-
mization (WDRO). Given a distribution Q ∈ P(Ξ) and a loss f ∈ F, the robust risk around Q with
radius ρ > 0 is defined as
                                 Rρ,Q (f ) :=            sup               Eξ∼Q′ [f (ξ)].                  (4)
                                                Q′ ∈P(Ξ),Wc (Q,Q′ )≤ρ

In particular, taking Q = Pbn and Q = P in the above expression, we consider the empirical robust
risk, R
      bρ (f ), and the true robust risk, Rρ (f ):

                               R
                               bρ (f ) := R b (f )
                                           ρ,Pn              and     Rρ (f ) := Rρ,P (f ).
We also introduce the following constant, called the critical radius ρcrit ,

                     ρcrit := inf Eξ∼P min c(ξ, ζ) : ζ ∈ arg max f              .                          (5)
                                     f ∈F                                         Ξ

Note that ρcrit is defined from the true distribution P , which makes it a deterministic quantity. In
our results, we will make the further assumption that ρcrit > 0, which excludes3 losses that remain
constant across all samples from the ground truth distribution P . This assumption reasonably aligns
with practice and is also in line with the previous works An & Gao (2021); Azizian et al. (2023a).
For instance, obtaining a predictor that precisely interpolates the ground truth distribution (leading
to a loss equal to zero everywhere) is unrealistic. In this context, our main result √then establishes the
generalization bound when n is large enough, for ρ scaling with the standard 1/ n rate.
Theorem 3.1 (Generalization guarantee for Wasserstein robust models). If Assumption 2.1 holds
                                                                             2
and ρcrit > 0, then there exists λlow > 0 such that when n > 16(α+β)  ρ2crit
                                                                               and ρ > √αn , we have with
probability at least 1 − δ,
                                    bρ (f ) ≥ Eξ∼P [f (ξ)]
                                    R                                  for all f ∈ F,
where α and β are the two constants
                                               r                                                   r
                   1             2       2∥F∥∞        2                              96IF 4∥F∥∞             4
α = 48 ∥F∥∞ +             IF +         +         2 log ,                          β=      +            2 log .
                 λlow           λlow      λlow        δ                              λlow   λlow            δ
    3
        See Proposition F.3, in Appendix F.1 about the interpretation of the critical radius.


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                     √
This result with ρ scaling with the dimension-free 1/ n rate is similar to (Azizian et al., 2023a,
Theorem 3.1), but guaranteed now in the wide setting of Assumption 2.1. We achieve this result
through a novel proof technique that combines nonsmooth analysis rationale with classical concen-
tration results; as depicted in Section 4.
The critical radius ρcrit can be interpretated as a degeneracy threshold of the robust problem; we
discuss it below in Remark 3.1. The quantity λlow is a positive constant related to the geometry of
the Wasserstein ambiguity set; we discuss it in Section 4.2. Interestingly, in the case of linear and
logistic regressions, we can establish estimates of these two quantities; see Section 3.2.
We now extend the previous result to derive the following excess risk bound.
Proposition 3.1 (Excess risk for Wasserstein robust models). Let α be given by Theorem 3.1. Under
                                     2
Assumption 2.1, if ρcrit > 0, n > 16α
                                  ρ2
                                       and ρ ≤ ρcrit    √α
                                                  4 − n , then with probability at least 1 − δ,
                                     crit

                               bρ (f ) ≤ Rρ+ √α (f )
                               R                              for all f ∈ F.
                                               n

                           p
In particular, if c = d(·, ·) with p ∈ [1, ∞) and every f ∈ F is LipF -Lipschitz, then
                                                                      1
                                                                  α p
                              Rρ (f ) ≤ Eξ∼P [f (ξ)] + LipF ρ + √
                              b                                         .
                                                                   n
Remark 3.1 (The critical radius as a degeneracy threshold). The critical radius ρcrit defined in (5)
plays the role of a degeneracy threshold for the problem, as follows. We can show that if ρ ≥ ρcrit ,
there exists f ∈ F satisfying Rρ (f ) = maxξ∈Ξ f (ξ). Furthermore, for ρ ≥ ρcrit + √αn , with high
probability, there exists f ∈ F such that R bρ (f ) = maxξ∈Ξ f (ξ). In other words, if the radius
is chosen too high compared to ρcrit , both generalization and excess bounds (Theorem 3.1 and
Proposition 3.1) are vacuous. A proof of this result is found in Appendix, Proposition F.1.

3.2   G ENERALIZATION GUARANTEES OF WASSERSTEIN ROBUST LINEAR MODELS

We now illustrate how our generalization guarantees from Section 3.1 apply to linear models. In this
part, we assume the support of P to be contained in a ball of diameter D centered at 0.
We recover estimates similar to the ones from the study of linear models (Shafieezadeh-Abadeh
et al., 2019), hence showing the tightness of our approach. We consider the setting from
Shafieezadeh-Abadeh et al. (2019) where the parameter space is assumed to be bounded away from
zero (Shafieezadeh-Abadeh et al., 2019, Assumption 4.5):
Assumption 3.1 (Hypothesis domain). F = {f (θ, ·) : θ ∈ Θ}, where Θ ⊂ Rp is a compact subset
and c = ∥ · − · ∥2 . There exists ω > 0 satisfying one of the following:

      1. (Linear regression). f (θ, (x, y)) = (⟨θ, x⟩ − y)2 , inf θ∈Θ ∥(θ, −1)∥2 ≥ ω and ω ≥ 1.

      2. (Logistic regression). f (θ, (x, y)) = log(1 + e−y⟨θ,x⟩ ) and inf θ∈Θ ∥θ∥2 ≥ ω.

Under this assumption, we obtain estimates for the constants λlow and ρcrit .
Proposition 3.2 (Linear models dual bound and critical radius). Under Assumption 3.1, let Ω :=
supθ∈Θ ∥θ∥2 . Theorem 3.1 and Proposition 3.1 hold with ρcrit ≥ D2 and

      1. (Linear regression) λlow ≥ ω2 under Assumption 3.1.1.
                                               ω
      2. (Logistic regression) λlow ≥                   under Assumption 3.1.2.
                                            8 1+eDΩ

These specific results show that we retrieve the constants from Shafieezadeh-Abadeh et al. (2019),
for normalized data in the case of logistic regression. In particular, our constant α is proportional
to 1/ω 2 for the linear regression. Remark that the tails parameters of f (ξ) and ξ ∼ P from
Shafieezadeh-Abadeh et al. (2019) √ correspond in our case to ||F||∞ and D respectively, and Dud-
ley’s constant is proportional to p. In the case of linear regression, the dual lower bound is directly
related to the parameter bound ω from Shafieezadeh-Abadeh et al. (2019). In more advanced set-
tings (e.g. deep learning), the positivity of λlow can be seen as an implicit definition of the hypothesis
bound ω.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.3    R EGULARIZED WASSERSTEIN ROBUST MODELS

Part of the success of optimal transport in machine learning is the use of regularization, and specifi-
cally entropic regularization, opening the way to nice properties and efficient computational schemes
(Cuturi, 2013; Peyré & Cuturi, 2019). Recall that the entropy-regularized optimal transport cost
writes, for a reference coupling π0 ∈ P(Ξ×Ξ) as
                         Wcτ (P, Q) =         min          {Eπ [c] + τ DKL (π∥π0 )}                       (6)
                                           π∈P(Ξ×Ξ)
                                         [π]1 =P,[π2 ]=Q

where DKL (·∥π0 ) is the Kullback-Leibler divergence w.r.t. π0 :
                                      (R
                                                  dπ
                                         Ξ×Ξ
                                              log dπ   dπ when π ≪ π0
                         KL(π∥π0 ) =                 0                                                    (7)
                                        ∞                   otherwise.

Given the definition of KL(·∥π0 ), note that the minimum (6) is well-defined, attained at some cou-
pling π P,Q ≪ π0 , see e.g. Peyré & Cuturi (2019). Regularization have been recently studied in
the context of WDRO: Wang et al. (2023) introduces an entropic regularization in constraints for
computational interests, Azizian et al. (2023a) considers an entropic regularization in the objective
for generalization, and Azizian et al. (2023b) studies a general regularization in both constraints and
objective.
Following the most general case (Azizian et al., 2023b) we consider the robust risk with double
regularization
                     τ,ϵ
                   Rρ,Q  (f ) :=      sup         E[π]2 [f ] − ϵDKL (π∥π0 )
                                    π∈P(Ξ×Ξ), [π]1 =Q
                                    Eπ [c]+τ KL(π∥π0 )≤ρ

with two parameters ϵ > 0 and τ ≥ 0. We introduce the conditional moment4 of π0
                                     mc := max Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) [c(ξ, ζ)],
                                             ξ∈Ξ

and the regularized critical radius
                              h             hτ                i                   h f (ζ) ii
          ρτ,ϵ
           crit := inf Eξ∼P Eζ∼π0f /ϵ (·|ξ)    f (ζ) + c(ξ, ζ) − τ log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ       ,            (8)
                   f ∈F                      ϵ
          f /ϵ
where dπ0 (·|ξ) ∝ ef /ϵ dπ0 (·|ξ). In this setting, the generalization guarantee states as follows.
Theorem 3.2 (Generalization for double regularization). Under Assumption 2.1, there exist ατ,ϵ > 0
                                                                                         16(ατ,ϵ +β τ,ϵ )2
and β τ,ϵ > 0 depending on F, Ξ, c, ϵ, τ and δ, such that if ρτ,ϵ
                                                                crit > 4mc , when n > (ρτ,ϵ            2
               n         o                                                                  crit −4mc )
                     τ,ϵ
                    α
and ρ > max mc , √n , we have with probability at least 1 − δ, for all Q ∈ P(Ξ) such that
Wcτ (P, Q) ≤ ρ,
                    bρτ,ϵ (f ) ≥ Eζ∼Q [f (ζ)] − ϵDKL (π P,Q ∥π0 )
                    R                                                     for all f ∈ F,
where π P,Q is the optimal coupling in (6).5

This result is similar to the one of Theorem 3.1 and is also similar to the only other generaliza-
tion result existing for regularized WDRO (Azizian et al., 2023a). Let us explicit below the main
differences.
Unlike Wasserstein robust models (Theorem 3.1), regularization leads to an inexact generalization
guarantee, where the regularized empirical robust risk bounds a proxy for the true risk EP [f ]. This
is in line with the regularization in optimal transport that induces a bias in the Wasserstein metric,
preventing Wcτ (P, P ) from being null. In particular, given an arbitrary τ > 0, Wcτ (P, P ) may not
be lower than ρ.
The coefficients ατ,ϵ and β τ,ϵ exhibit similar relations with λτ,ϵ
                                                                low , ∥F∥∞ , and IF to their counter-
parts α and β from Theorem 3.1. Their complete expressions can be found in the extended version
                                                                                  ∥·−ξ∥2
                                                                              −
   4
     E.g.,if c(ξ, ζ) = 12 ∥ξ−ζ∥2 and π0 (·|ξ) is a truncated Gaussian π0 (·|ξ) ∝ e 2σ2 1Ξ , we have mc ∝ σ 2 .
   5
     Due to the definition of the Kullback-Leibler divergence (7), we necessarily have π P,Q ≪ π0 .


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of Theorem 3.2 (in Appendix, Theorem E.2). In particular, the expression of ατ,ϵ suggests mc , ϵ, τ
and ρ should be of comparable order. Compared to the standard setting, we have an estimate of the
                                                                                     ∥F ∥
                                                                                    − ϵ∞
lower bound λτ,ϵ                                                         τ,ϵ
              low (Lemma D.2) showing dependence on the loss family: λlow = O e              .
Compared to Azizian et al. (2023a), we underline that our result covers the double regularization
case. Moreover, it is valid for an arbitrary π0 whereas the one from Azizian et al. (2023a) relies on
the specific form of π0 involving a Gaussian term. Our result is thus more flexible, allowing freedom
in the choice of π0 .
As for the standard case (Proposition 3.1), we obtain an excess risk bound. The main difference in
this setting is that we lose the explicit control of the true risk. This is mainly due to the inexactness
brought by regularization.
Proposition 3.3 (Excess risk for doubly regularized robust models). Let ατ,ϵ be given by Theo-
                                                             16ατ,ϵ2                    ρτ,ϵ      τ,ϵ
rem 3.2. Under Assumption 2.1, if ρτ,ϵ crit > 4mc , n > (ρτ,ϵ    −4m c )2 and mc < ρ ≤
                                                                                         crit
                                                                                         4    − α√n , then
                                                            crit
with probability at least 1 − δ,
                              bρτ,ϵ (f ) ≤ Rτ,ϵ ατ,ϵ (f )
                              R                             for all f ∈ F.
                                            ρ+ √  n



3.4   L IMITATIONS AND POTENTIAL EXTENSIONS

In the previous sections, we presented our results and their universality, to underline that they are
widely applicable in machine learning. In this section, we discuss three relative limitations of our
results: the assumption of the compactness of sample space, the assumption of finite Dudley entropy,
and the expression of constants.
Compactness of the sample space Ξ (Assumption 2.1.1) is essential to control worst-case distri-
butions of the robust objective (2), given our level of generality. This assumption is in line with
some recent studies (Azizian et al., 2023a; Blanchet & Shapiro, 2023); see also Gao et al. (2022)
which uses bounded growth assumptions. Such assumptions are reasonable, as standard statistical
frameworks involving Gaussian or heavy tail distributions could be covered by truncating.
In our study, considering loss families with finite Dudley’s entropy (Assumption 2.1.3) is crucial
to limit the dependence on the sample dimension. This assumption is satisfied for Lipschitz para-
metric losses with bounded parameter space, and it is not clear if a dimension-free generalization
could be established for non-parametric losses. For instance, Zeng & Lam (2022) dealing with non-
parametric losses, exhibits generalization guarantees with exponential dependence in the dimension.
Finally, regarding the generalization constants, we could improve them in several ways. For instance,
leveraging the structure of specific models would allow to obtain estimates of the constants λlow ,
ρcrit ; this is what we did for the linear models in Section 3.2. Taking into account the optimization
procedure which selects a small set of solutions could also be interesting in order to have sharper
constants on the class F.

4     S KETCH OF THE PROOF
This section presents our strategy to prove the generalization results of Section 3 (Theorems 3.1 and
3.2). The strength of our approach is to use flexible nonsmooth analysis arguments, able to cover
the general situation of arbitrary (continuous) cost and objective functions. We present the main
approach in Section 4.1, based on a duality formula and a lower bound λlow on the dual variable. In
Section 4.2, we focus on the latter and shed lights on its role. Finally, we explain in Section 4.3 the
extension to regularized models.

4.1   M AIN APPROACH

Compared to the original formulation (4), the dual representation significantly diminishes the prob-
lem’s degrees of freedom, and is usually the starting point of most studies of WDRO; see e.g. Kuhn
et al. (2019); Azizian et al. (2023b). Given any distribution Q ∈ P(Ξ) and radius ρ > 0, it holds
                              Rρ,Q (f ) = inf {λρ + Eξ∼Q [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)]} ,
                                           λ≥0


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the dual generator ϕ is a convex function with respect to λ, and Lipschitz continuous with
respect to f . For Wasserstein robust models, ϕ has the expression (see e.g. Blanchet & Murthy
(2019))
                               ϕ(λ, f, ξ) = sup {f (ζ) − λc(ξ, ζ)} .
                                               ζ∈Ξ

Observe that ϕ is naturally convex in λ, but also nonsmooth. The originality of our approach is to
build on this nonsmoothness by using a rationale of nonsmooth analysis, which allows us to cover
the case of other dual generators as for the regularized versions; see next section.
Let us then outline the main steps to establish Theorem 3.1:

      1. Dual lower bound. Given β > 0 appearing in Theorem 3.1, We establish the existence of
         a dual lower bound λlow > 0, which holds with high probability for all f ∈ F, for a small
         enough radius ρ ≤ ρcrit
                             4 − n:
                                    √β

                                                n                         o
                             R
                             bρ (f ) =   inf      λρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] .
                                         λ∈[λlow ,∞)

         This is done in Appendix E.1.
      2. Concentration of the radius. Let us write for all λ ≥ λlow and f ∈ F
                                             EP [ϕ(λ, f )] − EPbn [ϕ(λ, f )]

             λρ + EPbn [ϕ(λ, f )] ≥ λ ρ −                                       + EP [ϕ(λ, f )]
                                                            λ
                                  ≥ λ(ρ − αn ) + EP [ϕ(λ, f )],                                      (9)
         where we define the uniform gap αn by
                        n
              αn = sup EP [µϕ(µ−1,f )] − EPbn [µϕ(µ−1,f )] : (µ, f ) ∈ (0, λ−1
                                                                            low ]×F .               (10)

         This quantity can be bounded with high probability by √αn – where α > 0 is the constant
         from Theorem 3.1. To obtain such a bound, we rely on known uniform concentration
         theorems for Lipschitz functions (Boucheron et al., 2013). Concentration constants are
         computed in Appendix C.
      3. Generalization bound. We can now obtain the result. Taking the infimum over λ ≥ λlow
         in (9), we obtain with high probability for all f ∈ F,
                                   bρ (f ) ≥ Rρ−α/√n (f ) ≥ Eξ∼P [f (ξ)],
                                   R

         whenever √αn < ρ ≤ ρcrit     √β                                               2   2
                                 4 − n . This interval is nonempty if n > 16(α + β) /ρcrit . Since
         R                                                    bρ (f ) ≥ Eξ∼P [f (ξ)] for any ρ > √α
         bρ (f ) is non-decreasing with respect to ρ, we have R
                                                                                                       n
         as long as n > 16(α + β)2 /ρ2crit .

4.2   D EFINITION OF THE LOWER BOUND

λlow defines a dual lower bound on the true risk
Rρ (f ), making it independent from samples random-
ness. In our proof, we then show that this lower bound
holds with high probability on the empirical robust
risk R
     bρ (f ) using the convexity of ϕ. This is done in
Proposition E.2 in Appendix.
We now explain the definition of λlow more precisely.
We consider the maximal radius function
       ρmax (λ) = inf Eξ∼P [−∂λ+ ϕ(λ, f, ξ)].
                   f ∈F


At a given λ, this function indicates the maximum         Figure 1: A central object of our analysis: the
                                                          maximal radius ρmax , defined from the lower
value ρ can take for the dual solution of Rρ (f ) to be
                                                          envelope of derivatives of ϕ.

                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


higher than λ. In particular, by convexity of ϕ, we can easily verify that: if ρ ≤ ρmax (λ) for all
λ ∈ [0, 2λlow ], then the dual bound 2λlow holds on the true robust risk, and we have:
                                Rρ (f ) =      inf       {λρ + Eξ∼P [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)]} .                  (11)
                                            λ≥2λlow

As illustrated by Figure 1, ρmax reaches its highest value at zero, which is actually the critical radius,
ρcrit . The crux of the proof is to show there exists a value λlow allowing to choose radius values of
order ρcrit . This comes by passing to the limit in ρmax (λ).
Lemma 4.1. We have limλ→0+ ρmax (λ) = ρcrit . In particular, there exists λlow > 0 such that if
ρ ≤ ρcrit
        4 , then (11) holds for all f ∈ F.

Such a result may be surprising since ϕ is a nonsmooth function and ρmax , defined from the lower
envelope of (discontinuous) derivatives of ϕ is in general highly discontinuous. In order to establish
it, we use tools from nonsmooth analysis (Appendix A.1) and leverage compactness of the class F.

4.3   E XTENSION TO ( DOUBLE ) REGULARIZATION

The strategy of Section 4.1 is flexible enough to be extended to the regularized setting of Section 3.3.
Indeed, the regularized problem also has a dual representation, with a dual generator defined by
                                                                 h f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i
                       ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ) = (ϵ + λτ ) log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ+λτ           ,

where ϵ > 0 and τ ≥ 0. Strong duality has been shown in Azizian et al. (2023b). We explain in
Appendix B, Proposition B.2 how it applies to our general setting. This regularized dual generator
leads to a smooth counterpart of the key function ρmax from the proof and to the regularized critical
radius (8). In particular, we can show the regularized version of Lemma 4.1.
                               τ,ϵ                                 τ,ϵ                             ρτ,ϵ
Lemma 4.2. limλ→0+ ρτ,ϵ
                    max (λ) = ρcrit . In particular, there exists λlow > 0 such that if ρ ≤         4 ,
                                                                                                    crit



                 Rρτ,ϵ (f ) =     inf     {λρ + Eξ∼P [ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ)]}           for all f ∈ F.
                                λ≥2λτ,ϵ
                                    low



Then we obtain Theorem 3.2 by repeating the proof scheme of Section 4.1. The core results that
simultaneously lead to Theorems 3.1 and 3.2 are gathered in Appendix E.1. Due to the smoothness
                          τ,ϵ
of ρτ,ϵ
    max an expression of λlow can also be obtained; see Lemma D.2.

The key difference brought by regularization is that Lipschitzness of µϕ(µ−1,f, ξ) is lost when
µ → 0. This prevents us from using the concentration result – essential to bound the gap αn (10) –
unless we can set a lower bound on µ, or equivalently an upper bound on λ. This issue is inherent
to the regularized setting and may occur over the whole family F and the space Ξ; we provide
an example in Proposition F.4 to illustrate this. The next lemma aims to overcome this issue by
establishing the existence of such an upper bound for any distribution (see Lemma D.3 for a proof).
                                               ∥∞
Lemma 4.3. Let Q ∈ P(Ξ), ρ > mc and λup := 2∥F
                                            ρ−mc . Then for all f ∈ F,
                           τ,ϵ
                          Rρ,Q (f ) =          inf       {λρ + Eξ∼Q [ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ)]} .
                                            λ∈[0,λup ]


5     C ONCLUDING REMARKS
In this work, we provide exact generalization guarantees of (regularized) Wasserstein robust models,
without restrictive assumptions (on the transport cost or the class of functions). We achieve these
universal results by directly addressing the intrinsic nonsmoothness of robust problems. Our results
thus give users freedom when choosing the radius ρ: it is not necessary to consider specific regimes
for ρ in order to expect good generalization from robust models. Further research can now focus on
practical aspects: it would be of premier interest to design efficient procedures for selecting ρ, and
more generally, scalable algorithms for solving distributionally robust optimization problems.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partially supported by MIAI@Grenoble Alpes (ANR-19-P3IA-0003).


                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
C.D. Aliprantis and K.C. Border. Infinite Dimensional Analysis. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006.
Brandon Amos and J Zico Kolter. Optnet: Differentiable optimization as a layer in neural networks.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 136–145. PMLR, 2017.
Yang An and Rui Gao. Generalization bounds for (wasserstein) robust optimization. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 10382–10392, 2021.
Adriano Arrigo, Christos Ordoudis, Jalal Kazempour, Zacharie De Grève, Jean-François Toubeau,
  and François Vallée. Wasserstein distributionally robust chance-constrained optimization for en-
  ergy and reserve dispatch: An exact and physically-bounded formulation. European Journal of
  Operational Research, 296(1):304–322, 2022.
Waı̈ss Azizian, Franck Iutzeler, and Jérôme Malick. Exact generalization guarantees for (regular-
 ized) wasserstein distributionally robust models. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko,
 M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36,
 pp. 14584–14596. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023a.
Waı̈ss Azizian, Franck Iutzeler, and Jérôme Malick. Regularization for wasserstein distributionally
 robust optimization. ESAIM: Control, Optimisation and Calculus of Variations, 29:33, 2023b.
Peter L. Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Empirical minimization. Probability Theory and Related
  Fields, 135(3):311–334, Jul 2006. ISSN 1432-2064. doi: 10.1007/s00440-005-0462-3. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1007/s00440-005-0462-3.
Reza Belbasi, Aras Selvi, and Wolfram Wiesemann. It’s all in the mix: Wasserstein machine learning
  with mixed features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.12230, 2023.
Amine Bennouna, Ryan Lucas, and Bart Van Parys. Certified robust neural networks: generaliza-
 tion and corruption resistance. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
 Learning, ICML’23. JMLR.org, 2023.
Jose Blanchet and Karthyek Murthy. Quantifying distributional model risk via optimal transport.
  Mathematics of Operations Research, 44(2):565–600, 2019.
Jose Blanchet and Alexander Shapiro. Statistical limit theorems in distributionally robust optimiza-
  tion, 2023.
Jose Blanchet, Karthyek Murthy, and Viet Anh Nguyen. Statistical analysis of wasserstein distribu-
  tionally robust estimators. In Tutorials in Operations Research: Emerging Optimization Methods
  and Modeling Techniques with Applications, pp. 227–254. INFORMS, 2021a.
Jose Blanchet, Karthyek Murthy, and Nian Si. Confidence regions in Wasserstein distributionally
  robust estimation. Biometrika, 109(2):295–315, 2021b.
Stéphane Boucheron, Gábor Lugosi, and Pascal Massart. Concentration Inequalities: A Nonasymp-
   totic Theory of Independence. Oxford University Press, 2013.
Ruidi Chen and Ioannis Ch. Paschalidis. A robust learning approach for regression models based on
  distributionally robust optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 19(13):1–48, 2018.
F.H. Clarke. Optimization and Nonsmooth Analysis. Classics in Applied Mathematics. Society for
  Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1990.
Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 26, 2013.
Villani Cédric and Cédric Villani. Optimal transport : old and new / Cédric Villani. Grundlehren
  der mathematischen Wissenschaften. Springer, Berlin, 2009. ISBN 978-3-540-71049-3.
M. D. Donsker and S. R. S. Varadhan. Asymptotic evaluation of certain markov process expectations
 for large time, i. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 28(1):1–47, 1975.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R. Durrett. Probability: Theory and Examples. Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic
  Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, 2010.

Nicolas Fournier and Arnaud Guillin. On the rate of convergence in wasserstein distance of the
  empirical measure. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 162(3):707–738, 2015.

Rui Gao. Finite-sample guarantees for wasserstein distributionally robust optimization: Breaking
  the curse of dimensionality. Oper. Res., 71(6):2291–2306, 2022.

Rui Gao and Anton Kleywegt. Distributionally robust stochastic optimization with wasserstein
  distance. Math. Oper. Res., 48(2):603–655, 2023.

Rui Gao, Xi Chen, and Anton J Kleywegt. Wasserstein distributionally robust optimization and
  variation regularization. Operations Research, 2022.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), June 2016.

Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep con-
  volutional neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 25,
  2012.

Daniel Kuhn, Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani, Viet Anh Nguyen, and Soroosh Shafieezadeh-Abadeh.
  Wasserstein distributionally robust optimization: Theory and applications in machine learning. In
  Operations research & management science in the age of analytics, pp. 130–166. Informs, 2019.

Yongchan Kwon, Wonyoung Kim, Joong-Ho Won, and Myunghee Cho Paik. Principled learning
  method for wasserstein distributionally robust optimization with local perturbations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5567–5576. PMLR, 2020.

Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444,
  2015.

Jaeho Lee and Maxim Raginsky. Minimax statistical learning with wasserstein distances. In S. Ben-
  gio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.

Jiajin Li, Caihua Chen, and Anthony Man-Cho So. Fast epigraphical projection-based incremental
   algorithms for wasserstein distributionally robust support vector machine. In Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 4029–4039, 2020.

Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani and Daniel Kuhn. Data-driven distributionally robust optimization
  using the wasserstein metric: performance guarantees and tractable reformulations. Mathematical
  Programming, 171(1):115–166, 2018.

Gabriel Peyré and Marco Cuturi. Computational optimal transport: With applications to data sci-
  ence. Found. Trends Mach. Learn., 11(5–6):355–607, 2019.

Y. Polyanskiy and Y. Wu. Information theory: From coding to learning. prepublication, 2023.

J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi. You only look once: Unified, real-time object
   detection. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
   779–788, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2016. IEEE Computer Society.

R. Tyrrell Rockafellar and Roger J. B. Wets. Variational Analysis. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
  1998.

Michael E. Sander, Joan Puigcerver, Josip Djolonga, Gabriel Peyré, and Mathieu Blondel. Fast,
 differentiable and sparse top-k: A convex analysis perspective. In Proceedings of the 40th Inter-
 national Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’23. JMLR.org, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Soroosh Shafieezadeh-Abadeh, Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani, and Daniel Kuhn. Distributionally
  robust logistic regression. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems - Volume 1, NIPS’15, pp. 1576–1584, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2015.
  MIT Press.
Soroosh Shafieezadeh-Abadeh, Daniel Kuhn, and Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani. Regularization via
  mass transportation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(103):1–68, 2019.
Aman Sinha, Hongseok Namkoong, and John C. Duchi. Certifying some distributional robustness
 with principled adversarial training. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representa-
 tions, 2018.
Bahar Taskesen, Man-Chung Yue, Jose Blanchet, Daniel Kuhn, and Viet Anh Nguyen. Sequential
  domain adaptation by synthesizing distributionally robust experts. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, PMLR, pp. 10162–10172, 2021.
Vladimir Vapnik. The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. Springer: New York, 1999.
Martin J. Wainwright. High-Dimensional Statistics: A Non-Asymptotic Viewpoint. Cambridge Series
 in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, 2019.
Jie Wang, Rui Gao, and Yao Xie. Sinkhorn distributionally robust optimization, 2023.
Zhen Yang and Rui Gao. Wasserstein regularization for 0-1 loss, 2022.
Yibo Zeng and Henry Lam. Generalization bounds with minimal dependency on hypothesis class
  via distributionally robust optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27576–27590, 2022.
Luhao Zhang, Jincheng Yang, and Rui Gao. A simple and general duality proof for wasserstein
  distributionally robust optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.00362, 2022.
Chaoyue Zhao and Yongpei Guan. Data-driven risk-averse stochastic optimization with wasserstein
  metric. Operations Research Letters, 46(2):262–267, 2018.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Supplemental material

This supplemental gathers recalls, technical lemmas and definitions, examples, and detailed proofs
of the results from the main text. The core of our contributions is presented in Appendices D and E.
The whole supplemental is organized as follows:
– In Appendix A, we recall some essential mathematical tools. They include continuity notions in
nonsmooth analysis, the envelope formula to differentiate supremum functions (Theorem A.1) and
a uniform concentration inequality (Theorem A.2).
– In Appendix B, we present strong duality results for WDRO and its regularized version. We
explain in particular how the duality theorem from Azizian et al. (2023b) can be easily adapted to
our setting.
– Appendix C contains preliminary computations in view of applying the uniform concentration
theorem.
– In Appendix D, we demonstrate the existence of a dual lower bound in the standard and regularized
cases. In particular, the proofs involve the maximal radius introduced in Section 4.2.
– By using these preliminary results, in Appendix E, we prove our main results. They include the
generalization theorems (Theorem 3.1 and 3.2), the excess bounds (Proposition 3.1 and Proposi-
tion 3.3) and the constants of the linear models (Proposition 3.2).
– Appendix F contains results supporting several remarks of the main. They include the interpreta-
tion of the critical radius in the regularized case, a counter-example justifying the upper bound in the
regularized case and the interpretation of the restrictive compactness assumptions used in Azizian
et al. (2023a).

N OTATIONS

Throughout the proofs will use the following notations:

On probability spaces. Given the metric space (Ξ, d) where d is a distance, we denote the space
of probability measures on Ξ by P(Ξ). For all π ∈ P(Ξ × Ξ), i ∈ {1, 2}, we denote the ith marginal
of π by [π]i . We denote the Dirac mass at ξ ∈ Ξ by δξ . Given a measurable function g : Ξ → R,
we denote the expectation of g with respect to Q ∈ P(Ξ) by Eξ∼Q [g(ξ)] and we may also use the
shorthand EQ [g]. For π ∈ P(Ξ), we use the notation π g for the Gibbs distribution dπ g ∝ eg dπ.

On function spaces. For a continuous function f : Ξ → R, we denote the uniform norm by
∥f ∥∞ = supξ∈Ξ |f (ξ)|. By extension, if F is a set of functions we denote ∥F∥∞ := supf ∈F ∥f ∥∞ .
Whenever well-defined, we denote the set of maximizers of f on Ξ by arg maxΞ f := {ζ ∈ Ξ :
f (ζ) = maxξ∈Ξ f (ξ)}. Given a metric space (X , dist), we say a function h : X → R is Lipschitz
with constant L > 0 if for all x, y ∈ X , |h(x) − h(y)| ≤ L dist(x, y). For ϕ : R × X → R,
we denote ∂λ+ ϕ the right-sided derivative with respect to λ ∈ R, and ∂λ ϕ the derivative, whenever
well-defined.

In Wasserstein robust models.

       • ϕ(λ, f, ξ) = supζ∈Ξ {f (ζ) − λc(ξ, ζ)}
       • ψ(µ, f, ξ) = µϕ(µ−1 , f, ξ)
       • ρcrit = inf f ∈F Eξ∼P [min {c(ξ, ζ) : ζ ∈ arg maxΞ f }] .

In Wasserstein robust models with double regularization.
                                                 h f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i
     • ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ) = (ϵ + λτ ) log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ+λτ

       • ψ τ,ϵ (µ, f, ξ) = µϕτ,ϵ (µ−1 , f, ξ)


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                               h                                                         h f (ζ) ii
       • ρτ,ϵ
                                                 τ
          crit = inf f ∈F Eξ∼P   Eζ∼π
                                      f /ϵ
                                           (·|ξ) ϵ
                                                   f (ζ) + c(ξ, ζ)  − τ log Eζ∼π 0 (·|ξ)  e ϵ       .
                                        0



A     R ECALLS AND TECHNICAL PRELIMINARIES
A.1   N ONSMOOTH ANALYSIS

In this part, we use the notation G : X ⇒ Y to denote a function G defined on X and valued in the
set of subsets of Y.
Semicontinuity notions will be necessary to understand the proof of Lemma D.1. They are regularity
notions recurrently arising when manipulating nonsmooth convex functions.
Definition A.1 (Lower and upper semicontinuity (Aliprantis & Border, 2006, 2.42)). Let (X , dist)
be a metric space and let f : X → R. Then
      1. f is called lower semicontinuous if for all x ∈ X , lim inf y→x f (y) ≥ f (x).
      2. f is called upper semicontinuous if for all x ∈ X , lim supy→x f (y) ≤ f (x).
In particular, if f is lower semicontinuous, then −f is upper semicontinuous.
Outer semicontinuity can be seen as the set-valued counterpart of upper semicontinuity:
Definition A.2 (Outer semicontinuity). Let X and Y two metric spaces. Then a measurable and
compact-valued map G : X ⇒ Y is called outer semicontinuous at x ∈ X if for all open subset
V ⊂ Y containing G(x), there exists a neighborhood U of x which is such that for all w ∈ U ,
G(w) ⊂ V .

Semicontinuity of maximum and arg max functions are central to the proof of Lemma D.1:
Lemma A.1 (Semicontinuity of maximum value (Aliprantis & Border, 2006, 17.30)). Let X and Ξ
be two metric spaces and let G : X ⇒ Ξ be outer semicontinuous with nonempty compact values,
h : Ξ × Ξ → R continuous. Then the function

                                    x 7→ max{h(x, v) : v ∈ G(x)}
is upper semicontinuous. In particular, u 7→ min{h(u, v) : v ∈ G(x)} is lower semicontinuous.
Lemma A.2 (Semicontinuity of maximizers (Aliprantis & Border, 2006, 17.31)). If X is a metric
space, (Ξ, d) is a compact metric space, and h : X × Ξ → R is continuous, then the function
x 7→ maxz∈Ξ h(x, z) is continuous, and the set-valued map x 7→ arg maxz∈Ξ h(x, z) is outer
semicontinuous.

We recall the definition of gradient for a nonsmooth convex function. This the subdifferential.
Definition A.3 (Subdifferential of convex function). Let ϕ : Rm → R be a convex function. Then
we call subdifferential of ϕ the set-valued map ∂ϕ : Rm ⇒ Rm such that for all x ∈ Rm and
y ∈ Rm ,
                            ϕ(y) ≥ ϕ(x) + ⟨v, y − x⟩ for all v ∈ ∂ϕ(x).
In particular, we may apply the envelope formula to compute the subdifferential of a maximum
function:
Theorem A.1 (Envelope formula (Clarke, 1990, Cor. 1, Chapter 2.8)). Let (Ξ, d) be a compact
metric space and g : Rm × Ξ → R such that
      1. For all x ∈ Rm , g(x, ·) is continuous.
      2. For all ζ ∈ Ξ, g(·, ζ) is convex with subdifferential ∂x g(·, ζ).
Then G := supζ∈Ξ g(·, ζ) is convex on Rm , and its subdifferential is given for all x ∈ Rm by
                     ∂G(x) := conv{v : v ∈ ∂x g(x, ζ), ζ ∈ arg max g(x, ·)}.
                                                                       Ξ
where conv denotes the convex hull of a set.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2     U NIFORM CONCENTRATION INEQUALITY

We recall concentration inequalities that gives a high probability uniform bound for a family of
bounded and Lipschitz functions. We refer the reader to Boucheron et al. (2013) for a complete
reference on concentration inequalities, and Lemma G.2 in Azizian et al. (2023a) for the proof of
such a result.
Theorem A.2 (Uniform concentration (Azizian et al., 2023a, Lem. G.2)). Let (X , dist) be a (totally
bounded) separable metric space, P a probability distribution on a probability space Ξ, and Pbn =
 1
   Pn                              i.i.d.
n     i=1 δξi with ξ1 , . . . , ξn ∼ P . Consider a measurable mapping X : X × Ξ → R and assume
that,

      (i) There is a constant L > 0 such that, for each ξ ∈ Ξ, x 7→ X(x, ξ) is L-Lipschitz.
      (ii) X(·, ξ) almost surely belongs to [a, b].

Then, for any δ ∈ (0, 1), we respectively have

       1. With probability at least 1 − δ,
                                                                             s
                  n                                o 48LI(X , dist)             log 1δ
              sup Eξ∼Pbn [X(x, ξ)] − Eξ∼P [X(x, ξ)] ≤    √          + (b − a) 2        .
              x∈X                                          n                      n

       2. With probability at least 1 − δ,
                                                                             s
                  n                                o 48LI(X , dist)             log 1δ
              sup Eξ∼P [X(x, ξ)] − Eξ∼Pbn [X(x, ξ)] ≤    √          + (b − a) 2        .
              x∈X                                          n                      n

The quantity I(X , dist) is defined as follows:
Definition A.4. Given a compact metric space (X , dist), Dudley’s entropy integral, I(X , dist), is
defined as                                   Z ∞p
                             I(X , dist) :=       log N (t, X , dist)dt
                                                0
where N (t, X , dist) denotes the t-packing number of X , which is the maximal number of points in
X that are at least at a distance t from each other.

We may recall some properties of Dudley’s entropy for Cartesian products and segments from R.
These are known results, see e.g. Wainwright (2019) and Lemmas G.3 and G.4 from Azizian et al.
(2023a) for proofs.
Lemma A.3 (Dudley’s integral estimates).
       1. (on Cartesian products) Let (X1 , dist1 ) and (X2 , dist2 ) be two metric spaces. Consider
          the product space X := X1 × X2 equipped with the distance dist := dist1 + dist2 . Then
          we have the inequality
                                   I(X , dist) ≤ I(X1 , dist1 ) + I(X2 , dist2 ).

       2. (on R) Let c > 0. Then we have the inequality
                                                                    3c
                                               I([0, c], | · |) ≤      .
                                                                    2

B     S TRONG DUALITY
In this section, we recall duality results for WDRO Blanchet & Murthy (2019); Gao & Kleywegt
(2023); Zhang et al. (2022) and its regularized version Azizian et al. (2023b). We recall the optimal
transport cost with cost c for (Q, Q′ ) ∈ P(Ξ) × P(Ξ):
           Wc (Q, Q′ ) = inf E(ξ,ζ)∼π [c(ξ, ζ)] : π ∈ P(Ξ × Ξ), [π]1 = Q, [π]2 = Q′ .



                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition B.1 (Strong duality, standard WDRO). Under Assumption 2.1, for any Q ∈ P(Ξ) and
ρ > 0, then
                       sup     Eξ∼Q′ [f (ξ)] = inf {λρ + Eξ∼Q [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)]} .
                      Wc (Q,Q′ )≤ρ                 λ≥0


Proof. This is an application of Theorem 1 from Blanchet & Murthy (2019). In particular, Assump-
tions 1 and 2 from Blanchet & Murthy (2019) are satisfied through Assumption 2.1.
Proposition B.2 (Strong duality, regularized WDRO). Under Assumption 2.1, for any Q ∈ P(Ξ)
and ρ > 0, if there exists π ∈ P(Ξ × Ξ) such that Eπ [c] + τ DKL (π∥π0 ) < ρ, then
                          Eξ∼[π]2 [f (ζ)] − ϵ KL(π∥π0 ) = inf {λρ + Eξ∼Q [ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ)]} .

           sup                                                                               (12)
     π∈P(Ξ×Ξ),[π]1 =Q                                        λ≥0
    Eπ [c]+τ KL(π∥π0 )≤ρ

In particular, if ρ > mc , (12) holds.

Proof. This is an application of Theorem 3.1 from Azizian et al. (2023b), which is a corollary to
Theorem 2.1 Azizian et al. (2023b). In particular, if ρ > mc the coupling π0 satisfies Eπ0 [c] +
τ DKL (π0 ∥π0 ) = Eπ0 [c] ≤ mc < ρ.
Note that the proofs of Theorems 2.1 and 3.1 from Azizian et al. (2023b) can be easily extended to a
general compact metric space (Ξ, d), without being rewritten entirely. Precisely, only two arguments
in their proofs rely on the real-valued setting Rockafellar & Wets (1998) but can be directly extended
to a general metric space as follows:

       • In the proof of Theorem 2.1 from Azizian et al. (2023b), one needs to justify
                                                                             "            #
                sup {Eξ∼P [φ(ξ, ζ(ξ))] : ζ : Ξ → Ξ measurable} ≥ Eξ∼P sup φ(ξ, ζ) .               (13)
                                                                                 ζ∈Ξ

           To this end, the authors use the notion of normal integrand from Rockafellar & Wets (1998).
           Actually, (13) holds true in a compact metric space: if φ is continuous, then by compactness
           of Ξ, the set-valued map ξ 7→ arg maxζ∈Ξ φ(ξ, ζ) admits a measurable selection ζ ∗ , by the
           measurable maximum theorem, see 18.19 in Aliprantis & Border (2006). Such a selection
           ζ ∗ then satisfies φ(ξ, ζ ∗ (ξ)) = supζ∈Ξ φ(ξ, ζ) for all ξ ∈ Ξ, hence the result.

       • In the proof of Theorem 3.1 from Azizian et al. (2023b), g φ = supζ∈Ξ φ(·, ζ) is actually
         continuous by Lemma A.2 and the approximation by the infimal convolutions (gkφ )k∈N
         need not be done.

Note that the convexity of Ξ is not required (although stated in Assumption 1 from Azizian et al.
(2023b)).

C     C ONCENTRATION CONSTANTS
In this part, we compute some constants in view of applying Theorem A.2 for the main proofs of
Appendix E.

C.1   S TANDARD WDRO

For standard WDRO, we compute bounds (i) and global Lipschitz constants (ii) for ϕ and ψ.
Lemma C.1 (Concentration conditions for WDRO). we have the following:

      1.  (i) For all λ ≥ 0, f ∈ F and ξ ∈ Ξ, ϕ(λ, f, ξ) ∈ [−∥F∥∞ , ∥F∥∞ ].
         (ii) For all λ ≥ 0 and ξ ∈ Ξ, f 7→ ϕ(λ, f, ξ) is Lipschitz continuous on F with constant
              1.
                                                                            h              i
                                                                               ∥F ∥∞ ∥F ∥∞
      2. (i) Given λlow > 0, for all µ ∈ (0, λ−1
                                              low ] and f ∈ F, ψ(µ, f, ξ) ∈ − λlow , λlow .



                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           (ii) For all ξ ∈ Ξ, (µ, f ) 7→ ψ(µ, f, ξ) is Lipschitz continuous on (0, λ−1
                                                                                     low ] with constant
                           −1
                ∥F∥∞ + λlow .

Proof. 1. (i) Let (λ, f, ξ) ∈ R+ × F × Ξ. Recall that ϕ(λ, f, ξ) := supζ∈Ξ {f (ζ) − λc(ξ, ζ)}.
Since c is nonnegative, we have ϕ(λ, f, ξ) ≤ ∥F∥∞ . On the other hand, since c(ξ, ξ) = 0, we also
have ϕ(λ, f, ξ) ≥ f (ξ) ≥ −∥F∥∞ . Finally, we have ϕ(λ, f, ξ) ∈ [−∥F∥∞ , ∥F∥∞ ].
(ii) Let λ ≥ 0, ξ ∈ Ξ and (f, f ′ ) ∈ F × F. For all ζ ∈ Ξ, we have
                f (ζ) − λc(ξ, ζ) − ϕ(λ, f ′ , ξ) ≤ f (ζ) − λc(ξ, ζ) − (f ′ (ζ) − λc(ξ, ζ))
                                               ≤ f (ζ) − f ′ (ζ)
                                               ≤ ∥f − f ′ ∥∞ .
Taking the supremum over ζ ∈ Ξ on the left-hand side gives ϕ(λ, f, ξ) − ϕ(λ, f ′ , ξ) ≤ ∥f − f ′ ∥∞ .
Permuting the roles of f and f ′ yields |ϕ(λ, f, ξ) − ϕ(λ, f ′ , ξ)| ≤ ∥f − f ′ ∥∞ . We proved that
ϕ(λ, ·, ξ) is 1-Lipschitz continuous.
2. (i) Now, let λlow > 0 and let (µ, f, ξ) ∈ (0, λ−1
                                                  low ] × F × Ξ be arbitrary. Then we have


                                                                        ∥F∥∞
                          µϕ(µ−1 , f, ξ) = sup {µf (ζ) − c(ξ, ζ)} ≤           .
                                            ζ∈Ξ                          λlow

On the other hand, using c(ξ, ξ) = 0 we obtain

                                                                     ∥F∥∞
                             sup {µf (ζ) − c(ξ, ζ)} ≥ µf (ξ) ≥ −           ,
                             ζ∈Ξ                                      λlow
                               h               i
whence we have µϕ(µ−1 , f, ξ) ∈ − ∥F ∥∞ ∥F ∥∞
                                   λlow , λlow .

(ii) Toward a proof of 2. (ii), let λlow > 0, and ξ ∈ Ξ and µ ∈ (0, λlow ]. Remark that
µϕ(µ−1 , f, ξ) = supζ∈Ξ {µf (ζ) − c(ξ, ζ)}. The function (µ, f ) 7→ µϕ(µ−1 , f, ξ) write as a com-
position u ◦ v where u(h) := supζ∈Ξ {h(ζ) − c(ξ, ζ)} for h ∈ C(Ξ, R), and v(µ, f ) := µf for
µ ∈ (0, λ−1
         low ]. u is 1-Lipschitz continuous with respect to ∥ · ∥∞ . As to v, we can write

                                µf − µ′ f ′ = µ(f − f ′ ) + f ′ (µ − µ′ ),
whence v is clearly (∥F∥∞ + λ−1                                    −1
                                low )-Lipschitz continuous on (0, λlow ] × F. By composition, u ◦ v
                                                  −1
is Lipschitz continuous with constant ∥F∥∞ + λlow .

C.2   R EGULARIZED WDRO

We now compute the analogous constants of the regularized setting.
We will use the following convexity lemma repeatedly:
Lemma C.2 ((Azizian et al., 2023a, Lem. G.7)). Let g : Ξ → R be a measurable bounded function
and Q ∈ P(Ξ). Then one has the inequality
                                                              g(ζ)
                                                   ζ∼Q [g(ζ)e      ]
                                       h    i E
                             log Eζ∼Q eg(ζ) ≤              g(ζ)
                                                                     .
                                                    Eζ∼Q [e ]

The following is the regularized version of Lemma C.1:
Lemma C.3 (Concentration conditions for regularized WDRO). Let ξ ∈ Ξ. Then

      1.    (i) For all λ ≥ 0 and f ∈ F, ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ) ∈ [−∥F∥∞ − λmc , ∥F∥∞ ] .
           (ii) For all λ ≥ 0, f 7→ ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ) is Lipschitz continuous with constant 1.
                                                   −1
      2.   (i) Given λlow > 0, for all µ ∈ [λ−1
                                             up , λlow ] and f                 ∈ F, ψ τ,ϵ (µ, f, ξ) ∈
               h                    i
                − ∥F ∥∞       ∥F ∥∞
                   λlow − mc , λlow   .


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                             −1
           (ii) Given λup > 0, (µ, f ) 7→ ψ τ,ϵ (µ, f, ξ) is Lipschitz continuous on [λ−1
                                                                                       up , λlow ] × F

                                                  λup ϵ
                with constant ∥F∥∞ + λ−1low + ϵ+λup τ mc .


                                                                            f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ)       ∥F ∥∞
Proof. 1. (i) Let (λ, f, ξ) ∈ R+ × F × Ξ. For all ζ ∈ Ξ, e                       ϵ+λτ       ≤ e ϵ+λτ . This gives
                                                                 h ∥F ∥∞ i
                       ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ) ≤ (ϵ + λτ ) log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ+λτ = ∥F∥∞ .                                   (14)
                       f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ)         −∥F ∥∞ −λc(ξ,ζ)
On the other hand, e        ϵ+λτ       ≥e            , which gives
                                                  ϵ+λτ

                                                     ∥F ∥∞             h λc(ξ,ζ) i
                     ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ) ≥ (ϵ + λτ ) log e− ϵ+λτ Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e− ϵ+λτ
                                                                        h λc(ξ,ζ) i
                                    ≥ −∥F∥∞ + (ϵ + λτ ) log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e− ϵ+λτ
                                       ≥ −∥F∥∞ − λmc ,                                                              (15)
                                                                                                               λs
where for the last inequality we used Jensen’s inequality on the convex function s 7→ e− ϵ+λτ .
Combining (14) and (15) gives
                                  ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ) ∈ [−∥F∥∞ − λmc , ∥F∥∞ ].
(ii) Let ξ ∈ Ξ and λ ≥ 0. To compute the Lipschitz constant of f 7→ ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ), we compute the
derivative of hv : t 7→ ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f + tv, ξ) where t ∈ R and for an arbitrary direction v ∈ F. We have
                                                            h f (ζ)+tv(ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i
                          hv (t) = (ϵ + λτ ) log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e       ϵ+λτ           .

It is easy to verify that h′v (t) = E          f +tv−λc(ξ,·)           [v(ζ)] , whence |h′v (t)| ≤ ∥v∥∞ . This means
                                                   ϵ+λτ
                                         ζ∼π0                  (·|ξ)
that ϕτ,ϵ (λ, ·, ξ) has Lipschitz constant 1.
2. (i) Let λlow > 0 and (µ, f, ξ) ∈ (0, λ−1
                                         low ] × F × Ξ. λ. We deduce from (14) and (15), with
λ = µ−1 , that
                            τ,ϵ −1              ∥F∥∞         ∥F∥∞
                        µϕ (µ , f, ξ) ∈ −             − mc ,         .
                                                 λlow         λlow
(ii) Now, let ξ ∈ Ξ. Our goal is to compute a Lipschitz constant of (µ, f ) 7→ µϕτ,ϵ (µ−1 , f, ξ) on
         −1
[λ−1
   up , λlow ] × F. We first compute a Lipschitz constant of
                                                                          h µf (ζ)−c(ξ,ζ) i
                  hf : µ 7→ µϕτ,ϵ (µ−1 , f, ξ) = (µϵ + τ ) log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e µϵ+τ
            −1
on [λ−1
      up , λlow ], for an arbitrary f ∈ F. The derivative of hf is
                                  h                       µf (ζ)−c(ξ,ζ)
                                                                        i
                 1     Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) (ϵc(ξ, ζ) + τ f (ζ))e µϵ+τ                                h µf (ζ)−c(ξ,ζ) i
 h′f (µ) =                                  h µf (ζ)−c(ξ,ζ) i             + ϵ log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e µϵ+τ           ,
              µϵ + τ             E           e µϵ+τ
                                   ζ∼π0 (·|ξ)

which we write

                                             ϵc(ξ, ζ) + τ f (ζ)                      h µf (ζ)−c(ξ,ζ) i
           h′f (µ) = E µf −c(ξ,·)                                 + ϵ log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e µϵ+τ           .            (16)
                      π0 µϵ+τ (·|ξ)               µϵ + τ

                                                                       −c(ξ,·)
We bound h′f (µ) above. By Lemma C.2 with Q = π0 (·|ξ) and g = µfµϵ+τ          , we have that

                             h µf (ζ)−c(ξ,ζ) i                     ϵµf (ζ) − ϵc(ξ, ζ)
            ϵ log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e    µϵ+τ        ≤E   µf −c(ξ,·)
                                                 ζ∼π0 µϵ+τ (·|ξ)        µϵ + τ

which gives h′f (µ) ≤ E         µf −c(ξ,·)   [f (ζ)] ≤ ∥F∥∞ .
                                  µϵ+τ
                           ζ∼π0


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now we bound h′f (µ) below. We start with the first term in (16). Since c is nonnegative, we clearly
have
                                            ϵc(ξ, ζ) + τ f (ζ)     −τ ∥F∥∞
                       E µf −c(ξ,·)                              ≥                              (17)
                         π0 µϵ+τ
                                    (·|ξ)        µϵ  + τ            µϵ + τ
As to the second term of (16), we have by Jensen’s inequality,
                                      h µf (ζ)−c(ξ,ζ) i    ϵµ∥F∥∞     ϵmc
                     ϵ log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e µϵ+τ           ≥−         −                                (18)
                                                            µϵ + τ   µϵ + τ
                                                               λ   ϵm
Combining (17) and (18) gives h′f (µ) ≥ −∥F∥∞ − ϵ+λ
                                                 up    c
                                                    up τ
                                                         . Finally, hf has Lipschitz constant
        up λ c m
∥F∥∞ + ϵ+λ up τ


Since ϕτ,ϵ (µ−1 , ·, ξ) has Lipschitz constant 1, then µ ≤ λ−1                   τ,ϵ −1
                                                            low , the function µϕ (µ    , ·, ξ) has
                       −1
Lipschitz constant λlow .
Now, we can obtain a Lipschitz constant for
                                                           h µf (ζ)−c(ξ,ζ) i
                   h : (µ, f ) 7→ (µϵ + τ ) log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e µϵ+τ           = ψ τ,ϵ (µ, f, ξ).
                               −1              −1
Indeed, for (µ, µ′ ) ∈ [λ−1              −1                   ′
                         up , λlow ] × [λup , λlow ] and (f, f ) ∈ F × F, we can write

         |h(µ, f ) − h(µ′ , f ′ )| ≤ |h(µ, f ) − h(µ′ , f )| + |h(µ′ , f ) − h(µ′ , f ′ )|

                                                      λup ϵ
                                   ≤ ∥F∥∞ +                        |µ − µ′ | + λ−1          ′
                                                                                  low ∥f − f ∥∞ .
                                                   ϵ + λup τ

                                                         λup ϵ
hence h has Lipschitz constant ∥F∥∞ + λ−1     low + ϵ+λup τ mc .


D     D UAL BOUNDS AND MAXIMAL RADIUS
We establish the existence of a dual lower bound on the true robust risk (Lemma 4.1), for the standard
WDRO problem in D.1 and for regularized WDRO in D.2. The results involve the maximal radius
introduced in Section 4.2. For the regularized case, an estimate of the dual lower bound is provided.

D.1    S TANDARD WDRO: CONTINUITY AT ZERO OF THE MAXIMAL RADIUS

For λ ≥ 0, we recall the expression of the maximal radius:
                                    ρmax (λ) = inf Eξ∼P [−∂λ+ ϕ(λ, f, ξ)].
                                                f ∈F

Lemma D.1. ρmax (0) = ρcrit and limλ→0+ ρmax (λ) = ρcrit . In particular, there exists λlow > 0
such that ρmax (λ) ≥ ρcrit
                      4 for all λ ∈ [0, 2λlow ].

Proof. For ξ ∈ Ξ, f − λc(ξ, ·) is continuous, hence we can apply the envelope formula
(Theorem A.1) and the right-sided derivative of ϕ with respect to λ is ∂λ+ ϕ(λ, f, ξ) =
− min {c(ξ, ζ) : ζ ∈ arg maxΞ {f − λc(ξ, ·)}}. For convenience, we use the shorthand
                                      c∗ (ξ, K) := min{c(ξ, z), z ∈ K}
whenever K ⊂ Ξ is compact. By integration and taking the infimum over F we obtain
                          ρmax (λ) = inf Eξ∼P [c∗ (ξ, arg max {f − λc(ξ, ·)})].                     (19)
                                        f ∈F                  Ξ

In particular, ρmax (0) = ρcrit .
To prove the result, it is sufficient to show that lim inf k→∞ ρmax (λk ) ≥ ρcrit for any positive
sequence (λk )k∈N converging to 0. Indeed, the functions Eξ∼P [ϕ(·, f, ξ)] are convex hence their
right-sided derivatives Eξ∼P [−∂λ+ ϕ(·, f, ξ)] are nonincreasing, and ρmax is nonincreasing since it
is an infimum over nonincreasing functions. This means lim supk→∞ ρmax (λk ) ≤ ρmax (0) for any
sequence λk → 0.


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now assume toward a contradiction that there exists ϵ > 0 and a sequence (λk )k∈N from R+ , such
that λk → 0 as k → ∞, and ρmax (λk ) ≤ ρcrit − ϵ for all k ∈ N. From the expression of ρmax (19)
this means that for each k, there exists fk such that Eξ∼P [c∗ (ξ, arg maxΞ fk −λk c(ξ, ·))] ≤ ρcrit − 2ϵ .
By compactness of F with respect to ∥ · ∥∞ , we may assume (fk )k∈N to converge to some f ∗ ∈ F.
In particular, for ξ ∈ Ξ, fk , −λk c(ξ, ·) converges to f ∗ as k → ∞.
Let ξ ∈ Ξ be arbitrary.           (λ, f ) 7→ arg maxΞ {f − λc(ξ, ·)} is outer semicontinu-
ous with compact values (Lemma A.2) and c is jointly continuous, hence (λ, f ) 7→
c∗ (ξ, arg maxΞ {f − λc(ξ, ·))} is lower semicontinuous, see Lemma A.1. We then have
lim inf k→∞ c∗ (ξ, arg maxΞ {fk − λk c(ξ, ·)}) ≥ c∗ (ξ, arg maxΞ f ∗ ). By integration with respect
to ξ ∼ P , we obtain


            Eξ∼P [c∗ (ξ, arg max f ∗ )] ≤ Eξ∼P [lim inf c∗ (ξ, arg max {fk − λk c(ξ, ·)})]
                             Ξ                           k→∞               Ξ
                                             ≤ lim inf Eξ∼P [c∗ (ξ, arg max {fk − λk c(ξ, ·)})]
                                                k→∞                        Ξ
                                                      ϵ
                                             ≤ ρcrit − .
                                                      2

Since, ρcrit ≤ Eξ∼P [c∗ (ξ, arg maxΞ f ∗ )], this yields a contradiction, and allows to conclude.

D.2     R EGULARIZED WDRO: L IPSCHITZ MAXIMAL RADIUS AND UPPER BOUND

D.2.1    L IPSCHITZ CONTINUITY OF THE MAXIMAL RADIUS
For λ ≥ 0, we consider the regularized maximal radius,
                                 ρτ,ϵ                      τ,ϵ
                                  max (λ) = inf Eξ∼P [−∂λ ϕ (λ, f, ξ)].
                                                f ∈F


The following result is the regularized version of Lemma D.1. Compared to the standard setting, the
maximal radius is Lipschitz continuous, leading to an estimate of the dual lower bound.
                             τ,ϵ
Lemma D.2. ρτ,ϵ                        τ,ϵ
               max (0) = ρcrit and ρmax is Lipschitz continuous on R+ with constant

                         2 τ2

                                                   ∥F ∥∞            2∥F ∥∞ mc
                                     2                   +min{ mτc , (ρ−m      } .
                                 ∥F∥ ∞   + m 2,c e   ϵ                    c )ϵ
                         ϵ ϵ2
In particular, setting

                                                            3ϵρτ,ϵ
                     λτ,ϵ
                      low :=
                                                               crit
                                                              ∥F ∥∞                 ∥∞ mc
                                                                                               ,             (20)
                                                                        { mτc , 2∥F
                                                                                 (ρ−mc )ϵ }

                                         τ2    2                    +min
                                 8       ϵ2 ∥F∥∞ + m2,c e
                                                                ϵ



                  ρτ,ϵ                 τ,ϵ
then ρτ,ϵ
      max (λ) ≥    4 for all λ ∈ [0, 2λlow ].
                   crit


Proof. ϕτ,ϵ is differentiable with respect to λ and we can verify that its derivative is given by


                                                    τ f (ζ) + ϵc(ξ, ζ)                      h f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i
   ∂λ ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ) = −E    f −λc(ξ,·)                                  + τ log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ+λτ           .
                          ζ∼π0 ϵ+λτ (·|ξ)                 ϵ + λτ

                        τ,ϵ
This gives ρτ,ϵ
             max (0) = ρcrit For f ∈ F and ξ ∈ Ξ, our goal is now to compute the Lipschitz constant
of λ 7→ ∂λ ϕ (λ, f, ξ). The Lipschitz constant of ρτ,ϵ
              τ,ϵ
                                                      max will then be obtained by integration and
taking the infimum over Lipschitz functions. We compute the appropriate quantities:
                                                                                     f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ)
1. We compute the derivative with respect to λ of u1 : (λ, ζ) 7→ − τ f (ζ)+ϵc(ξ,ζ)
                                                                         ϵ+λτ       e ϵ+λτ :
                              2
                             τ f (ζ) + ϵτ c(ξ, ζ) (τ f (ζ) + ϵc(ξ, ζ))2

                                                                           f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ)
             ∂λ u1 (λ, ζ) =                 2
                                                 +                3
                                                                          e ϵ+λτ .
                                  (ϵ + λτ )             (ϵ + λτ )

                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                  f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ)
2. We compute the derivative with respect to λ of u2 : (λ, ζ) 7→ e                     ϵ+λτ       :

                                          τ f (ζ) + ϵc(ξ, ζ)     f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ)
                             ∂λ u2 (λ, ζ) = −           2
                                                               e ϵ+λτ .
                                               (ϵ + λτ )
                                                           h f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i
3. We compute the derivative of U3 : λ 7→ τ log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ+λτ           :

                                                           2
                                                                                  f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ)
                                                          τ f (ζ)+τ ϵc(ξ,ζ)
                                          Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ)         (ϵ+λτ )2     e          ϵ+λτ 2


                          U3′ (λ) = −                          h f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i                      .
                                                    Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ+λτ

Combining 1, 2 and 3, we are able to compute the derivative of ∂λ ϕτ,ϵ :
                              Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) [u1 (λ, ζ)]Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) [∂λ u2 (λ, ζ)]
     ∂λ2 ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ) = −                                                       + U3′ (λ)
                                           Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) [u2 (λ, ζ)]2
                      h                 2   f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ)
                                                          i
          Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) (τ f (ζ)+ϵc(ξ,ζ))
                            (ϵ+λτ )3      e ϵ+λτ
      =                        h f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i
                   Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ+λτ
                        h                     f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i              h                    f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i
            Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) τ f (ζ)+ϵc(ξ,ζ)
                               (ϵ+λτ )2        e    ϵ+λτ      E ζ∼π0 (·|ξ)
                                                                              τ f (ζ)+ϵc(ξ,ζ)
                                                                                    ϵ+λτ       e ϵ+λτ
         −                                                  h f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i
                                                Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ+λτ

             1                                τ f (ζ) + ϵc(ξ, ζ)
      =            Var      f −λc(ξ,·)                              ,
          ϵ + λτ       ζ∼π ϵ+λτ (·|ξ)               ϵ + λτ

                                                                        f −λc(ξ,·)
where Var        f −λc(ξ,·)         is the variance with respect to π      ϵ+λτ      (·|ξ).
           ζ∼π      ϵ+λτ    (·|ξ)

Note that all quantities can be differentiated under the (conditional) expectation since the derivatives
with respect to λ involve functions that are continuous on the compact sample space Ξ (they are
therefore bounded by a constant), see e.g. Theorem A.5.3 from Durrett (2010). By the property of
the variance, we obtain

                                                                    "                      2 #
                                            1                          τ f (ζ) + ϵc(ξ, ζ)
                 |∂λ2 ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ)| ≤        E      f −λc(ξ,·)
                                         ϵ + λτ ζ∼π0 ϵ+λτ (·|ξ)              ϵ + λτ
                                          2                       2
                                                                 τ ∥F∥2∞ + ϵ2 c(ξ, ζ)2 .

                                        ≤ 3E    f −λc(ξ,·)                                                        (21)
                                         ϵ ζ∼π0 ϵ+λτ (·|ξ)
Now we bound the right-hand side of the last inequality. First, we have
                                   h          f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ)
                                                            i         ∥F ∥∞
                        Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) c(ξ, ζ)2 e ϵ+λτ           ≤ m2,c e ϵ                                          (22)

On the other hand, by Jensen’s inequality, we have
                                                                   ∥F ∥∞
                                      h f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i      λmc
                           Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ+λτ           ≥ e− ϵ+λτ − ϵ                                             (23)

                                          λ  ∥∞ mc
                                              m
                         λmc
We have the alternatives ϵ+λτ ≤ upϵ c = 2∥F                         λmc
                                                   in any case, and ϵ+λτ ≤ mτc whenever τ > 0.
                         n              o (ρ−mc )ϵ
                                  ∥∞ mc
            λmc
This means ϵ+λτ   ≤ min mτc , 2∥F
                               (ρ−mc )ϵ  .
                                                                                      mc 2∥F ∥∞ mc
                                                                 c(ξ, ζ)2 ≤ m2,c emin{ τ , (ρ−mc )ϵ } e ϵ .
                                                                                                       2∥F ∥∞
Dividing (22) by (23), we obtain E               f −λc(ξ,·)
                                              ζ∼π0 ϵ+λτ (·|ξ)
Reinjecting this inequality in (21) gives


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           2
                                     2    τ                 2∥F ∥∞            2∥F ∥∞ mc
                                                                   +min{ mτc , (ρ−m      } := L.
            |∂λ2 ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ)| ≤           ∥F∥ 2
                                                 ∞ + m2,c e    ϵ                    c )ϵ                 (24)
                                     ϵ    ϵ2

This means that for f ∈ F, the function g : (λ, f ) 7→ Eξ∼P [−∂λ ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ)] is L-Lipschitz where
L is given by (24).
                                                                                 ′
We then show that ρτ,ϵ                                                                 2
                    max := inf f ∈F g(·, f ) is L-Lipschitz continuous. Let (λ, λ ) ∈ R , and let
                                             ′                  ′
(fk )k∈N be a sequence from F such that g(λ , fk ) → ρmax (λ ). Then by definition of ρτ,ϵ
                                                          τ,ϵ
                                                                                         max , we
                                                             k→∞
have for all k ∈ N,
                                        ′                        ′                ′
                          ρτ,ϵ
                           max (λ) − g(λ , fk ) ≤ g(λ, fk ) − g(λ , fk ) ≤ L|λ − λ |.
                                                   ′            ′
Taking the limit as k → ∞ gives ρτ,ϵ         τ,ϵ
                                  max (λ) − ρmax (λ ) ≤ L|λ − λ |. Exchanging the roles of λ and
 ′        τ,ϵ         τ,ϵ  ′              ′        τ,ϵ
λ gives |ρmax (λ) − ρmax (λ )| ≤ L|λ − λ |, hence ρmax is L-Lipschitz.
Now, set 2λτ,ϵ  := sup {λ ∈ R+ : ρτ,ϵ              τ,ϵ                    τ,ϵ
                                      max (λ) ≥ ρcrit /4}. Then either λlow = ∞ (in which case any
       τ,ϵ low
value λlow satisfies the desired property), or by continuity of ρmax , ρmax (2λτ,ϵ
                                                                 τ,ϵ    τ,ϵ             τ,ϵ
                                                                               low ) = ρcrit /4 and we
      τ,ϵ         τ,ϵ             τ,ϵ     τ,ϵ
have ρcrit − 2Lλlow ≤ ρmax (2λlow ) = ρcrit /4. Finally, we obtain (20).

D.2.2    D UAL UPPER BOUND
The following result allows to bound the dual solution above. This step is specific to the regularized
setting, see in particular Proposition F.4 which illustrates this requirement.
Lemma D.3 (Upper bound for the regularized problem Lemma 4.3). Assume ρ > mc and let
             ∥∞
λup := 2∥Fρ−mc . For all f ∈ F and Q ∈ P(Ξ),

              inf        {λρ + Eξ∼Q [ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ)]} =      inf       {λρ + Eξ∼Q [ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ)]} .
            λ∈[0,∞)                                       λ∈[0,λup )


Proof. Let ξ ∈ Ξ be arbitrary. Recall that

                                            τ f (ζ) + ϵc(ξ, ζ)                      h f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i
   ∂λ ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ) = −E    f −λc(ξ,·)                          + τ log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ+λτ           .
                         ζ∼π0 ϵ+λτ (·|ξ)          ϵ + λτ
We bound −∂λ ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ) above, uniformly in f ∈ F and ξ ∈ Ξ. For readability of the proof, we
            f −λc(ξ,·)

set π̃0 = π0 ϵ+λτ with a slight abuse of notation. In this case, we have

                      τ f (ζ) + ϵc(ξ, ζ)                    λτ f (ζ) + λϵc(ξ, ζ) − ϵf (ζ) + ϵf (ζ)
       Eζ∼π̃0 (·|ξ)                        = Eζ∼π̃0 (·|ξ)
                            ϵ + λτ                                       λ(ϵ + λτ )

                                             1                        ϵ                f (ζ) − λc(ξ, ζ)
                                           = Eζ∼π̃0 (·|ξ) [f (ζ)] − Eζ∼π̃0 (·|ξ)
                                             λ                        λ                     ϵ + λτ
                                             ∥F∥∞         ϵ                h f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i
                                           ≤          − log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ+λτ
                                               λ          λ
                                             ∥F∥∞              ϵ
                                           ≤          −                Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) [f (ζ) − λc(ξ, ζ)]
                                               λ          λ(ϵ + λτ )
                                             ∥F∥∞           ϵ∥F∥∞         ϵmc
                                           ≤          +               +          ,                        (25)
                                               λ          λ(ϵ + λτ ) ϵ + λτ
where for the third line, we used Lemma C.2, and for the fourth line, we used Jensen’s inequality.
On the other hand,
                                h f (ζ)−λc(ξ,ζ) i        τ
             −τ log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ+λτ            ≤−         Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) [f (ζ) − λc(ξ, ζ)]
                                                      ϵ + λτ
                                                        λτ                   λτ
                                                  ≤            ∥F∥∞ +             mc         (26)
                                                    λ(ϵ + λτ )            ϵ + λτ
Summing (25) and (26) gives
                                                             2∥F∥∞
                                     −∂λ ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ) ≤          + mc ,
                                                               λ

                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   ∥∞
whence assuming ρ > mc , and taking λ = λup := 2∥F
                                                ρ−mc , we obtain for all f ∈ F and all ξ ∈ Ξ,

                                     0 ≤ ρ + ∂λ ϕτ,ϵ (λup , f, ξ).
Integrating with respect to a distribution Q ∈ P(Ξ) yields
                                 0 ≤ ρ + Eξ∼Q [∂λ ϕτ,ϵ (λup , f, ξ)],
which is the derivative at λup of the convex function λ 7→ λρ + Eξ∼Q [ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ)]. This means
                                                           n                            o
            inf {λρ + Eξ∼Q [ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ)]} = inf          λρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ)] .
          λ∈[0,∞)                                  λ∈[0,λup )


E     P ROOF OF THE MAIN RESULTS
In this section, we prove the main results of the paper. First, we establish the core concentration
results in E.1 that apply to standard and regularized WDRO. In particular, we establish the dual
lower bound with high probability on the empirical robust risk. We deduce Theorems 3.1 and 3.2 in
E.2 by computing the generalization constants. In E.3 we obtain the excess bounds (Proposition 3.1
and Proposition 3.3). Finally, the results on linear models (Proposition 3.2) are found in E.4.

E.1   D UAL BOUNDS WITH HIGH PROBABILITY ON THE EMPIRICAL PROBLEM

All the results of this subsection hold for both standard and regularized cases. The proofs hold as
is, replacing ϕ, ψ, ρcrit , ρmax and λlow by ϕτ,ϵ , ψ τ,ϵ , ρτ,ϵ     τ,ϵ      τ,ϵ
                                                             crit , ρmax and λlow respectively.



For λ ≥ 0, we recall the expression of the maximal radius:
                               ρmax (λ) = inf Eξ∼P [−∂λ+ ϕ(λ, f, ξ)].
                                           f ∈F


Problem’s constants. Before proving the next results, we introduce several quantities:
Proposition E.1 (Dual lower bound in the true problem). Under Assumption 2.1, there exists λlow >
0 such that for all λ ∈ [0, 2λlow ], ρmax (λ) ≥ ρcrit                      +                ρcrit
                                                 4 . In particular, Eξ∼P [∂λ ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] ≤ − 4 for
all f ∈ F.

Proof. This comes from limλ→0+ ρmax (λ) = ρcrit . See lemma D.1 for standard WDRO and
lemma D.2 for the regularized case.
Remark E.1 (Refining the degeneracy threshold). The constant λlow may be refined to fix another
threshold than ρcrit
                  4 . More precisely, for any η ∈ (0, 1), we may also find λlow > 0 such that for all
λ ∈ [0, 2λlow ], ρmax (λ) ≥ ηρcrit . We choose η = 41 in Proposition E.1 to be consistent with the
study of linear models from Section 3.2.

For the next results, we define the following quantities:

• Φ is the length of a segment I such that ϕ(λ, f, ξ) ∈ I
for all λ ∈ {λlow , 2λlow }, f ∈ F and ξ ∈ Ξ.
• Ψ is the length of a segment J such that ψ(µ, f, ξ) ∈
J for all µ ∈ (0, λ−1
                   low ], f ∈ F and ξ ∈ Ξ.
• Lψ and λup ∈ [0, ∞] are such that ψ(·, ·, ξ) is Lψ -
                     −1
Lipschitz on [λ−1
               up , λlow ] × F for all ξ ∈ Ξ.


Let λlow > 0 be the dual lower bound given by Proposi-
tion E.1. We now to show this quantity is a lower bound
on the empirical robust risk:
                                                            Figure 2: Bounding from below the empirical
                                                            dual solution λ∗ expresses as a slope condition
                                                  24        (thanks to convexity of the objective).
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition E.2 (Dual lower bound with high probability). Under Assumption 2.1, let λlow be
                                                                   C(δ)
given by Proposition E.1, and λup ∈ [λlow , ∞]. If ρ ≤ ρcrit  4 −
                                                                   √
                                                                     n
                                                                        where C(δ) := 96I(F  ,∥·∥∞ )
                                                                                           λlow      +
     q
 2Φ           4                            δ
λlow   2 log δ , then with probability 1 − 2 , for all f ∈ F,
                    n                           o                n                        o
             inf      λρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(, λ, f, ξ)] =        inf     λρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] .
         λ∈[0,λup )                                        λ∈[λlow ,λup )


Proof. The proof consists in using the convexity of ϕ(·, f, ξ). Indeed, given a convex function g
over R+ , the infimum of g has to occur on an interval [λlow , +∞] if g has a negative slope between
λlow and 2λlow (Figure 2):
                      g(2λlow ) − g(λlow )
                                           ≤ 0 =⇒ inf g(λ) = inf g(λ).
                              λlow                    λ≥λlow          λ≥0
We want this condition satisfied for the empirical Lagrangian function g(λ) = λρ + EPbn [ϕ(λ, f )]
with high probability. For convenience, this can be expressed with the slope of EPbn [ϕ(·, f )]:
                                       EPbn [ϕ(2λlow , f )] − EPbn [ϕ(λlow , f )]
                           sb(f ) :=                                          ≤ −ρ.                 (27)
                                                λlow
This is the condition we aim to obtain. To this end, we proceed by comparing the empirical
slope to the true one, that is s(f ) := EP [ϕ(2λlow ,fλ)]−E
                                                        low
                                                            P [ϕ(λlow ,f )]
                                                                            . We can show that any func-
tion (f, ξ) 7→ ϕ(λ, f, ξ), with λ ∈ R+ , satisfies the requirements for the concentration theorem
Theorem A.2, which is done in Lemma C.1 and Lemma C.3. Consequently, we can apply the
concentration theorem twice, on each function ϕ(2λlow , ·, ·) and ϕ(2λlow , ·, ·), to obtain that sb(f )
approximates s(f ) with probability at least 1 − 2δ ,
                                                                   β
                                  ∀f ∈ F, sb(f ) ≤ s(f ) + √ ,
                                                                    n
where C(δ) > 0 will be computed afterwards. On the other hand, s(f ) ≤ EP [∂λ+ ϕ(2λlow , f )] by
convexity of ϕ, hence s(f ) ≤ − ρcrit
                                   4 by Proposition E.1. This means s         b(f ) ≤ √βn − ρcrit
                                                                                             4 hence we
                                                C(δ)
have the desired condition (27) when ρ ≤ ρcrit
                                            4 −
                                                √ , and with probability at least 1 − δ , for all
                                                  n                                   2
f ∈ F,
                   n                        o           n                          o
            inf     λρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] =    inf    λρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] .
          λ∈[0,λup )                                       λ∈[λlow ,λup )


Concentration constant C(δ). We now compute C(δ). Let λ ∈ {λlow , 2λlow }. By Theorem A.2,
we have with probability at least 1 − 4δ , for all f ∈ F,
                                                                                   s
                                                              48I(F, ∥ · ∥∞ )         2 log 4δ
         Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(2λlow , f, ξ)] − Eξ∼P [ϕ(2λlow , f, ξ)] ≤        √          +Φ                 (28)
                                                                      n                  n
and with probability at least 1 − 4δ , for all f ∈ F,
                                                                                 s
                                                             48I(F, ∥ · ∥∞ )        2 log 4δ
           Eξ∼P [ϕ(λlow , f, ξ)] − Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λlow , f, ξ)] ≤      √          +Φ              .    (29)
                                                                    n                  n
                                        q
We set C ′ (δ) := 48I(F, ∥ · ∥∞ ) + Φ 2 log 4δ . Intersecting the events (28) and (29), we obtain with
probability 1 − 2δ , for all f ∈ F,
                Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(2λlow , f, ξ)] − Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λlow , f, ξ)]
                                             λlow
                                                                           2C ′ (δ)

                       1
                 ≤         Eξ∼P [ϕ(2λlow , f, ξ)] − Eξ∼P [ϕ(λlow , f, ξ)] + √
                   λlow                                                        n
                                                    ′
                                                2C    (δ)
                 ≤ Eξ∼P [∂λ+ ϕ(2λlow , f, ξ)] +       √
                                                λlow n
                     ρcrit    2C ′ (δ)
                 ≤−        +       √ ,                                                             (30)
                      4      λlow n


                                                          25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where we recall that for λlow > 0, satisfies for all λ ∈ [0, 2λlow ] and all f ∈ F,
Eξ∼P [∂ + ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] ≤ − ρcrit                    ′
                           4 . This means C(δ) = 2C (δ)/λlow and we have the desired ex-
pression.



This implies a generalization bound on the dual problem of (regularized) WDRO:
Proposition E.3 (Generalization bound on the dual problem). Under Assumption 2.1, let λlow > 0
be given by Proposition E.1. If B(δ)
                                √
                                  n
                                     ≤ ρ ≤ ρcrit
                                            4 −
                                                 C(δ)
                                                  √
                                                    n
                                                      where
                                               q
                                      2
       • B(δ) = 48Lψ I(F, ∥ · ∥∞ ) + λlow   + Ψ 2 log 2δ ,
                                            q
       • C(δ) = 96I(F ,∥·∥∞ )
                    λlow      + λ2Φ
                                 low
                                             2 log 4δ ,

then with probability at least 1 − δ, for all f ∈ F,

              n                           o                       B(δ)
        inf     λρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] ≥ inf               λ ρ− √      + Eξ∼P [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] .
     λ∈[0,λup )                                     λ∈[0,∞)         n

Proof. We assume λup > λlow . By Theorem A.2, applied to (µ, f ) 7→ µϕ(µ−1 , f, ξ), we obtain
with probability at least 1 − 2δ ,
                                                                                          B(δ)
              αn :=             sup           {Eξ∼P [ψ(µ, f, ξ)] − Eξ∼Pbn [ψ(µ, f, ξ)]} ≤ √       (31)
                         (µ,f )∈(λ−1
                                  up ,λ
                                       −1
                                          ]×F                                               n
                                      low

                                               q
where B(δ) = 48Lψ I([0, λ−1                          2                     ′   ′            ′
                          low ] × F, dist) + Ψ 2 log δ and dist((µ, f ), (µ , f )) := |µ − µ | +
      ′
∥f − f ∥∞ . Furthermore, we have the inequality
                                            1                                     2
         I([0, λ−1
                low ] × F) ≤ I(F, ∥ · ∥∞ ) +    (1 + 2 log 2) ≤ I(F, ∥ · ∥∞ ) +      ,
                                          2λlow                                 λlow
                                                                                     q
                                                                            2
see Lemma A.3, hence we may refine B(δ) as B(δ) = 48Lψ I(F, ∥ · ∥∞ ) + λlow      + Ψ 2 log 2δ .
                                  C(δ)
By Proposition E.2, if ρ ≤ ρcrit
                            4 −
                                  √ , then with probability at least 1 − δ , for all f ∈ F,
                                    n                                    2
                  n                         o              n                            o
            inf     λρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] =     inf       λρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] .           (32)
            λ∈[0,λup )                                    λ∈[λlow ,λup )

Finally, combining (32) and (31), and if
                                            B(δ)   ρ       C(δ)
                                            √ ≤ ρ ≤ crit − √ ,
                                              n      4       n
we can write with probability 1 − δ, for all f ∈ F,
                  n                        o                    n                        o
         inf       λρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] =        inf         λρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)]
       λ∈[0,λup )                                λ∈[λlow ,λup )
                         (                                                                    )
                                                      Eξ∼P [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] − Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)]
       ≥      inf          λρ + Eξ∼P [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] − λ
          λ∈[λlow ,λup )                                                 λ
        ≥         inf    {λρ + Eξ∼P [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] − λαn }
            λ∈[λlow ,λup )

                                  B(δ)
        ≥     inf         λ ρ− √         + Eξ∼P [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)]
          λ∈[λlow ,λup )            n

                              B(δ)
        ≥ inf        λ ρ−      √     + Eξ∼P [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] ,
          λ∈[0,∞)                n


                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


If λup ≤ λlow , this means, by convexity of the inner function,
               n                         o
        inf      λρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] = λlow ρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λlow , f, ξ)]
      λ∈[0,λup )

                                        ≥ λlow (ρ − αn′ ) + Eξ∼P [ϕ(λlow , f, ξ)]

                                                               B(δ)
                                        ≥ inf       λ ρ− √            + Eξ∼P [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] ,
                                          λ∈[0,∞)                n
                                      n                                                 o
where we refined αn into αn′ = supf ∈F Eξ∼P [ψ(λ−1low , f, ξ)] − Eξ∼P
                                                                            −1
                                                                     bn [ψ(λlow , f, ξ)] .


E.2   G ENERALIZATION BOUNDS

We are now ready to prove the generalization bounds. The following is an extended version of the
generalization result in standard WDRO (Theorem 3.1). Note that the extended bound (33) involves
a control of Rρ− √αn (f ), which means that R
                                            bρ (f ) also generalizes well against distribution shifts.

Theorem E.1 (Generalization guarantee, standard WDRO). Under Assumption 2.1, there exists
λlow > 0 such that if
                                  α           ρ        β
                                 √ < ρ ≤ crit − √ ,
                                   n            4       n
where
                                                                q
                                                             ∥∞
      • α = 48 ∥F∥∞ + λlow1                       2
                                I(F, ∥ · ∥∞ ) + λlow   + 2∥F
                                                          λlow    2 log 2δ
                                       q
                                 ∥∞
       • β = 96I(F ,∥·∥∞ )
                 λlow      + 4∥F
                              λlow      2 log 4δ ,

then with probability at least 1 − δ, for all f ∈ F,
                                bρ (f ) ≥ Rρ− √α (f ) ≥ Eξ∼P [f (ξ)].
                                R                                                                (33)
                                                n


In particular, for any ρ > √αn and n > 16(α + β)2 /ρ2crit , with probability at least 1 − δ, R
                                                                                             bρ (f ) ≥
Eξ∼P [f (ξ)] for all f ∈ F.

Proof. Under Assumption 2.1, let λlow be given by Proposition E.2. Our goal is to apply Propo-
sition E.3 in the standard WDRO case and to compute its constants thanks to Lemma C.1. By
Lemma C.1, we have the following constants:

       • Φ = 2∥F∥∞ ,
                 ∥∞
       • Ψ = 2∥F
              λlow ,

       • λup = ∞, and Lψ = ∥F∥∞ + λ−1
                                   low .


α corresponds to B(δ) in Proposition E.3 and β corresponds C(δ), whence we obtain the desired
expressions for α and β with the quantities above.
By strong duality, Proposition B.1, Rϱ (f ) and R
                                                bϱ (f ) admit the representations

                             Rϱ (f ) =     inf     {λϱ + Eξ∼P [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)]}
                                         λ∈[0,∞)
                                                 n                        o
                           R
                           bϱ (f ) =     inf      λϱ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] ,
                                       λ∈[0,∞)

for any ϱ ≥ 0 and f ∈ F. By Proposition E.3, if √αn < ρ ≤ ρcrit          √β
                                                                  4 − n , then with probability at
least 1 − δ, we have for all f ∈ F, R
                                    bρ (f ) ≥ Rρ− √α (f ), hence the first part of the result.
                                                          n


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As to the last statement, if n > 16(α + β)2 /ρ2crit , √αn < ρcrit √β             √α
                                                             4 − n . For any n < ρ ≤ 4 − n ,
                                                                                            ρcrit   √β

with probability at least 1 − δ, R bρ (f ) ≥ Eξ∼P [f (ξ)] for all f ∈ F as shown previously. For
     ρcrit    β
ρ≥    4    − √ , since the quantity R
                n
                                    bρ (f ) is non-decreasing with respect to ρ, we also have Rbρ (f ) ≥
Eξ∼P [f (ξ)].

The next result corresponds to the generalization guarantee for WDRO with double regularization
(Theorem 3.2).
Theorem E.2 (Generalization guarantee, regularized WDRO). Under Assumption 2.1, there exists
λlow > 0 such that if
                                          ατ,ϵ          ρτ,ϵ    β τ,ϵ

                               max mc , √         < ρ ≤ crit − √ ,
                                             n            4        n
where ατ,ϵ and β τ,ϵ are the two constants

           τ,ϵ                     1            2∥F∥∞ mc ϵ                           2
       • α = 48 ∥F∥∞ + τ,ϵ +                                         I(F, ∥ · ∥∞ ) + τ,ϵ
                                 λlow    ϵ(ρ − mc ) + 2τ ∥F∥∞                       λlow
                                    r
                    2∥F∥∞                     2
               +              + mc     2 log
                      λτ,ϵ
                       low                    δ
                                                       r
           τ,ϵ    96I(F, ∥ · ∥∞ )        ∥F∥∞                   4
       • β =              τ,ϵ      +4       τ,ϵ + mc       2 log ,
                        λlow               λlow                 δ

then with probability at least 1 − δ, for all f ∈ F,
                          bρτ,ϵ (f ) ≥ Rτ,ϵ ατ,ϵ (f ) ≥ Eζ∼Q [f (ζ)] − ϵDKL (π P,Q ∥π0 )
                          R             ρ− √   n


whenever Wcτ (P, Q) ≤ ρ.
                         ρτ,ϵ
                                                                                          n          o
                                        16(ατ,ϵ +β τ,ϵ )2                                   τ,ϵ
In particular, if mc <     4 and n > (ρτ,ϵ
                           crit
                                                −4m c )2 , then for any ρ > max      mc , α√n , with proba-
                                           crit

bility at least 1 − δ, for all Q such that Wcτ (P, Q) ≤ ρ, R   bρτ,ϵ (f ) ≥ Eζ∼Q [f (ζ)] − ϵDKL (π P,Q ∥π0 )
for all f ∈ F.

Proof. Under Assumption 2.1, let λτ,ϵ
                                  low > 0 be given by Proposition E.2, and assume ρ > mc . As
for standard WDRO, our goal is to apply Proposition E.3 and to compute its constants thanks to
                                                 ∥∞
Lemma C.3. By Lemma C.3, and taking λup = 2∥F ρ−mc , we have the following constants:


       • Φ = ∥F∥∞ − (−∥F∥∞ − 2λτ,ϵ                  τ,ϵ
                               low mc ) = 2(∥F∥∞ + λlow mc )

                 ∥∞
       • Ψ = 2∥F
              λτ,ϵ
                    + mc
                    low

                     ∥∞                          2∥F ∥∞ mc ϵ
       •   λup = 2∥F                    1
                  ρ−mc and Lψ = ∥F∥∞ + λτ,ϵ + ϵ(ρ−mc )+2τ ∥F ∥∞
                                                                .
                                        low



In Proposition E.3, ατ,ϵ corresponds to B(δ) and β τ,ϵ corresponds to C(δ) with the quantities above.
In this case, we easily verify that ατ,ϵ and β τ,ϵ have the desired expressions.
By strong duality, Proposition B.2, and by the dual upper bound, Lemma D.3, Rϱτ,ϵ (f ) and R
                                                                                           bτ,ϵ (f )
                                                                                            ϱ
admit the representations
                               Rϱτ,ϵ (f ) =        inf     {λϱ + Eξ∼P [ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ)]}
                                              λ∈[0,λup )
                                                         n                            o
                              bτ,ϵ (f ) =
                              R                inf        λϱ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕτ,ϵ (λ, f, ξ)] ,
                                ϱ
                                            λ∈[0,λup )
                                                                              τ,ϵ
                                                                                β√            ρτ,ϵ   τ,ϵ
for any ϱ ≥ 0 and f ∈ F. Recall that ρ > mc . If furthermore α√n < ρ ≤ crit
                                                                          4 −      n
                                                                                     , then with
                                                     τ,ϵ     τ,ϵ
probability at least 1 − δ, we have for all f ∈ F, R
                                                   b (f ) ≥ R √α (f ) by Proposition E.3 hence
                                                                  ρ          ρ−     n
we obtain the first inequality.


                                                             28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, toward the second inequality, let Q ∈ P(Ξ) such that Wcτ (P, Q) ≤ ρ. Let π P,Q ∈ P(Ξ × Ξ)
satisfying [π P,Q ]1 = P , [π P,Q ]2 = Q and E(ξ,ζ)∼πP,Q [c(ξ, ζ)] + τ DKL (π P,Q ∥π0 ) = Wcτ (P, Q).
                                     τ,ϵ                                       P,Q
We finally obtain for all f ∈ F, Rρ−     α (f ) ≥ Eζ∼Q [f (ζ)] − ϵDKL (π
                                         √                                         ∥π0 ).
                                           n

                                    ρτ,ϵ                                                         ρτ,ϵ
                                                                                 n            o
                                                    16(ατ,ϵ +β τ,ϵ )2                    ατ,ϵ
                                                                                                       ατ,ϵ
As to the last statement, if mc < crit    and n >                     , then max  m    ,          4 −
                                                                                                < crit
                                                       τ,ϵ        2                  c   √             √ .
                                     4               (ρcrit −4mc )                         n             n
                                      ρτ,ϵ
               n           o
                     α τ,ϵ                    β√τ,ϵ
For any max mc , n < ρ < 4 − n , the bound holds by the first part of the result. For
                      √                crit


      ρτ,ϵ  β√τ,ϵ         bρτ,ϵ (f ) is non-decreasing with respect to ρ, the bound also holds.
ρ≥     4 −
       crit
               n
                  , since R

E.3    E XCESS RISK BOUNDS

In this part, we prove the excess risk bounds (Proposition 3.1 and Proposition 3.3). The proofs
consist in adapting the previous proofs of the generalization bounds. For standard WDRO, the
general excess bound specializes in the case of Wasserstein-p costs and Lipschitz losses.
Theorem E.3 (Excess risk WDRO). Let α be given by Theorem E.1. Under Assumption 2.1, if
ρ ≤ ρcrit    √α
       4 − n , then with probability at least 1 − δ, for all f ∈ F,
                                                 bρ (f ) ≤ Rρ+ √α (f ).
                                                 R               n

In particular, if c = d(·, ·)p , where p ≥ 1, and there exists LipF > 0 such that every f ∈ F is
LipF -Lipschitz with respect to d, then
                                                                      p1
                             bρ (f ) ≤ Eξ∼P [f (ξ)] + LipF ρ + √α
                             R                                           .
                                                                  n

Proof. By definition of λlow and Proposition E.1 we can write for any 0 < ρ′ ≤ ρcrit
                                                                                4 ,
                                 Rρ′ (f ) =        inf         {λρ′ + Eξ∼P [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)]}
                                              λ∈[λlow ,λup )
leading to
   Rρ′ (f ) =        inf         {λρ′ + Eξ∼P [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)]}
                λ∈[λlow ,λup )
                                 (                                                                               )
                                     ′
                                                                       Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] − Eξ∼P [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)]
            ≥        inf          λρ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] − λ
                λ∈[λlow ,λup )                                              λ
                             n                                o
            ≥      inf        λρ′ + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] − λαn
              λ∈[λlow ,λup )

                                    ′  B(δ)
            ≥      inf         λ ρ −    √     + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)]
              λ∈[λlow ,λup )              n

                                ′   B(δ)
            ≥ inf        λ ρ − √           + Eξ∼Pbn [ϕ(λ, f, ξ)] = Rb ′ B(δ) (f ).
                                                                     ρ − √n
              λ∈[0,∞)                 n
                         √
whenever ρ′ > B(δ)/ n, and the inequality holds with probability at least 1 − δ for all f ∈ F.
Recall also that B(δ) = α (see the proof of Theorem E.1). Taking ρ′ = ρ + √αn leads to the desired
result as long as ρ + √αn ≤ ρcrit 4 .

Toward a proof of the last part, assume that any f ∈ F is Lipschitz with constant LipF , and c = dp
with p ≥ 1. For any couple (ξ, ζ) ∈ Ξ × Ξ, we have
                                    f (ζ) ≤ f (ξ) + LipF d(ξ, ζ).
Integrating over an arbitrary
                    √         coupling π with first marginal P and second marginal Q satisfying
Wc (Q, P ) ≤ ρ + α/ n gives
                                                                                           1
                      EQ [f ] ≤ EP [f ] + LipF Eπ [d] ≤ EP [f ] + LipF Eπ [c] p
                                                                            √
where we used Jensen inequality. For any Q satisfying Wc (Q, P ) ≤ ρ + α/ n, taking the infimum
in the above inequality over such couplings π, gives
                                                                √ 1
                               EQ [f ] ≤ EP [f ] + LipF (ρ + α/ n) p
hence we obtain the result by definition of Rρ+ √αn (f ).


                                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem E.4 (Excess risk for regularized WDRO). Let ατ,ϵ be given by Theorem E.2. Under
                           ρτ,ϵ   α τ,ϵ
Assumption 2.1, if mc < ρ ≤ crit
                            4 −
                                  √ , then with probability at least 1 − δ, for all f ∈ F,
                                     n


                                      bρτ,ϵ (f ) ≤ Rτ,ϵ ατ,ϵ (f ).
                                      R             ρ+ √  n


Proof. For ρ > mc , strong duality holds (Proposition B.2). The proof is then identical to that of the
standard WDRO setting (Theorem E.3).

E.4   G ENERALIZATION CONSTANTS OF LINEAR MODELS

The two following results correspond to Proposition 3.2, which is the estimation of the constants
ρcrit and λlow for linear models in the framework of Shafieezadeh-Abadeh et al. (2019). We assume
the support of P to belong to an Euclidean ball of diameter D centered at zero. We then define Ξ as
the closed ball of diameter 3D centered at zero.
Proposition E.4 (Linear regression). Consider the parametric loss f (θ, (x, y)) = (⟨θ, x⟩ − y)2 ,
where θ belongs to a compact subset Θ ⊂ Rp , and the transport cost c = ∥ · − · ∥2 . Assume there
exists ω > 0 such that
                                     inf ∥(θ, −1)∥2 ≥ ω.
                                         θ∈Θ

Then Theorem 3.1 and Proposition 3.1 hold with ρcrit ≥ D2 and λlow ≥ ω2 .

Proof. In this setting, the expression of ρmax is

                              "      (                                                     )#
       ρmax (λ) = inf Eξ∼P min ∥ξ − ζ ′ ∥2 : ζ ′ ∈ arg max{f (w, ζ) − λ∥ξ − ζ∥2 }
                   θ∈Θ                                        ζ∈Ξ


For any ξ ∈ Ξ and θ ∈ Θ, the term inside the argmax writes

                     f (θ, ζ) − λ∥ξ − ζ∥2 = ζ T (M − λI)ζ + 2λζ T ξ − λ∥ξ∥2 .

Consider ζ = (u, v), ξ = (u0 , v0 ), u, u0 ∈ R, the representations in an orthonormal basis of Rp ,
such that the first element (θ, −1)/∥(θ, −1)∥ is the eigen vector of M . We can write the above
equation with u and v terms:
           f (θ, ζ) − λ∥ξ − ζ∥2 = (∥(θ, −1)∥2 − λ)u2 + 2λu · u0 − λ∥v∥2 + 2λ⟨v, v0 ⟩             (34)

If λ ≤ ω then we have ∥(θ, −1)∥2 − λ > 0, hence the maximum of f (θ, ζ) − λ∥ξ − ζ∥2 with
respect to ζ is only attained at the boundary of Ξ (otherwise we could increase the quadratic term
with respect to u). For all λ ≤ ω, we thus can bound from below
                      ρmax (λ) ≥ Eξ∼P [min ∥ξ − ζ∥2 : ∥ζ∥ = 3D/2] ≥ D2 .

In particular, ρcrit ≥ D2 . We also remark that ρcrit ≤ 4D2 hence we have 2λlow ≥ ω by definition
of λlow (Proposition E.1).

Proposition E.5 (Logistic regression). Consider the parametric loss f (θ, (x, y)) = log(1 +
e−y⟨θ,x⟩ ) where θ belongs to a compact subset Θ ⊂ Rp , and the transport cost c = ∥ · − · ∥2 .
Assume there exists ω > 0 such that
                                         inf ∥θ∥2 ≥ ω.
                                           θ∈Θ

                                                                                  ω
Then Theorem 3.1 and Proposition 3.1 hold with ρcrit ≥ D2 and λlow ≥                      , where Ω =
                                                                              8 1+eDΩ
supθ∈Θ ∥θ∥2 .


                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. For the logistic regression, we have

                       f (θ, ζ) − λ∥ζ − ξ∥2 = log 1 + e⟨θ,ζ⟩ − λ∥ζ − ξ∥2 .

                                                                                                    (35)
Consider the representation ζ = sθ + v, where s ∈ R and v is orthogonal to θ. Then we have
                                               2
          f (θ, ζ) − λ∥ζ − ξ∥2 = log 1 + es∥θ∥ − s2 λ∥θ∥2 + 2sλ⟨θ, ξ⟩ − λ∥v − ξ∥2 .

The second order derivative with respect to s is
                                            ∥θ∥4
                                                             − 2λ∥θ∥2 .                            (36)
                                 1+e   s∥θ∥2   1 + e−s∥θ∥2
                     2               2                              2
The term 1 + es∥θ∥ 1 + e−s∥θ∥ is lower than 2 1 + e|s|∥θ∥ < 2 1 + eDΩ . Hence we easily

                                                      ω
deduce that (36) is positive for all ζ ∈ Ξ if λ <       DΩ
                                                             . If this condition holds, then maximizers
                                                   4 1+e
of f (θ, ζ) − λ∥ζ − ξ∥2 for ζ ∈ Ξ are included in the boundary of Ξ, meaning that ρmax (λ) ≥ D2 if
          Ω      . Since ρcrit ≤ 4D2 , then 2λlow ≥    ω
λ≤          DΩ                                           DΩ
                                                             .
      4 1+e                                          4 1+e



F     S IDE REMARKS

This part contains results supporting various remarks made in the main text.

F.1   I NTERPRETATION OF THE CRITICAL RADIUS

The results of this part justify the interpretation of the radius made in Remark 3.1 and Proposition F.3
Proposition F.1. If ρ ≥ ρcrit , then there exists f ∈ F such that

                                         Rρ (f ) = max f (ξ).
                                                    ξ∈Ξ


In particular, in the setting of Theorem 3.1, if ρ ≥ ρcrit + √αn , with probability at least 1 − δ, there
exists f ∈ F such that
                                         R
                                         bρ (f ) = max f (ξ).
                                                    ξ∈Ξ


Proof. The first part is identical to the square cost case, see (Azizian et al., 2023a, Remark 3.2 ). The
second part is obtained by Theorem E.1: in the setting of Theorem E.1, we have with probability at
             bρ (f ) ≥ Rρ−α/√n for all f ∈ F. Hence if ρ ≥ ρcrit + α/√n, we obtain the result by
least 1 − δ, R
                                              √
applying the first part to the radius ρ − α/ n.

The following result gives an interpretation of the critical radius ρτ,ϵ
                                                                     crit in regularized WDRO appear-
ing in Theorem 3.2. We show that when the radius ρ is larger than this value, then some robust
losses become degenerated. Precisely, they become independent of ρ and are equal to a regularized
version of the worst-case loss maxΞ f .
Proposition F.2. Assume ρ ≥ ρτ,ϵcrit . Then there exists f ∈ F such that

                    Rρτ,ϵ (f ) =

                                      sup      Eζ∼[π]2 [f (ζ)] − ϵDKL (π∥π0 ) .
                                  π∈P(Ξ×Ξ)
                                   [π]1 =P

                                                              τ,ϵ
In particular, in the setting of Theorem 3.2, if ρ ≥ ρτ,ϵ
                                                      crit +
                                                              α√ , with probability at least 1 − δ, there
                                                                n
exists f ∈ F such that
                        bρτ,ϵ (f ) =

                        R             sup       Eζ∼[π]2 [f (ζ)] − ϵDKL (π∥π0 ) .
                                  π∈P(Ξ×Ξ)
                                   [π]1 =P


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. In the regularized case, we can verify that the critical radius has the expression
                       n      h             hτ                  i                    f (ζ)
                                                                                           io
         ρτ,ϵ
           crit = inf   Eξ∼P Eζ∼πf /ϵ (·|ξ) f (ζ) + c(ξ, ζ) − τ log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ           ,   (37)
                  f ∈F              0        ϵ
see for instance the proof of Lemma D.2. Let f ∈ F be arbitrary. Consider a coupling π ∗ ∈
                                                       f
P(Ξ × Ξ) such that [π ∗ ]1 = P and π ∗ (·|ξ) = π0ϵ (·|ξ) for almost all ξ ∈ Ξ. We first verify that for
a good choice of f , it is included in the uncertainty set defining Rρτ,ϵ (f ).
                                                                      h f (ζ) i
We compute DKL (π ∗ ∥π0 ). Below, we set Z(ξ) := Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ .
                                         "              "         f (ζ)
                                                                        !##
                        ∗                                        e ϵ
              DKL (π ∥π0 ) = Eξ∼P E              f        log
                                            ζ∼π0ϵ (·|ξ)          Z(ξ)
                                                                                   h f (ζ) i
                                                          f (ζ)
                                = Eξ∼P E         f                − log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ
                                            ζ∼π0ϵ (·|ξ)     ϵ

                                               f (ζ)              h               h f (ζ) ii
                                = E(ξ,ζ)∼π∗             − Eξ∼P log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ           .    (38)
                                                 ϵ
This leads to
                                    h              hτ              i                     f (ζ)
                                                                                               i
   Eπ∗ [c] + τ DKL (π ∗ ∥π0 ) = Eξ∼P Eζ∼πf /ϵ (·|ξ) f (ζ) + c(ξ, ζ) − τ log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ
                                         0          ϵ
which is the term in the infimum (37). Since f was chosen arbitrary, this means that if ρ > ρτ,ϵ
                                                                                             crit ,
then there exists f ∈ F such that the coupling π ∗ defined above (depending on f ) satisfies
E(ξ,ζ)∼π∗ [c(ξ, ζ)] + τ DKL (π ∗ ∥π0 ) ≤ ρ, and we obtain
                              Rρτ,ϵ (f ) ≥ Eζ∼[π∗ ]2 [f (ζ)] − ϵDKL (π ∗ ∥π0 ).
On the other hand by the computation (38), we have
                                                                  h               h f (ζ) ii
          Rρτ,ϵ (f ) ≥ Eζ∼[π∗ ]2 [f (ζ)] − ϵDKL (π ∗ ∥π0 ) = ϵEξ∼P log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ       .    (39)

By Donsker-Varadhan variational formula Donsker & Varadhan (1975), for almost all ξ ∈ Ξ, we
have                       h f (ζ) i
            log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e ϵ = sup {Eζ∼ν [f (ζ)/ϵ] − DKL (ν∥π0 (·|ξ))} .            (40)
                                              ν∈P(Ξ)

Reinjecting (40) in (39) gives
                                     "                                            #
                Rρτ,ϵ (f ) ≥ ϵEξ∼P       sup {Eζ∼ν [f (ζ)/ϵ] − DKL (ν∥π0 (·|ξ))}
                                     ν∈P(Ξ)

                        ≥     sup         Eξ∼P Eζ∼π(·|ξ) [f (ζ)] − ϵDKL (π(·|ξ)∥π0 (·|ξ))
                            π∈P(Ξ×Ξ)
                             [π]1 =P

                        =     sup         Eζ∼[π]2 [f (ζ)] − ϵDKL (π∥π0 ) ,
                            π∈P(Ξ×Ξ)
                             [π]1 =P

where we used the chain rule for DKL divergence (see e.g.                            Theorem 2.15
in Polyanskiy & Wu. (2023)):               DKL (π∥π0 )         =      Eξ∼P [DKL (π(·|ξ)∥π0 (·|ξ))] +
DKL ([π]1 ∥[π0 ]1 ) ≥ Eξ∼P [DKL (π(·|ξ)∥π0 (·|ξ))].          Since we clearly have Rρτ,ϵ (f ) ≤

  sup       Eζ∼[π]2 [f (ζ)] − ϵDKL (π∥π0 ) , this yields the first part.
π∈P(Ξ×Ξ)
 [π]1 =P

The second part is a direct consequence of the generalization bound Theorem E.2 as for the standard
case (see the proof of Proposition F.1).

The following result allows to interpret ρcrit as a fluctuations measure on F:
Proposition F.3 (Critical radius and loss fluctuations). Suppose supp P = Ξ. Under Assumption 2.1
ρcrit > 0 if and only if F contains no constant functions.


                                                       32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We prove the equivalence by contraposition. For the first implication, assume there exists
f ∈ F such that for all ξ and ζ in Ξ, f (ξ) = f (ζ). This means for all ξ ∈ Ξ we have ξ ∈
arg maxΞ f , whence min {c(ξ, ζ) : ζ ∈ arg maxΞ f } = 0 because c(ξ, ξ) = 0. By integrating
with respect to ξ ∼ P , we obtain ρcrit = 0.
Now, towards the other implication we assume ρcrit = 0 and we show that F contains a constant
function. Let (fk )k∈N be a sequence of functions from F such that

                        Eξ∼P min c(ξ, ζ) : ζ ∈ arg max fk          −→ 0.
                                                                        Ξ              k→∞


By compactness of F, Assumption 2.1.3, we may assume (fk )k∈N to converge to some function
f ∗ for the norm ∥ · ∥∞ . The set-valued map f 7→ arg maxΞ f is outer semicontinuous with
compact values (Lemma A.2) and c is jointly continuous, hence for any ξ ∈ Ξ, the function
f 7→ min {c(ξ, ζ) : ζ ∈ arg maxΞ f } is lower semicontinuous on F, see Lemma A.1. Thus we
have

                                                                                                            ∗
           lim inf min c(ξ, ζ) : ζ ∈ arg max fk                  ≥ min c(ξ, ζ) : ζ ∈ arg max f
            k→∞                                Ξ                                                  Ξ
by lower semicontinuity (see Definition A.1).
By integration with respect to ξ ∼ P , we have

                      0 = lim inf Eξ∼P min c(ξ, ζ) : ζ ∈ arg max fk
                            k→∞                             Ξ

                        ≥ Eξ∼P lim inf min c(ξ, ζ) : ζ ∈ arg max fk
                                   k→∞                      Ξ

                        ≥ Eξ∼P min c(ξ, ζ) : ζ ∈ arg max f ∗
                                                                            Ξ
                                                        ∗
hence Eξ∼P [min {c(ξ, ζ) : ζ ∈ arg maxΞ f }] = 0. Finally, for P -almost all ξ ∈ Ξ,
min {c(ξ, ζ) : ζ ∈ arg maxΞ f ∗ } = 0. This means by compactness of arg maxΞ f ∗ that ξ ∈
arg maxΞ f ∗ for P -almost all ξ ∈ Ξ. Since supp P = Ξ and f ∗ is continuous, we obtain that
f ∗ is constant.

F.2   N ECESSITY OF THE DUAL UPPER BOUND

We exhibit an example where the function µ 7→ ψ τ,ϵ (µ, f, ξ) is not Lipschitz as µ → 0. This justifies
the necessity of bounding the dual solution above in the regularized case, as done in Lemma D.3.
Proposition F.4. Consider τ = 0, ϵ > 0, Ξ = [0, 1], c(ξ, ζ) = |ξ − ζ| and assume that the reference
distribution is a truncated Laplace π0 (dζ|ξ) ∝ e−|ξ−ζ| 1[0,1] (ζ)dζ. Assume furthermore F is a
                                                                  2∥F ∥∞
family of functions from [0, 1] to R which satisfies e−              ϵ          ≥ ϵ.
                                                                 τ,ϵ
Then for almost all ξ ∈ [0, 1] and all f ∈ F, µ 7→ ψ                   (µ, f, ξ) is not Lipschitz at 0+ .

Proof. Let ξ ∈ (0, 1) and f ∈ F. The expression of the derivative of ψ 0,ϵ with respect to µ is given
by (16):

                                                     ϵc(ξ, ζ)                      h µf (ζ)−c(ξ,ζ) i
         ∂µ ψ 0,ϵ (µ, f, ξ) = E   µf −c(ξ,·)                    + ϵ log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e      µϵ        .
                               ζ∼π0 µϵ       (·|ξ)     µϵ
In particular, it satisfies

                           2∥F ∥∞                       c(ξ, ζ)                      h c(ξ,ζ) i
  ∂µ ψ 0,ϵ (µ, f, ξ) ≤ e      ϵ     E  −
                                         c(ξ,·)                   + ϵ log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e− µϵ + ∥F∥∞ . (41)
                                    ζ∼π0 µϵ (·|ξ)         µ
On the other hand, by Donsker-Varadhan formula Donsker & Varadhan (1975), we can write
                                                                   −c(ξ,·)
                   h −c(ξ,ζ) i                   −c(ξ, ζ)
    log Eζ∼π0 (·|ξ) e µϵ       =E   −c(ξ,ζ)                 − DKL π0 µϵ (·|ξ) π0 (·|ξ) .
                                 ζ∼π0 µϵ (·|ξ)     µϵ

                                                            33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      2∥F ∥∞
Reinjecting this in (41) and using e−                    ϵ        ≥ ϵ gives
                                                          c(ξ,·)
                                                          −
                         ∂µ ψ τ,ϵ (µ, f, ξ) ≤ ∥F∥∞ − DKL π0 µϵ (·|ξ) π0 (·|ξ) .

Consequently, to prove non-Lipschitzness of ψ 0,ϵ (·, f, ξ) at 0, we show that
                                     c(ξ,·)
                                      −
                              DKL π0 µϵ (·|ξ) π0 (·|ξ) → ∞

                                        |ξ−·|
                                   −
as µ → 0. We show that π0 µϵ (·|ξ) converges in law to δξ . Let φ : R → R be of class C ∞ with
compact support. With the change of variable u ← ξ−ζ
                                                  µϵ , we have
                        Z 1                                       Z
                                 |ξ−ζ|
                              e− µϵ φ(ζ)dζ = µϵ                            1[ ξ−1 , ξ ] (u)e−|u| φ(ξ + µϵu)du.
                                                                                µϵ      µϵ
                         0                                             R

Also, we easily verify that
           Z 1              Z ξ            Z 1
                  |ξ−ζ|           ξ−ζ            ζ−ξ                ξ     −(1−ξ)
                e− µϵ dζ =      e− µϵ dζ +     e− µϵ dζ = µϵ(2 − e− µϵ − e µϵ ),
             0                            0                                ξ

hence we obtain
                                                                      1[ ξ−1 , ξ ] (u)e−|u| φ(ξ + µϵu)du
                                                              R
                                                                  R       µϵ µϵ
                         E       −
                                   |ξ−·|      [φ(ζ)] =                                       ξ   −(1−ξ)
                                                                                                               .                     (42)
                              ζ∼π0 µϵ                                           2 − e− µϵ − e      µϵ


We then have the following:

                    ξ          −(1−ξ)
       • 2 − e− µϵ − e           µϵ      converges to 2 as µ → 0,

       • For all u ∈ R, 1[ ξ−1 , ξ ] (u)e−|u| φ(ξ + µϵu)du converges to e−|u| φ(ξ) as µ → 0, hence
                                   µϵ     µϵ
         its integral with respect to u converges to 2φ(ξ) by dominated convergence theorem.

                                                                                                                             |ξ−·|
                                                                                                                         −     µϵ
Combining both limits in (42) gives E                            −
                                                                      |ξ−·|            [φ(ζ)] → φ(ξ). This means that π0             (·|ξ)
                                                                        µϵ
                                                           ζ∼π0                (·|ξ)
converges in law to δξ . We have DKL (δξ ∥π0 (·|ξ)) = ∞, hence by lower semicontinuity of the DKL -
divergence for the convergence  in law (or weak convergence),
                                                              see e.g. Theorem 4.9 from Polyanskiy
                                                  c(ξ,·)
                                              −
& Wu. (2023), we get DKL π0                         µϵ
                                                           (·|ξ) π0 (·|ξ)               −→ ∞. This means that ψ 0,ϵ (·, f, ξ) is not
                                                                                        µ→0
Lipschitz near 0.

F.3    O N CONTINUITY OF MAXIMIZERS

We justify the importance of relaxing Assumption 5.1 from Azizian et al. (2023a) which
corresponds to compactness of F with respect to the distance DF (f, g) := ∥f − g∥∞ +
dH (arg maxΞ f, arg maxΞ g). We show that this condition is actually equivalent to assuming con-
tinuity on f 7→ arg max f , which is a strong condition and difficult to verify in practice.
Proposition F.5. For (f, g) ∈ F × F, define
                              DF (f, g) := ∥f − g∥∞ + dH (arg max f, arg max g)
                                                                                             Ξ        Ξ

where dH is the Hausdorff distance on the set of compact subsets of Ξ, K(Ξ) . Assume (F, ∥ · ∥∞ )
is compact. Then we have the equivalence
      (F, DF ) is compact ⇐⇒ f 7→ arg max f is continuous from (F, ∥ · ∥∞ ) to (K(Ξ), dH ).
                                                             Ξ


                                                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We prove (⇒). Assume (F, DF ) is compact. Let f ∈ F, and let (gk )k∈N be an arbitrary
sequence from F such that gk converges to f for ∥ · ∥∞ . We want to show that arg maxΞ gk
converges to arg maxΞ f for dH , proving the continuity of the arg max map. By compactness of
(F, DF ), (gk )k∈N admits accumulation points for DF . Let h be any one of them. We may extract a
subsequence from (gk )k∈N converging to h, say gnk → h ∈ F. In particular, gnk converges to h
                                                      k→∞
for ∥ · ∥∞ . We necessarily have h = f by definition of the sequence (gk )k∈N . It means that (gk )k∈N
admits only one possible accumulation point for DF , which is f . This implies gk converges to f for
DF , hence arg maxΞ gk converges to arg maxΞ f .
Now, we prove (⇐). Let (fk )k∈N be a sequence from F. By compactness of (F, ∥ · ∥∞ ), we may
extract a converging subsequence fnk → f for ∥ · ∥∞ . Assuming f 7→ arg maxΞ f is continuous
                                       k→∞
gives that arg maxΞ fnk converges to arg maxΞ f , which is the desired result.


                                                 35
