Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


SAVA: S CALABLE L EARNING -AGNOSTIC
DATA VALUATION
 Samuel Kessler∗†
 Microsoft
 samuel.kessler@microsoft.com

 Tam Le∗
 The Institute of Statistical Mathematics / RIKEN AIP
 tam@ism.ac.jp

 Vu Nguyen
 Amazon
 vutngn@amazon.com



                                                   A BSTRACT

             Selecting data for training machine learning models is crucial since large, web-
             scraped, real datasets contain noisy artifacts that affect the quality and relevance
             of individual data points. These noisy artifacts will impact model performance.
             We formulate this problem as a data valuation task, assigning a value to data
             points in the training set according to how similar or dissimilar they are to a clean
             and curated validation set. Recently, LAVA (Just et al., 2023) demonstrated the
             use of optimal transport (OT) between a large noisy training dataset and a clean
             validation set, to value training data efficiently, without the dependency on model
             performance. However, the LAVA algorithm requires the entire dataset as an input,
             this limits its application to larger datasets. Inspired by the scalability of stochastic
             (gradient) approaches which carry out computations on batches of data points
             instead of the entire dataset, we analogously propose SAVA, a scalable variant of
             LAVA with its computation on batches of data points. Intuitively, SAVA follows
             the same scheme as LAVA which leverages the hierarchically defined OT for data
             valuation. However, while LAVA processes the whole dataset, SAVA divides the
             dataset into batches of data points, and carries out the OT problem computation
             on those batches. Moreover, our theoretical derivations on the trade-off of using
             entropic regularization for OT problems include refinements of prior work. We
             perform extensive experiments, to demonstrate that SAVA can scale to large datasets
             with millions of data points and does not trade off data valuation performance. Our
             code is available at https://github.com/skezle/sava.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Neural scaling laws empirically show that the generalization error decreases according to a power
law as the data a model trains on increases. This has been shown for natural language processing,
vision, and speech (Kaplan et al., 2020; Henighan et al., 2020; Rosenfeld et al., 2019; Zhai et al.,
2022; Radford et al., 2023). However, training neural networks on larger and larger datasets for
moderate improvements in model accuracy is inefficient. Furthermore, production neural network
models need to be continuously updated given new utterances that enter into common everyday
parlance (Lazaridou et al., 2021; Baby et al., 2022). It has been shown both in theory and in practice
that sub-power law, exponential scaling of model performance with dataset size is possible by
carefully selecting informative data and pruning uninformative data (Sorscher et al., 2022), and that
generalization improves with training speed (Lyle et al., 2020). Therefore, valuing and selecting data
    ∗
        co-first authors † work done while at the University of Oxford.


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                           Validation

                                 Clean validation set


                                                             Training
  Large noisy training set              SAVA

                                                                                                        Distance between two (labeled) points



                             Training set valuation scores



                                                                        Distance between two batches     Valuation score for a point


Figure 1: Overview of the proposed SAVA method. On the left-hand side, SAVA values data
points in a noisy training dataset by comparing to a clean validation dataset. SAVA performs scalable
data valuation by solving multiple cheap and small OT problems on batches of data points (on the
right-hand side). Notations in Orange denote OT distances and plans over training and validation
batches, while notations in Green denote OT distances over data points in a batch. OT(µ̄t , µ¯v ) denotes
the OT distance between training and validation batches and π̄ ∗ (µ̄t , µ̄v ) is the associated OT plan
in Eq. (11). OT(µBi , µBj′ ) is the OT distance between the batch Bi from the training set and the
batch Bj′ in the validation set where we use the feature-label distance in Eq. (1) as the ground cost
for labeled data points in these batches. sk is SAVA’s final valuation score for training labeled data
point zk in Eq. (12). The hatched box denotes the summation over the validation batches to value the
data point zk . We provide a visualization of these artifacts generated by SAVA in Figure 12.


points that are informative: which have not been seen by the model, which do not have noisy labels,
and which are relevant to the task we want to solve—are not outliers—can help to not only decrease
training times, and reduce compute costs, but also improve overall test performance (Mindermann
et al., 2022; Tirumala et al., 2023).
Popular data selection and data pruning methods use variations of the model loss to value data
points (Jiang et al., 2019; Pruthi et al., 2020; Paul et al., 2021). Crucially, these methods depend on
the model used, and they are vulnerable to prioritizing data points with noisy labels or noisy features;
data points that do not resemble the target validation set. When treating data valuation as a function
of model performance, we introduce a dependency on a neural network model. This is the case when
valuing a point using the leave-one-out (LOO) error, i.e., the change of model performance when the
point is omitted from training. To rid our dependence on a neural network model, a promising idea is
to leverage optimal transport (OT) between a training distribution and a clean validation distribution
as a proxy to directly measure the value of data points in the training set in a model-agnostic fashion.
In particular, the validation performance of each point in the training set can be estimated using
the hierarchically defined Wasserstein between the training and the validation set (Alvarez-Melis
& Fusi, 2020; Just et al., 2023). LAVA (Just et al., 2023) has been shown to successfully value data
by measuring the sensitivity of the hierarchically defined Wasserstein between training data points
and validation distributions in a model-agnostic fashion. However, LAVA requires significant RAM
consumption since its memory complexity grows quadratically O(N 2 ) with the dataset size N . This
hinders LAVA from scaling to large datasets.
In this paper, we present SAVA, a scalable variant of LAVA, for data valuation. Our method completely
addresses the bottleneck of RAM requirements in LAVA. Intuitively, SAVA performs the OT com-
putations on batches instead of on the entire dataset like LAVA (hence the analogy to the stochastic
approach to (sub)gradient computation). Specifically, SAVA uses ideas from hierarchical optimal
transport (Yurochkin et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2019) to enable OT calculations on batches instead of the
entire dataset. We can scale up OT-based data valuation using SAVA to large real-world web-scrapped
datasets. On benchmark problems SAVA performs comparably to LAVA while being able to scale
to datasets two orders of magnitude larger without memory issues, while LAVA is limited due to
hardware memory constraints.
Contributions: In summary, our contributions are three-fold as follows:

           • We introduce a novel scalable data valuation method called SAVA that leverages the
             (sub)gradient of hierarchical optimal transport which performs OT computations on batches
             of data points, enabling OT-based data valuation to large datasets.


                                                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           • We correct the essential theoretical result on the trade-off for using entropic regularization
             to compute the OT (sub)gradient in LAVA (Just et al., 2023, Theorem 2).1 Consequently, by
             building upon our refined theory, we derive the exact trade-off to estimate the (sub)gradient
             of hierarchical OT with entropic regularization in our framework.
           • We provide an extensive experimental analysis to demonstrate the improved scalability with
             increasing dataset sizes with respect to baselines.

2       O PTIMAL T RANSPORT FOR DATA VALUATION
2.1       O PTIMAL T RANSPORT FOR L ABELED DATASETS
                                                                                                         V
Let X be the feature space, and V be the number of labels. We write ft : X 7→ {0, 1} and fv : X 7→
      V
{0, 1} for the labeling functions for training and validation data respectively. Given the training set
                      N                                                  N′
Dt = {(xi , ft (xi ))}i=1 and the validation set Dv = {(x′i , fv (x′i ))}i=1 , the corresponding measures
                                      PN                                         PN ′
for sets Dt , Dv are µt (x, y) = N1 i=1 δ(xi ,yi ) and µv (x′ , y ′ ) = N1′ i=1 δ(x′i ,yi′ ) respectively
where δ is the Dirac function, and y, y ′ are labels of x, x′ respectively. For simplicity, let Z = (X , Y)
where Y is the space of labels. For ease of reading, we summarize the notations in Table 1.
Following Alvarez-Melis & Fusi (2020), we compute the distance between two labels by leveraging
the OT distance between the conditional distributions of the features given each label, i.e., µt (·|yt ) =
Rµt (·)I[ft (·)=yt ] for label yt in µt , where I is the indicator function.
  µt (·)I[ft (·)=yt ]

Let d be the metric of the feature space X , e.g., the Euclidean distance. The distance between labels
yt and yv is OTd (µt (·|yt ), µv (·|yv )), i.e., the metric of the label space Y. Consequently, the cost
between feature-label pairs in Z = (X , Y) is
                        C((xt , yt ), (xv , yv )) = d(xt , xv ) + c OTd (µt (·|yt ), µv (·|yv )),                      (1)
where c > 0 is a weight coefficient. Therefore, with the cost matrix C, we can use the OT on the
represented measures µt , µv to compute the distance between the training and validation sets, i.e.,
d(Dt , Dv ), without relying on external models or parameters as follows
                                                          Z
                  d(Dt , Dv ) := OTC (µt , µv ) =   min           C(z, z ′ )dπ(z, z ′ ),        (2)
                                                         π∈Π(µt ,µv )   Z×Z

where Π(µt , µv ) is the set of transportation couplings with marginals as µt and µv . To simplify
notations, we drop C, and use OT when the context is clear. We further write π ∗ for the optimal
transport plan in Eq. (2). In practice, we leverage the entropic regularization (Cuturi, 2013) to reduce
the OT complexity into quadratic (from super cubic) w.r.t. the number of input supports, defined as
                                         Z
            OTε (µt , µv ) =     min            C(z, z ′ )dπ(z, z ′ ) + εH(π | µt ⊗ µv ),             (3)
                                 π∈Π(µt ,µv )   Z×Z

                                                                                                     dπ
                                                                               R
where ⊗ is the product measure operator, and H(π | µt ⊗ µv ) =                     Z×Z
                                                                                         log       dµt dµv       dπ.

Additionally, the OT problem in Eq. (2) is a constrained convex minimization, it is naturally paired
with a dual problem, i.e., constrained concave maximization problem, as follows:
                                  OTC (µt , µv ) =      max       ⟨f, µt ⟩ + ⟨g, µv ⟩ ,                                (4)
                                                     (f,g)∈R(C)

where R(C) = {(f, g) ∈ C(Z)R× C(Z) : ∀(z, z ′ ), f (z) + g(z ′ ) ≤ C(z,Rz ′ )}, C is a collection of
continuous functions, ⟨f, µt ⟩ = Z f (z)dµt (z), and similarly ⟨g, µv ⟩ = Z g(z)dµv (z).

2.2       LAVA: DATA VALUATION VIA CALIBRATED OT GRADIENTS

As discussed in Just et al. (2023), the OT distance is known to be insensitive to small differences while
also being not robust to large deviations. This feature is naturally suitable for detecting abnormal
    1
        See Appendix C.1 for the detailed discussion.


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Table 1: A summary of notations.

 Notation                         Definition
 z = (x, y) ∈ R|X | × {0, 1}V     Data point feature and label where V is #label and X is a feature space
                                                                              N                                         N′
                                  Datasets for training Dt = {(xi , ft (xi ))}i=1 and validation Dv = (x′j , fv (x′j )) j=1

 D t , Dv
 B = {Bi }K       ′    ′ Kv
           i=1 , B = {Bj }j=1
             t
                                  Disjoined batches for Dt and Dv where Kt , Kv are the number of batches
            Ni
 Bi = {zk }k=1                    Batch of data points where Ni is the size of the training batch Bi
                N′
 Bj′ = {zl }l=1j
                                  Batch of data points where Nj′ is the size of the validation batch Bj′
           1
              PNi
 µBi = Ni t=1 δ(zt )              Measure over labeled data points for the batch Bi
                 PN
 µt (x, y) = N1 i=1 δ(xi ,yi )    Measure over training set
                 PN ′
 µv (x, y) = N1′ i=1 δ(xi ,yi )   Measure over validation set
         1
            PKt
 µ̄t = Kt i=1 δ(Bi )              Measure over batches for the training set
             PKv
 µ̄v = K1v j=1    δ(Bj′ )         Measure over batches for the validation set
           t ×Kv
 C̄ ∈ RK +                        Cost matrix over batches, each element C̄i,j = d(Bi , Bj′ )
            Ni ×N ′
 C ∈ R+        j
                                  Cost matrix over labeled data points within Bi and Bj′ , each element Ckl = d(zk , zl′ )
                      ′                                                                     ′
 f ∈ R , g ∗ ∈ RNj
    ∗    Ni
                                  Dual solutions of the OT over a cost matrix C ∈ RNi ×Nj
                 ′                                                        ′
 π ∗ ∈ RNi ×Nj                    OT plan over a cost matrix C ∈ RNi ×Nj
 f¯∗ ∈ RKt , ḡ ∗ ∈ RKv           OT dual solutions over a cost matrix over batches C̄ ∈ RKt ×Kv
 π̄ ∗ ∈ RKt ×Kv                   OT plan over a cost matrix between batches C̄ ∈ RKt ×Kv
 OTC (µt , µv )                   OT solution to the opt. problem with cost C over training and validation set measures


data points, i.e., disregarding normal variations in distances between clean data while being sensitive
to abnormal distances of outlying points. Therefore, the (sub)gradient of the OT distance w.r.t.
the probability mass associated with each point can be leveraged as a surrogate to measure the
contribution of that point. More precisely, the (sub)gradient of the OT distance w.r.t. the probability
mass of data points in the two datasets can be expressed:
                            ∇µt OT(µt , µv ) = (f ∗ )T , ∇µv OT(µt , µv ) = (g ∗ )T .                                     (5)
                                                                                  PN
The dual solution is unique up to a constant due to the redundant constraint i=1 µt (zi ) =
PM          ′
  i=1 µv (zi ) = 1. Therefore, for measuring the subgradients of the OT w.r.t. the probability
mass of a given data point in each dataset, Just et al. (2023) propose to calculate the calibrated
gradients (i.e., a sum of all elements equals to zero)2 as
                                  ∂OT(µt , µv )                     X             fj∗
                                                = fi∗ −                               .                                   (6)
                                    ∂µt (zi )                                    N −1
                                                                j∈{1,...,N }\i

The calibrated gradients predict how the OT distance changes as more probability mass is shifted to a
given data point. This can be interpreted as a measurement of the contribution of the data point to the
OT. Additionally, if we want a training set to match the distribution of the validation dataset, then
either removing or reducing the mass of data points with large positive gradients, while increasing
the mass of data points with large negative gradients can be expected to reduce their OT distance.
Therefore, as demonstrated in Just et al. (2023), the calibrated gradients provide a powerful tool to
detect and prune abnormal or irrelevant data in various applications.
Memory limitation. While being used with the current best practice, the Sinkhorn algorithm for
entropic regularized OT (Cuturi, 2013) still runs in quadratic memory complexity O(N 2 ) with the
dataset size N , as it requires performing operations on the entire dataset, using the full pairwise cost
matrix. Consequently, the memory and RAM requirements for the Sinkhorn algorithm primarily
depend on the dataset size N . Additionally, notice that a dense square (float) matrix of size N = 105
will require at least 74 GB of RAM and N = 106 will take 7450 GB of RAM which is prohibitively
expensive. Therefore, LAVA is limited to small datasets.
Scalability. Inspired by the scalability of stochastic gradient approaches where the computation
is carried out on batches of data points instead of the whole dataset as in the traditional gradient,
we follow this simple but effective scheme to propose an analog for OT, named SAVA which is a
scalable variant of LAVA with its OT computation on batches. Intuitively, SAVA also leverages the
    2
      To remove the degree of freedom which comes from the fact that one among all row/column sum constraints
for the transport polytope is redundant, among the OT subgradients, we fix the zero-sum subgradient following
the convention in Cuturi & Doucet (2014) and the calibrated approach in LAVA (Just et al., 2023).


                                                            4
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Algorithm 1 Scalable Data Valuation (SAVA) algorithm. More concretely, in Lines 1–5, we solve
     multiple OT problems between batches. In Line 6, we solve the OT problem across batches:
     OTC̄ (µ̄t , µ̄v ), to obtain π̄ ∗ (µ̄t , µ̄v ). In Lines 7–10, we estimate valuation scores for training data
     using the plan π̄ ∗ (µ̄t , µ̄v ) and potentials f ∗ (µBi , µBj′ ) computed in the previous steps.
  Input: a threshold ε for Sinkhorn algorithm, let z = (x, y)
  Output: training data values sk for all k ∈ [Ni ] for all i ∈ [Kt ].
1 for i = 1, ..., Kt do
2     for j = 1, ..., Kv do
          Compute Ckl Bi , Bj′ , ∀k ∈ [Ni ], ∀l ∈ [Nj′ ] by using Eq. (8).

3

4         Compute f ∗ (µBi , µBj′ ), g ∗ (µBi , µBj′ ) by solving OTC (µBi , µBj′ ).
5         Set C̄ij (µ̄t , µ̄v ) = OTC (µBi , µBj′ ).             // distance d(Bi , Bj′ ) on batches.

6 Compute π̄ ∗ (µ̄t , µ̄v ) ∈ RKt ×Kv by solving OTC̄ (µ̄t , µ̄v ) using Eq. (11).
7 for i = 1, ..., Kt do
8     for k = 1, ..., Ni do
                        ∂OT(µBi ,µB ′ )
                                    j
 9           Compute   ∂µBi (zk ) , ∀j ∈ [Kv ] using Eq. (14).
10           Compute sk = ∂HOT(µ   t ,µv )
                              ∂µt (zl )    using Eq. (13).  //         valuation score for zk ∈ Bi .



     hierarchically defined OT as in LAVA, but it performs OT on batches of data points instead of on the
     entire dataset as in LAVA.
     Notice that the scalable OT-based data valuation (i.e., SAVA) we will introduce in the next section
     focuses on the (sub)gradient of the OT instead of the OT distance itself. Therefore, several popular
     scalable OT approaches such as sliced-Wasserstein (Rabin et al., 2011; Bonneel et al., 2015; Nguyen
     et al., 2024), tree-sliced-Wasserstein (Le et al., 2019; 2024b; Tran et al., 2025a;b), or Sobolev
     transport (Le et al., 2022; 2023; 2024a), may not be suitable since they leverage local structures on
     supports (e.g., line, tree, or graph structure respectively) to scale up the computation of OT distance.
     In the next section, we introduce our novel scalable approach for computing the (sub)gradient of the
     OT using hierarchical OT (Yurochkin et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2019). We focus on the problem of data
     valuation but our work can be applied to other large dataset applications where the (sub)gradient of
     the OT is required.

     3    SAVA: S CALABLE D ATA V ALUATION
     In this section, we present SAVA, a scalable data valuation method, scaling LAVA to large-scale
     datasets. Instead of solving a single, but expensive OT problem for distributions on the entire datasets,
                                                                           ′
     i.e., OT(µt , µv ) in LAVA with the pairwise cost matrix size RN ×N , we consider solving multiple
     cheaper OT problems for distributions on batches of data points. For this purpose, our algorithm
     performs data valuation on two levels of hierarchy: across batches, and across data points within two
     batches. Thus, SAVA can complement LAVA for large-scale applications.
     Hierarchical OT. We follow the idea in hierarchical OT approach (Yurochkin et al., 2019; Lee
                                                                                                            Kt
     et al., 2019) to partition the training dataset Dt of N samples into Kt disjoint batches B = {Bi }i=1     .
                                                  ′                                  ′
                                                                                              ′ K  v
     Similarly, for the validation set Dv of N samples into Kv disjoint batches B = Bj j=1 . Addition-
     ally, for all i ∈ [Kt ], j ∈ [Kv ], let the number of samples in batches Bi , Bj′ as Ni , Nj′ respectively.
     The corresponding measures of the training and validation sets w.r.t. the batches are defined as:
                     PKt                                 PKv
     µ̄t (B) = K1t i=1      δ(Bi ) and µ̄v (B ′ ) = K1v j=1   δ(Bj′ ) respectively. We then define a distance
     between the datasets as the hierarchical optimal transport (HOT) between the measures µt , µv as OT
     distance for corresponding represented measures on batches, i.e., µ̄t and µ̄v as in §2.1 as follows:
                                     d(µt , µv ) := HOT(µt , µv ) := OT(µ̄t , µ̄v ).                        (7)
     It is worth noting that HOT finds the optimal coupling at the batch level, but not at the support data
     point level as in the classic OT. Therefore, it can be seen that
                                              OT(µt , µv ) ≤ HOT(µt , µv ),


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the equality trivially happens when either each batch only has one support or each dataset only
has one batch.
Our goal is to estimate the (sub)gradient ∂d(µ t ,µv )
                                           ∂µt (zk ) =
                                                       ∂HOT(µt ,µv )
                                                         ∂µt (zk )   where HOT(µt , µv ) is defined in
the Eq. (7). Computing this derivative involves two OT estimation steps including (i) OT between
individual data points within two batches to compute d(Bi , Bj′ ) := OT(µBi , µBj′ ), where µBi , µBj′
are corresponding measures for batches Bi , Bj′ respectively, and subsequently a cost matrix C̄ on
pairwise batches for input measures over batches; (ii) d(µt , µv ) = HOT(µt , µv ) := OTC̄ (µ̄t , µ̄v ).
Pairwise cost between batches. We estimate the distance between two batches as the OT problem
between Bi and Bj , i.e., d(Bi , Bj′ ) := OT(Bi , Bj′ ) as discussed in §2.1 by viewing the OT problem
between two labeled (sub)datasets, i.e., batches Bi and Bj′ .
More precisely, to solve this OT problem, we calculate the pairwise cost for data points between two
                                  ′
batches Ckl (Bi , Bj′ ) ∈ RNi ×Nj , where ∀k ∈ [Ni ], ∀l ∈ [Nj′ ], the element Ckl (Bi , Bj′ ) is the cost
between two labeled data points (xk , yk ) ∈ Bi and (x′l , yl′ ) ∈ Bj′ , calculated as

                        Ckl Bi , Bj′ = d(xk , x′l ) + c OTd µBi (·|yk ), µBj′ (·|yl′ ) .

                                                                                                       (8)

Given the cost matrix C(Bi , Bj′ ), we solve OTC (µBi , µB ′ ) to get dual solutions
                                                                              j
f ∗ (µBi , µBj′ ), g ∗ (µBi , µBj′ ), and the OT distance for d(Bi , Bj′ ) = OTC (µBi , µBj′ ).
We repeat this process and solve the OT problem for each pair (Bi , Bj′ ), i.e., the OT problem
for distributions on batches of data points, across the training and validation datasets, for all i ∈
[Kt ], j ∈ [Kv ]. This enables us to define the cost matrix for pairwise batches in µ̄t , µ̄v , denoted as
                    t ×Kv
C̄(µ̄t , µ̄v ) ∈ RK
                  +       where we recall that Kt and Kv are the number of batches in training and
validation sets. Hence, for this cost matrix C̄, the element C̄ij is computed as OT(µBi , µBj′ ), for all
i ∈ [Kt ], ∀j ∈ [Kv ].
Batch valuation. Given the pairwise cost matrix across batches C̄, we compute the data valuation for
each batch via the (sub)gradient of the distance OTC̄ (µ̄t , µ̄v ) w.r.t. the probability mass of batches in
the two datasets, i.e., ∂OT     C̄ (µ̄t ,µ̄v )
                             ∂ µ̄t (Bi ) . These partial derivatives measure the contribution of the batches
to the OT distance, i.e., shifting more probability mass to the batch would result in an increase or
decrease of the dataset distance, respectively.
More precisely, let f¯∗ , ḡ ∗ be the optimal dual variables of OTC̄ (µ̄t , µ̄v ), then the data valuation of the
batch Bi in the training set Dt is estimated as follows:
                                              ∂OTC̄ (µ̄t , µ̄v )
                                                                 = f¯i∗ .                                    (9)
                                                ∂ µ̄t (Bi )
Since the optimal dual variables are only unique up to a constant, we follow Just et al. (2023) to
normalize these optimal dual variables such that the sum of all elements is equal to zero:
                               ∂OTC̄ (µ̄t , µ̄v )                        X             f¯j∗
                                                  = f¯i∗ −                                   .              (10)
                                 ∂ µ̄t (Bi )                                          Kt − 1
                                                                    j∈{1,...,Kt }\i


Using batch valuation for data point valuation. After solving the OT problem over batches, we
obtain the OT plan π̄ ∗ (µ̄t , µ̄v ) which is used to compute the data valuation over individual data point:
                                                              C̄(µ̄ , µ̄ )
                                                                   t    v
                          π̄ ∗ (µ̄t , µ̄v ) = diag(ū∗ ) exp −               diag(v̄ ∗ ),              (11)
                                                                   ε
where diag(·) is matrix diagonal operator, (ū∗ , v̄ ∗ ) is a dual solution from Sinkhorn algorithm.
                                        ¯∗                       ∗
Additionally, we have ū∗ = exp(− 12 − fε ), v̄ ∗ = exp(− 12 − ḡε ) following Cuturi (2013, Lemma 2).
For a data point z ∈ Bi ⊂ Dt , its data valuation score can be computed as
                                      Kv
                                      X
                                              ∗
                                                                ∂OT(µBi , µBj′ )
                                            π̄ij (µ̄t , µ̄v )                          .                    (12)
                                      j=1
                                                                      ∂µBi (z)


                                                                6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Using HOT, we can measure the (sub)gradients of the OT distance w.r.t. the probability mass of a
given data point in each dataset via the calibrated gradient summarized in the following Lemma 1.
We refer to Table 1 for the notations.
Lemma 1. The calibrated gradient for a data point zk in the batch Bi in Dt can be computed as:
                                              Kv
                              ∂HOT(µt , µv ) X      ∗
                                                                    ∂OT(µBi , µBj′ )
                                            =     π̄ij (µ̄t , µ̄v )                  ,                              (13)
                                ∂µt (zk )     j=1
                                                                      ∂µBi (zk )

where the calibrated gradient of OT for measures on batches is calculated as follows:
           ∂OT(µBi , µBj′ )                                   X           fl∗ (µBi , µBj′ )
                              = fk∗ (µBi , µBj′ )   −                                         , ∀j ∈ [Kv ].         (14)
              ∂µBi (zk )                                                      Ni − 1
                                                        l∈{1,...,Ni }\k


It is common practice to compute the OT via its entropic regularization, using the Sinkhorn algorithm
(Cuturi, 2013). We quantify the deviation in the calibrated gradients caused by the entropy regularizer.
This analysis shows the potential impact of the deviation on applications built on these gradients.
We refine the theoretical result (Just et al., 2023, Theorem 2), which uses entropic regularization
to approximate the OT (sub)gradient in two aspects. Firstly, we take into account the non-negative
constraint of the OT plan π ≥ 0 in the dual formulation. Secondly, we correct the discrete formulation
for entropic regularization.3
Theorem 2 (Refined Theorem 2 in Just et al. (2023)). The difference between calibrated gradients
for two data points in Dt is
  ∂OT (µt , µv ) ∂OT (µt , µv )   ∂OTε (µt , µv ) ∂OTε (µt , µv )
                −               =                −
    ∂µt (zi )      ∂µt (zk )        ∂µt (zi )       ∂µt (zk )
                                                                                                              !
                                                        N                   (πε∗ )ij /µt (zi )
                                                                                            h∗kj − h∗ij
                                                    +ε               log ∗                +                       , (15)
                                                       N −1             (πε )kj /µt (zk )        ε

where h∗ is the corresponding optimal dual variable, accounting for non-negative constraint on the
transportation plan π ≥ 0 in the primal OT formulation.

Proof. Refer to Appendix C.2 for the proof.

The term in the brackets (in blue) is the key difference between our new result and the previous one
derived in LAVA (Just et al., 2023, Theorem 2).
Lemma 3 (HOT with entropic regularized OT over batches). The difference between the calibrated
gradients for two data points {zl , zh } ∈ Bi ⊂ Dt can be calculated as
                                           Kv
                                                               "
    ∂HOT(µt , µv ) ∂HOT(µt , µv ) X             ∗
                                                                 ∂OTε (µBi , µBj′ ) ∂OTε (µBi , µBj′ )
                   −                    =     π̄ij (µ̄t , µ̄v )                       −
       ∂µt (zk )          ∂µt (zl )       j=1
                                                                    ∂µBi (zk )              ∂µBi (zl )
                                                                                                    #
                                                                  (π̄ε∗ )k,j /µt (zk ) h∗lj − h∗kj

                                                   Ni
                                           +ε                 log ∗                   +                . (16)
                                                Ni − 1            (π̄ε )l,j /µt (zl )       ε

Proof. Refer to Appendix C.3 for the proof.

We make a similar observation in LAVA that the ground-truth (sub)gradient difference between two
training points zk and zl is calculated based on the HOT formulation and can be approximated by
the entropic regularized formulation OTε over batches, such as via the Sinkhorn algorithm (Cuturi,
2013). In other words, we can calculate the ground-truth difference based on the solutions to the
regularized problem plus some calibration terms that scale with ε. In addition, in our case with
HOT, the (sub)gradient difference also depends on the additional optimal assignment across batches
π̄ ∗ (µ̄t , µ̄v ) which is again estimated by the Sinkhorn algorithm.
   3
       See Appendix C.1 for the detailed discussion.


                                                          7
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       LAVA         LAVA OOM           Batch-wise LAVA       Random         KNN Shapley       TracInCP        Inf. Func.         Data OOB       SAVA
                       Backdoor Detection (10%)                Poison Detection (10%)       1.0
                                                                                                  Noisy Features (30%)                     Noisy Labels (30%)
                 1.0                                     1.0
                                                                                            0.8                                0.8
                 0.8                                     0.8
Detection rate
                                                                                            0.6                                0.6
                 0.6                                     0.6
                 0.4                                     0.4                                0.4                                0.4

                 0.2                                     0.2                                0.2                                0.2
                 0.0                                     0.0                                0.0                                0.0
                          0.1        0.5 1.0 2.0 5.0             0.1      0.5 1.0 2.0 5.0          0.1      0.5 1.0 2.0 5.0                0.1     0.5 1.0 2.0 5.0
                              Training Set Size ×104               Training Set Size ×104            Training Set Size ×104                 Training Set Size ×104
    Figure 2: SAVA can value the full CIFAR10 dataset with various corruptions, while LAVA has
    out-of-memory (OOM) issues. We sort training examples by the highest OT gradients in Eq. (6) and
    Eq. (12) for LAVA and SAVA respectively, and use the fraction of corrupted data recovered for a prefix
    of size N/4 as the detection rate (where N is the training set size). The star symbol (⋆) denotes the
    point at which LAVA is unable to continue valuing training due GPU out-of memory (OOM) errors.

    4                  P ROPERTIES AND D ISCUSSIONS

   The SAVA algorithm. We outline the computational steps of SAVA in Algorithm 1. In Lines 1–5,
   we solve multiple OT tasks for data points between two batches Bi , Bj′ . We obtain the dual solution
   f ∗ (µBi , µBj′ ) ∈ RNi . Additionally, these OT distances are used to fill in the cost matrix for pairwise
   batches C̄ij (µ̄t , µ̄v ) = OTC (µBi , µBj′ ). Here, the cost matrix C is of size Ni × Nj′ where the batch
   sizes Ni , Nj′ ≪ N . The required memory complexity is O(Ni × Nj′ ).
   In Line 6 Algorithm 1, we solve the OT problem across batches OTC̄ (µ̄t , µ̄v ) to obtain π̄ ∗ (µ̄t , µ̄v ).
   The cost matrix is small, of size Kt × Kv , so less expensive compared to working with the full
   dataset Just et al. (2023). Finally, in Lines 7–10, we estimate valuation scores for training data using
   the auxiliary matrices computed in the previous steps, including f ∗ (µBi , µBj′ ) and π̄ ∗ (µ̄t , µ̄v ).
   SAVA memory requirements. The memory complexity of LAVA is O(N × N ′ ) where N and N ′ are
   the training and validation dataset sizes. This comes from the main OT step of OT(µt , µv ) over the
   full cost matrix C of size N × N ′ to subsequently calculate the calibrated gradient in Eq. (6). SAVA
   overcomes this limitation by solving multiple smaller OT problems OT(µBi , µBj′ ) on distributions
   for batches of data points only: if batches Bi and Bj′ are of size Ni and Nj′ respectively, then the
   memory complexity is O(Ni × Nj′ ). See Appendix D for an analysis of the time complexity.
    Practical implementation with caching. While yielding a significant memory improvement, SAVA’s
    runtime is not necessarily faster than LAVA. To speed up SAVA, we propose to implement Algorithm 1
    by caching the label-to-label costs between points in the validation and training batches: OTd (·, ·) in
    §2.1 so that it is only calculated once in the first iteration of Algorithm 1 and reused for subsequent
    batches. This significantly reduces SAVA runtimes with no detriment to performance Figure 9. All
    experimental results in §5, unless otherwise stated, implement this caching strategy.
    Batch sizes. If we consider Eq. (7), HOT provides the upper bound for the OT since its optimal
    coupling is on batches of data points. HOT recovers the OT when either batch only has one support or
    each dataset only has one batch. Consequently, up to a certain batch size, when increasing the batch
    size Ni , HOT converges to the OT, but its memory complexity also increases, i.e., O(Ni × Nj′ ) →
    O(N × N ′ ). On the other hand, if the batch size Ni is too small, the number of batches Kt will be
    large. As a result, the memory complexity will also be high, i.e., OTC̄ (µ̄t , µ̄v ) in Algorithm 1. Thus,
    the batch size will trade off the memory complexity and the approximation of HOT to standard OT.


    5                  E XPERIMENTS

   We aim to the test two following hypotheses: (i) Can SAVA scale and overcome the memory complexity
   issues which hinder LAVA while maintaining similar performance? (ii) Can SAVA scale to a large
   real-world noisy dataset with over a million data points?


                                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1      DATASET C ORRUPTION D ETECTION

We test the scalability of SAVA versus LAVA (Just et al., 2023) by leveraging the CIFAR10 dataset,
introducing a corruption to a percentage of the training data, but keeping the validation set clean. We
then assign a value to each data point in the training set. Following Pruthi et al. (2020); Just et al.
(2023), we sort the training examples by their values. An effective data valuation method would rank
corrupted examples in a prefix of ordered points. We use the fraction of corrupted data recovered by
the prefix of size N/4 as our detection rate (see an example in Appendix F, Figure 5).
Setup. We consider 4 different corruptions (see Appendix E for details) applied to training data
following Just et al. (2023): (i) noisy labels, (ii) noisy features, (iii) backdoor attacks and (iv) poison
detections. All experiments are run on a Tesla K80 Nvidia GPUs with 12GB GPU RAM. Unless
otherwise stated, all results reported are a mean ±1 standard deviation over 5 independent runs.
Baselines. Our main baseline is LAVA. For SAVA and LAVA we use features from a pre-trained
ResNet18 (He et al., 2016). For SAVA, we use a default batch size of Ni = 1024 which is its main
hyperparameter.4 We consider KNN Shapley (Jia et al., 2019a), the Shapley value measures the
marginal improvement in the utility of a data point and uses KNN to approximate the Shapley value.
KNN Shapley also uses ResNet18 features to calculate Shapley values, we tune k as its performance
is sensitive to this hyperparameter. We consider TracInCP (Pruthi et al., 2020) which measures the
influence of each training point by measuring the difference in the loss at the beginning versus the end
of training. We also compare with Influence Function (Koh & Liang, 2017) which approximates the
effect of holding out a training point on the test error, it uses expensive approximations of the Hessian
to calculate the influence of a training point. We also consider Data-OOB (Kwon & Zou, 2023)
which uses bagging estimators to value data points, data points are embedded using a pre-trained
feature extractor, and the bagging estimator is a decision tree (see Appendix G.1 for implementation
details). We finally consider a naive OT baseline which obtains values for data points at a batch level,
and aggregates values across validation batches; the baseline essentially performs LAVA only at a
data point level within a batch and averaging values across validation batches. We call this baseline
Batch-wise LAVA. Although Batch-wise LAVA obtains good corruption detection results, it is very
sensitive to the batch size (see Appendix H.6).
Noisy labels. We corrupt 30% of the labels in the training set by randomly assigning the target a
different label. From Figure 2, we can see that LAVA has an out-of-memory (OOM) issue when
valuing the full training set of 50K points. In contrast, SAVA, Batch-wise LAVA, KNN Shapley and
Data-OOB can consistently value and detect all corruptions when inspecting 12.5K ordered samples
by values. Influence Functions matches the performance of SAVA, but is very expensive to run on
large datasets. TracInCP is unable to detect noisy labels better than random selection, similar to the
observations in Just et al. (2023). Consequently, when pruning 30% of the data, SAVA can consistently
improve its accuracy on the test set as the training set size increases (Appendix H.1).
Noisy features. We add Gaussian noise to 30% of the training images to simulate feature corruptions
that might occur in real datasets. From Figure 2, LAVA obtains good performance for moderate
dataset sizes, but for training set sizes above 10K, some runs have OOM errors when embedding
the entire training set into memory and when calculating the full cost matrix for OT problem. In
contrast, SAVA can consistently value and detect corruptions. Batch-wise LAVA is also able to scale
and gets similar performance to SAVA. As can KNN Shapley and Data-OOB, albeit its detection rate
is lower than SAVA; as we prune 30% of the data for larger and larger dataset sizes performance of
SAVA outperforms KNN Shapley Figure 7. TracInCP and Influence Functions both struggle to detect
noisy data points, both methods were originally shown to detect noisy labels, so we do not expect
them to work well beyond noisy label detection.
Backdoor attacks. We corrupt 10% of the data with a Trojan square attack (Liu et al., 2018). SAVA,
Batch-wise LAVA and KNN Shapley can scale as the dataset size increases while LAVA has an OOM
error when valuing the largest dataset with 50k points. TracInCP and Influence Functions both
struggle to detect backdoored training points and have long runtimes. Data-OOB also struggles
to value data points in this scenario, this is in line with recent surveys which show less strong
performance when valuing data with noisy features (Jiang et al., 2023).


   4
       See Appendix H for the study of the sensitivity of the batch size Ni in SAVA.


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Poisoning attacks. We corrupt 10% of the data with a poison frogs attack (Shafahi et al., 2018). We
find in Figure 2 that SAVA and Batch-wise LAVA can scale and maintain a high detection rate. In
contrast, KNN Shapley struggles to detect corrupted data points after inspecting 25% of the ordered
training data. TracInCP, Data-OOB and Influence Functions struggle to detect the corrupted data.

5.2   L ARGE S CALE VALUATION AND P RUNING
We test our second hypothesis: whether SAVA can scale to a large real-world dataset. We consider
the web-scrapped dataset Clothing1M (Xiao et al., 2015) where the training set has over 1M images
whose labels are noisy and unreliable. However, the validation set has been curated. Clothing1M
is a 14-way image classification problem and has been used for previous work on online data
selection (Mindermann et al., 2022). We consider SAVA and other data pruning methods as baselines
to remove low-value training data points before training a ResNet18 classifier.
We compare to Batch-wise LAVA, intro-
duced in §5.1. We also compare to                              70                                 No Pruning


                                               Test Accuracy
EL2N (Paul et al., 2021) which values                                                             SAVA
                                                               69                                 Random Pruning
training points using the loss on several
partially trained networks to decide which                                                        Supervised Prototypes
                                                               68                                 EL2N
points to remove. We train 10 models for                                                          Batch-wise LAVA
10 epochs, we perform a cross-validate a                       67
sliding window of values to decide which                            0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4
EL2N values to keep (see Appendix G.2.2                             Proportion of Data Pruned
for details). We also consider supervised      Figure 3: SAVA can scale to a large web-scrapped
prototypes (Sorscher et al., 2022) which       dataset. We use SAVA and other baselines, to value data
prunes image embeddings according to           points and then prune a certain percentage of the noisy
how similar they look to cluster centers af-   training set. The resulting dataset is used for training a
ter clustering image embeddings (see Ap-       classifier.
pendix G.2.3 for details).
If we were to train a classifier on the full noisy training set, we would obtain an accuracy of 67.6 ± 0.2,
this remains constant as we randomly prune more data. Supervised prototypes obtains better results
than random, and improves slightly over random pruning. This is expected since supervised prototypes
is a semantic deduplication method and ignores label information. SAVA, Batch-wise LAVA and EL2N
perform well and we find that SAVA performs better than both EL2N and Batch-wise LAVA. This
shows the benefit of the SAVA’s weighting of the (sub)gradient of the OT across the validation dataset
using optimal plan across batches π̄ ∗ (µ̄t , µ̄v ) rather than Batch-wise LAVA’s uniform weighting. SAVA
produces the best accuracy model of 70.0 ± 0.2 in Figure 3.

6     C ONCLUSIONS
We have presented a scalable extension to LAVA to address the challenges posed by large-scale
datasets. Instead of relying on the expensive OT computation on the whole dataset, our proposed
SAVA algorithm involves jointly optimizing multiple smaller OT tasks across batches of data points and
within individual batches. We empirically show that SAVA maintains performance in data valuation
tasks while successfully scaling up to handle a large real-world noisy dataset. This makes the data
valuation task feasible for large-scale datasets. Our proposed method, along with the theoretical
correction (Just et al., 2023, Theorem 2), will complement, strengthen and improve (in terms of
efficiency) OT-based data valuation.
Limitations. HOT finds the optimal coupling at the batch level, but not at the global level as in the
traditional OT, i.e., OT(µt , µv ) ≤ HOT(µt , µv ), which makes the validation error bound looser (Just
et al., 2023, Eq. (1), Theorem 1). However, our experiments indicate little performance degradation
for small datasets between SAVA and LAVA. See Appendix B for further discussion on limitations.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank the area chairs, anonymous reviewers for their comments, and Hoang Anh Just for helpful
discussions. TL acknowledges the support of JSPS KAKENHI Grant number 23K11243, and Mitsui
Knowledge Industry Co., Ltd. grant.


                                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We have described in detail our algorithm in Section 3 with Algorithm 1. All implementation details
for our method and baselines are described in Section 5 and expanded on in Appendix G. The code to
reproduce all experiments can be found at https://github.com/skezle/sava.

R EFERENCES
Amro Kamal Mohamed Abbas, Kushal Tirumala, Daniel Simig, Surya Ganguli, and Ari S Morcos.
 Semdedup: Data-efficient learning at web-scale through semantic deduplication. In ICLR 2023
 Workshop on Mathematical and Empirical Understanding of Foundation Models. 26
Jason Altschuler, Francis Bach, Alessandro Rudi, and Jonathan Niles-Weed. Massively scalable
  Sinkhorn distances via the Nyström method. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 4429–4439, 2019. 20
David Alvarez-Melis and Nicolo Fusi. Geometric dataset distances via optimal transport. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:21428–21439, 2020. 2, 3, 21
Deepak Baby, Pasquale D’Alterio, and Valentin Mendelev. Incremental learning for RNN-Transducer
  based speech recognition models. 2022. 1, 23
Nicolas Bonneel, Julien Rabin, Gabriel Peyré, and Hanspeter Pfister. Sliced and radon wasserstein
  barycenters of measures. Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision, 51(1):22–45, 2015. 5
Cody Coleman, Christopher Yeh, Stephen Mussmann, Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Peter Bailis, Percy
  Liang, Jure Leskovec, and Matei Zaharia. Selection via proxy: Efficient data selection for deep
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. 26
M. Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, pp. 2292–2300, 2013. 3, 4, 6, 7, 17
M. Cuturi and A. Doucet. Fast computation of Wasserstein barycenters. In International conference
 on machine learning, pp. 685–693, 2014. 4
Pavel Dvurechensky, Alexander Gasnikov, and Alexey Kroshnin. Computational optimal transport:
  Complexity by accelerated gradient descent is better than by Sinkhorn’s algorithm. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 1367–1376. PMLR, 2018. 19
Aden Forrow, Jan-Christian Hütter, Mor Nitzan, Philippe Rigollet, Geoffrey Schiebinger, and Jonathan
  Weed. Statistical optimal transport via factored couplings. In The 22nd International Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2454–2465, 2019. 20
Yoav Freund, H Sebastian Seung, Eli Shamir, and Naftali Tishby. Selective sampling using the query
  by committee algorithm. Machine learning, 28:133–168, 1997. 26
Yarin Gal, Riashat Islam, and Zoubin Ghahramani. Deep bayesian active learning with image data.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1183–1192. PMLR, 2017. 26
Aude Genevay, Marco Cuturi, Gabriel Peyré, and Francis Bach. Stochastic optimization for large-
  scale optimal transport. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 3440–3448,
  2016. 17
Aude Genevay, Gabriel Peyre, and Marco Cuturi. Learning generative models with Sinkhorn
  divergences. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 1608–1617, 2018. 17
Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. Data Shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning.
 In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2242–2251. PMLR, 2019. 25
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016. 9, 24


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Heewoo
  Jun, Tom B Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, et al. Scaling laws for autoregressive generative
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14701, 2020. 1
Neil Houlsby, Ferenc Huszár, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Máté Lengyel. Bayesian active learning for
  classification and preference learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1112.5745, 2011. 26
Ruoxi Jia, David Dao, Boxin Wang, Frances A Hubis, Nezihe M Gürel, Bo Li, Ce Zhang, Costas J
  Spanos, and Dawn Song. Efficient task-specific data valuation for nearest neighbor algorithms.
  Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 12(11):1610–1623, 2019a. 9, 25
Ruoxi Jia, David Dao, Boxin Wang, Frances Ann Hubis, Nick Hynes, Nezihe Merve Gürel, Bo Li,
  Ce Zhang, Dawn Song, and Costas J Spanos. Towards efficient data valuation based on the
  Shapley value. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
 1167–1176. PMLR, 2019b. 25
Angela H Jiang, Daniel L-K Wong, Giulio Zhou, David G Andersen, Jeffrey Dean, Gregory R Ganger,
  Gauri Joshi, Michael Kaminksy, Michael Kozuch, Zachary C Lipton, et al. Accelerating deep
  learning by focusing on the biggest losers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00762, 2019. 2
Kevin Fu Jiang, Weixin Liang, James Zou, and Yongchan Kwon. Opendataval: a unified benchmark
  for data valuation. 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=eEK99egXeB. 9,
  26
Tyler B Johnson and Carlos Guestrin. Training deep models faster with robust, approximate impor-
  tance sampling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018. 26
Hoang Anh Just, Feiyang Kang, Tianhao Wang, Yi Zeng, Myeongseob Ko, Ming Jin, and Ruoxi Jia.
  LAVA: Data valuation without pre-specified learning algorithms. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 26
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
   Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020. 1
Angelos Katharopoulos and François Fleuret. Not all samples are created equal: Deep learning with
  importance sampling. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2525–2534. PMLR,
  2018. 26
Andreas Kirsch, Joost Van Amersfoort, and Yarin Gal. Batchbald: Efficient and diverse batch
  acquisition for deep bayesian active learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  32, 2019. 26
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1885–1894. PMLR, 2017. 9, 25
Yongchan Kwon and James Zou. Beta Shapley: a unified and noise-reduced data valuation framework
  for machine learning. In International Conference on AI and Statistics, 2022. 25
Yongchan Kwon and James Zou. Data-oob: Out-of-bag estimate as a simple and efficient data value.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 18135–18152. PMLR, 2023. 9, 26
Angeliki Lazaridou, Adhi Kuncoro, Elena Gribovskaya, Devang Agrawal, Adam Liska, Tayfun Terzi,
  Mai Gimenez, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Tomas Kocisky, Sebastian Ruder, et al. Mind the gap:
  Assessing temporal generalization in neural language models. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:29348–29363, 2021. 1
Tam Le, Makoto Yamada, Kenji Fukumizu, and Marco Cuturi. Tree-sliced variants of Wasserstein
  distances. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 12283–12294, 2019. 5
Tam Le, Truyen Nguyen, Dinh Phung, and Viet Anh Nguyen. Sobolev transport: A scalable metric
  for probability measures with graph metrics. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 9844–9868. PMLR, 2022. 5


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tam Le, Truyen Nguyen, and Kenji Fukumizu. Scalable unbalanced Sobolev transport for measures
  on a graph. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 8521–8560,
  2023. 5
Tam Le, Truyen Nguyen, and Kenji Fukumizu. Generalized Sobolev transport for probability
  measures on a graph. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024a. 5
Tam Le, Truyen Nguyen, and Kenji Fukumizu. Optimal transport for measures with noisy tree metric.
  In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3115–3123, 2024b. 5
John Lee, Max Dabagia, Eva Dyer, and Christopher Rozell. Hierarchical optimal transport for
  multimodal distribution alignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
  2, 5, 16
Mingkun Li and Ishwar K Sethi. Confidence-based active learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
 Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 28(8):1251–1261, 2006. 26
Yingqi Liu, Shiqing Ma, Yousra Aafer, Wen-Chuan Lee, Juan Zhai, Weihang Wang, and Xiangyu
  Zhang. Trojaning attack on neural networks. In 25th Annual Network And Distributed System
  Security Symposium (NDSS 2018). Internet Soc, 2018. 9, 20
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Online batch selection for faster training of neural networks. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1511.06343, 2015. 26
Clare Lyle, Lisa Schut, Robin Ru, Yarin Gal, and Mark van der Wilk. A bayesian perspective on
  training speed and model selection. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  10396–10408, 2020. 1
Sören Mindermann, Jan M Brauner, Muhammed T Razzak, Mrinank Sharma, Andreas Kirsch, Winnie
  Xu, Benedikt Höltgen, Aidan N Gomez, Adrien Morisot, Sebastian Farquhar, et al. Prioritized
  training on points that are learnable, worth learning, and not yet learnt. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 15630–15649. PMLR, 2022. 2, 10, 26
Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Jeff Bilmes, and Jure Leskovec. Coresets for data-efficient training of
  machine learning models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6950–6960.
  PMLR, 2020. 26
Khai Nguyen, Shujian Zhang, Tam Le, and Nhat Ho. Sliced Wasserstein with random-path projecting
  directions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. 5
Dongmin Park, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Kangwook Lee. Active learning is a strong baseline for
  data subset selection. In Has it Trained Yet? NeurIPS 2022 Workshop, 2022. 26
Mansheej Paul, Surya Ganguli, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Deep learning on a data diet: Finding
 important examples early in training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
 20596–20607, 2021. 2, 10, 22, 26
Gabriel Peyré and Marco Cuturi. Computational optimal transport. Foundations and Trends® in
 Machine Learning, 11(5-6):355–607, 2019. 26
Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Satyen Kale, and Mukund Sundararajan. Estimating training data
  influence by tracing gradient descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
 19920–19930, 2020. 2, 9, 21, 25
Julien Rabin, Gabriel Peyré, Julie Delon, and Marc Bernot. Wasserstein barycenter and its application
  to texture mixing. In International Conference on Scale Space and Variational Methods in
  Computer Vision, pp. 435–446, 2011. 5
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 28492–28518. PMLR, 2023. 1, 20
Mengye Ren, Wenyuan Zeng, Bin Yang, and Raquel Urtasun. Learning to reweight examples for
 robust deep learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4334–4343. PMLR,
 2018. 26


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jonathan S Rosenfeld, Amir Rosenfeld, Yonatan Belinkov, and Nir Shavit. A constructive prediction
  of the generalization error across scales. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019. 1
Meyer Scetbon, Marco Cuturi, and Gabriel Peyré. Low-rank Sinkhorn factorization. International
 Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021. 20
Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
  approach. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. 26
Burr Settles. Active learning literature survey. 2009. 26
Ali Shafahi, W Ronny Huang, Mahyar Najibi, Octavian Suciu, Christoph Studer, Tudor Dumitras,
  and Tom Goldstein. Poison frogs! targeted clean-label poisoning attacks on neural networks.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018. 10, 20, 21
Ben Sorscher, Robert Geirhos, Shashank Shekhar, Surya Ganguli, and Ari Morcos. Beyond neural
  scaling laws: beating power law scaling via data pruning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:19523–19536, 2022. 1, 10, 26
Kushal Tirumala, Daniel Simig, Armen Aghajanyan, and Ari S Morcos. D4: Improving llm
  pretraining via document de-duplication and diversification. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
 Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023. 2, 26
Mariya Toneva, Alessandro Sordoni, Remi Tachet des Combes, Adam Trischler, Yoshua Bengio, and
 Geoffrey J Gordon. An empirical study of example forgetting during deep neural network learning.
 2018. 26
Hoang V. Tran, Thanh Chu, Minh-Khoi Nguyen-Nhat, Huyen Trang Pham, Tam Le, and Tan Minh
  Nguyen. Spherical tree-sliced Wasserstein distance. In The Thirteenth International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2025a. 5
Hoang V. Tran, Khoi N.M. Nguyen, Trang Pham, Thanh T. Chu, Tam Le, and Tan M. Nguyen.
  Distance-based tree-sliced Wasserstein distance. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
 Learning Representations, 2025b. 5
Jiachen T Wang and Ruoxi Jia. Data banzhaf: A robust data valuation framework for machine
   learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 6388–6421.
   PMLR, 2023. 26
Jiachen T Wang, Yuqing Zhu, Yu-Xiang Wang, Ruoxi Jia, and Prateek Mittal. Threshold
   kNN-Shapley: A linear-time and privacy-friendly approach to data valuation. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2308.15709, 2023. 25
Jiachen T Wang, Prateek Mittal, and Ruoxi Jia. Efficient data Shapley for weighted nearest neighbor
   algorithms. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2557–2565.
   PMLR, 2024. 25
Zhaoxuan Wu, Yao Shu, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Davinz: Data valuation using deep neural
  networks at initialization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 24150–24176.
  PMLR, 2022. 26
Tong Xiao, Tian Xia, Yi Yang, Chang Huang, and Xiaogang Wang. Learning from massive noisy
  labeled data for image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2691–2699, 2015. 10, 20
Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Tengyu Ma, and Percy S Liang. Data selection for language
  models via importance resampling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:
  34201–34227, 2023. 26
Xinyi Xu, Zhaoxuan Wu, Chuan Sheng Foo, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Validation free and
  replication robust volume-based data valuation. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:10837–10848, 2021. 26


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tom Yan and Ariel D Procaccia. If you like Shapley then you’ll love the core. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 5751–5759, 2021. 26
Mikhail Yurochkin, Sebastian Claici, Edward Chien, Farzaneh Mirzazadeh, and Justin M Solomon.
 Hierarchical optimal transport for document representation. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 32, 2019. 2, 5, 16
Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scaling vision transformers.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  12104–12113, 2022. 1


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX
In this appendix, we provide discussion regarding the border impact of our work in §A and the
limitations of our work in §B. We also provide details of theoretical results in §C, describe the data
corruptions used in our experiments in §E. In §F, we further discuss how we calculate detection
rates and discuss data valuation rankings. We also give details for the implementations used in the
experiments in §G. In §H, we provide further empirical results. In §I, we present and discuss further
related works. We also provide a visualization for the artifacts in SAVA in §J, and other further
discussions in §K.


A PPENDIX A           B ROADER I MPACT

Data selection in deep learning for training neural networks can significantly enhance the efficiency
and effectiveness of model training. By enabling faster training and improved generalization perfor-
mance, data selection techniques reduce the computational resources and time required, leading to
notable environmental benefits such as lower energy consumption and reduced carbon footprint. By
using, an optimal transport approach to data valuation ensures high-quality, relevant data is selected,
improving model performance. However, this approach also carries risks: a malicious actor could
curate a harmful validation dataset, leading to the training of models on dangerous or unethical
data. This underscores the importance of vigilance and ethical considerations in dataset creation and
curation.


A PPENDIX B          L IMITATIONS

One theoretical limitation stated in Section 6 regards a looser validation error bound (Just et al.,
2023, Eq. (1), Theorem 1) due to the use of hierarchical optimal transport (Yurochkin et al., 2019;
Lee et al., 2019). However, the validation error bound for SAVA remains useful as in LAVA since it
can be interpreted that minimizing either the OT or hierarchical OT between training and validation
sets, and will bound the model’s validation error. As we observe in practice, there is little difference
in performance between SAVA and LAVA (Just et al., 2023). Another limitation of OT-based data
valuation methods is their dependence on a clean validation dataset.
Another limitation of our work is that the ground cost we consider is limited to labeled datasets.5
We have not explored different ground truth costs for text data or speech data, which are interesting
directions for future investigation.


A PPENDIX C          D ETAILS OF T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

C.1    E XISTING T HEOREM 2 IN J UST ET AL . (2023)

Theorem 4 (restated Theorem 2 in Just et al. (2023)). The difference between calibrated gradients
for two data points in Dt and Dv can be calculated as
                                                                                                                   !
∂ OT (µt , µv ) ∂ OT (µt , µv )   ∂OTε (µt , µv ) ∂OTε (µt , µv )     N                        1        1
               −                =                −                −ε                           ∗
                                                                                                     − ∗
   ∂µt (zi )      ∂µt (zk )         ∂µt (zi )       ∂µt (zk )        N −1                    (πε )kj  (πε )ij
                                                                                                       (C.1)

The above theorem analyzes the trade-off of using entropic regularization to estimate the OT gradient.
However, the theoretical result suffers two key drawbacks that we correct below:

      1. The original derivation ignores the positive constraint when deriving its dual formulation:
         π ≥ 0. This positivity is essential to have the OT plan in the valid domain.
   5
     For unlabelled datasets, in some sense, it is equivalent to set the weight coefficient c = 0, to ignore the
contribution of label information for the ground cost.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         2. In the proof of (Just et al., 2023, Theorem 2), the authors have incorrectly6 written the
            relative entropy (i.e., Kullback-Leibler divergence) term for the discrete case
                                                                                ′
                                                                         N X
                                                                           N
                                                                         X                     (πε )ij
                                        H(πε |µt ⊗ µv ) =                           log                     .                  (C.2)
                                                                         i=1 j=1
                                                                                           µt (zi )µv (zj )

            However, the correct term should be written as follows as used in (Cuturi, 2013; Genevay
            et al., 2016; 2018)
                                                                           ′
                                                                   N X
                                                                     N
                                                                   X                                   (πε )ij
                                    H(πε |µt ⊗ µv ) =                          (πε )ij log                          .          (C.3)
                                                                   i=1 j=1
                                                                                                   µt (zi )µv (zj )

C.2      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Theorem 5 (restated Theorem 2 in the main paper). The difference between calibrated gradients for
two data points in Dt and Dv can be calculated as
 ∂ OT (µt , µv ) ∂ OT (µt , µv )   ∂OTε (µt , µv ) ∂OTε (µt , µv )
                −                =                −
    ∂µt (zi )      ∂µt (zk )         ∂µt (zi )       ∂µt (zk )
                                                                                                                           !
                                                                   N                       (πε∗ )ij /µt (zi )
                                                                                                           h∗kj − h∗ij
                                                               +ε                   log ∗                +                     (C.4)
                                                                  N −1                 (πε )kj /µt (zk )        ε
where h∗ is the corresponding optimal dual variable, accounting for non-negative constraint on the
transportation plan π ≥ 0 in the primal OT formulation.

Proof. Using the same notation as in LAVA (Just et al., 2023), the Lagrangian function for the
standard OT formulation between datasets Dt and Dv
                                                                                                     ′
                                                            N
                                                            X                                      N
                                                                                                   X
                                                                  fi πi⊤ IN ′ − ai                       gj I⊤

          L(π, h, f, g) = ⟨π, C⟩ + ⟨h, π⟩ +                                                    +               π
                                                                                                             N j − b j ,       (C.5)
                                                            i=1                                    j=1

where we consider the dual variable h for the corresponding constraint π ≥ 0 in the primal OT,
which was overlooked in LAVA. Additionally, fi with 1 ≤ i ≤ N and gj with 1 ≤ j ≤ N ′ are
corresponding dual variables for the marginal constraints in OT.
The Lagrangian function for entropic regularized OT formulation between datasets Dt and Dv is
                                                       ′
                                            N X
                                              N
                                            X                                  (πε )ij
  Lε (πε , fε , gε ) = ⟨πε , C⟩ + ε                        (πε )ij log
                                            i=1 j=1
                                                                         µt (zi ) µv (zj )
                                                                                       ′
                             N                                                      N
                                                     ⊤
                             X                                                      X
                         +         (fε )i       (πε )i IN ′ − µt (zi )          +          (gε )j I⊤
                                                                                                   N (π ε )j − µv (z j )   ,   (C.6)
                             i=1                                                    j=1

where we correct the discrete formulation of entropic regularization (used in LAVA) in the second
term on the right-hand side. We have used the following notations:
                                                 ′
          • IN ′ = (1, 1, · · · , 1) ∈ RN ×1 . Similarly, IN ∈ RN ×1 .
          • π is a primal variable (i.e., the OT assignment matrix or transporation plan). πi⊤ is the ith
            row of the matrix π. πj is the j th column of matrix π.
          • The subscript ε indicates primal/dual variables for corresponding entropic regularized OT.

Using the first-order necessary condition, we have
                                                     ∇Lπ (π ∗ , h∗ , f ∗ , g ∗ ) = 0                                           (C.7)
                                                     ∇ (Lε )π (πε∗ , fε∗ , gε∗ ) = 0                                           (C.8)
   6
       This could be a typo within the derivation from Just et al. (2023).


                                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where π ∗ is the optimal solution to the primal formulation, and (h∗ , f ∗ , g ∗ ) are optimal solution to
the dual problem.
For ∀i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }, and ∀j ∈ {1, 2, . . . N ′ }, we have
      ∇Lπ (π ∗ , h∗ , f ∗ , g ∗ )ij = Cij + h∗ij + fi∗ + gj∗ = 0                                                   (C.9)
                                                        (πε∗ )ij

                  ∗    ∗ ∗                                                      ∗        ∗
      ∇ (Lε )π (πε , fε , gε )ij = Cij + ε log                       + 1 + (fε )i + (gε )j = 0.                   (C.10)
                                                    µt (zi )µv (zj )

Let’s subtract Eq. (C.10) from Eq. (C.9), we have
                                                                           (πε∗ )ij
                              h             i
                  ∗        ∗              ∗
                 fi − (fε )i + gj∗ − (gε )j + h∗ij − ε log                                +1       = 0.           (C.11)
                                                                       µt (zi )µv (zj )
Similarly, ∀k ̸= i, k ∈ {1, 2 . . . N }, we have
                                                                           (πε∗ )kj
                             h             i
                 ∗        ∗              ∗
                fk − (fε )k + gj∗ − (gε )j + h∗kj − ε log                                 +1       = 0.           (C.12)
                                                                       µt (zk )µv (zj )

Let’s subtract Eq. (C.12) from Eq. (C.11) and rearrange, we have
                                                              "                     #
                    ∗        ∗     ∗    ∗       ∗     ∗
                                                                 (πε∗ )ij /µt (zi )
               (fε )i − (fε )k − (fi − fk ) = hij − hkj − ε log ∗                     .                           (C.13)
                                                                 (πε )kj /µt (zk )

Additionally, from the definition of the calibrated (sub)gradient, we have
                        ∂OT (µt , µv ) ∂OT (µt , µv )     N
                                       −              =      (f ∗ − fk∗ )                                         (C.14)
                          ∂µt (zi )       ∂µt (zk )     N −1 i
                        ∂OTε (µt , µv ) ∂OTε (µt , µv )     N         ∗        ∗
                                        −               =        (fε )i − (fε )k .                                (C.15)
                          ∂µt (zi )        ∂µt (zk )      N −1
Let’s substract Eq. (C.14) from Eq. (C.15) and rearrange, we have
              ∂OTε (µt , µv ) ∂OTε (µt , µv )   ∂OT (µt , µv ) ∂OT (µt , µv )
                             −                =                −                                                  (C.16)
                ∂µt (zi )       ∂µt (zk )         ∂µt (zi )        ∂µt (zk )
                                                 N           ∗       ∗
                                                       (fε )i − (fε )k − (fi∗ − fk∗ ) .

                                              +                                                                   (C.17)
                                                N −1
Plugging Eq. (C.13) in Eq. (C.17), we have
    ∂OTε (µt , µv ) ∂OTε (µt , µv ) ∂ OT (µt , µv ) ∂ OT (µt , µv )
                   −               =               −
      ∂µt (zi )       ∂µt (zk )        ∂µt (zi )      ∂µt (zk )
                                                                                                          !
                                                 N                  (πε∗ )ij /µt (zi )
                                                                                   h∗kj − h∗ij
                                             −ε             log ∗                +                            .   (C.18)
                                                N −1           (πε )kj /µt (zk )        ε

Rearranging it again to be aligned with the result in Just et al. (2023), we conclude the proof
    ∂OT (µt , µv ) ∂OT (µt , µv )
                  −
      ∂µt (zi )      ∂µt (zk )
                                                                                                          !
      ∂OTε (µt , µv ) ∂OTε (µt , µv )     N                         (πε∗ )ij /µt (zi )
                                                                                   h∗kj − h∗ij
    =                −                −ε                    log ∗                +                            .   (C.19)
        ∂µt (zi )       ∂µt (zk )        N −1                  (πε )kj /µt (zk )        ε



               (π ∗ ) /µt (zi )
The term log (π∗ε) ij /µt (zk ) is a correction with respect to the corrected discrete formula for entropic
                 ε kj
                                                           h∗ −h∗
regularization. In addition, we have an extra term kj ε ij where h∗ is the corresponding optimal
dual variable, which accounts for π ≥ 0 in the primal OT formulation.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3     P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

We present the Proof of Lemma 3 as follows by building upon the refined theory in Theorem 2 (i.e.,
the corrected version for Theorem 2 in Just et al. (2023)).
Lemma 6 (restated Lemma 3 in the main paper). The difference between the calibrated gradients for
two data points {zl , zh } ∈ Bi ⊂ Dt can be calculated as
                                           Kv
                                                                "
    ∂HOT(µt , µv ) ∂HOT(µt , µv ) X              ∗
                                                                  ∂OTε (µBi , µBj′ ) ∂OTε (µBi , µBj′ )
                     −                   =     π̄ij (µ̄t , µ̄v )                    −
       ∂µt (zk )            ∂µt (zl )      j=1
                                                                      ∂µBi (zk )            ∂µBi (zl )
                                                                                            #
                                                          (π̄ε∗ )k,j /µt (zk ) h∗lj − h∗kj

                                           Ni
                                      +ε            log ∗                      +              ,        (C.20)
                                         Ni − 1            (π̄ε )l,j /µt (zl )      ε

where h∗ is the corresponding optimal dual variable, accounting for nonnegative constraint on the
transportation plan (i.e., π̄ ∗ ≥ 0) in the primal OT formulation.

Proof. Let OT(µt , µv ) be the OT formulation between empirical measures µt and µv , we present the
proof as follows
       ∂HOT(µt , µv ) ∂HOT(µt , µv )
                     −
         ∂µt (zk )      ∂µt (zl )
                                                    "                                              #
                           PKv                          ∂OT(µBi ,µB ′ )         ∂OT(µBi ,µB ′ )
                                  ∗                                     j                      j
                       =    j=1 π̄ij (µ̄t , µ̄v )          ∂µBi (zk )       −     ∂µBi (zl )                                      (C.21)
                                                "
                           PKv                          ∂OTε (µBi ,µB ′ )       ∂OTε (µBi ,µB ′ )
                                  ∗                                     j                          j
                       =    j=1 π̄ij (µ̄t , µ̄v )          ∂µBi (zk )       −         ∂µBi (zl )
                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                          (π̄ ∗ ) /µt (zk )    h∗ −h∗

                                                                   +ε NN i
                                                                       i −1
                                                                                      log (π̄ε∗ )k,j          + lj ε kj       , (C.22)
                                                                                              ε l,j /µt (zl )



where Eq. (C.21) follows the definition of HOT and Eq. (C.22) utilizes our Theorem 2.


A PPENDIX D             SAVA T IME C OMPLEXITY

Table 2: Time complexity comparison for LAVA and SAVA methods. V and V ′ are the number of
classes in the training and validation sets, the classes are the same for the experiments in this paper.
N and N ′ are the number of points in the training and validation sets, Nyi and Ny′ ′ are the number
                                                                                     j
of points from training class yi and validation class yj′ . Ni and Nj′ are the number of points in the
training and validation batch. Kt and Kv are the number of batches in the training and validation
sets.

            Time Complexity
 LAVA       V × V ′ × Nyi × Ny′ ′ × log Nyi + N × N ′ × log N
                                     j

                   ′
 SAVA       V ×V       × Niyi × Nj′y′ × log Niyi + Kt × Kv × Ni × Nj′ log Ni + Kt × Kv × log Kt
                                         j


For simplicity, we assume N ≥ N ′ , then Sinkhorn complexity is Õ(N × N ′ × log N ) (Dvurechensky
et al., 2018).
For LAVA, for the training dataset (i.e., big dataset), let V be theP
                                                                    number of classes, Nyi be the number
of instances in class yi , then the total number of samples N = i Nyi . Note that we use V ′ , N ′ , Ny′ ′
                                                                                                         j
for the validation dataset (i.e., small dataset), and for simplicity, we assume that N ≥ N ′ and Nyi ≥
Ny′ ′ . To compute class-wise Wasserstein distance, we need to solve V × V ′ OT problems with the
   j


                                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Examples of the data corruptions used in our experimental setup. Examples of data
from the CIFAR10 dataset where the images have corruptions: noisy features, trojan square, and
poison frogs corruptions respectively.

                                                                  PV      PV ′
complexity Õ(Nyi ×Ny′ ′ ×log Nyi ). Totally, the complexity is     i=1
                                                                                         ′
                                                                            j=1 Õ(Nyi ×Nyj′ ×log Nyi ).
                         j
                                                                                             ′
Additionally, we also need to solve OT between two datasets with complexity Õ(N × N × log N ).
For SAVA, with the label-to-label caching implementation, for the classwise Wasserstein distance,
                       PV PV ′
the total complexity is i=1 j=1 Õ(Niyi × Nj′ y′ × log Niyi ) where for each class yi , yj′ , we
                                                        j
sample Niyi , Nj′ y′ respectively for these classes. Let Ni , Nj′ be the number of samples in batches
                  j
and Kt , Kv be the number of batches respectively, the total complexity to solve all batch level OT
           PKv PKt                ′
problems is i=1     j=1 Õ(Ni × Nj × log Ni ). Additionally, we need to solve one more OT problem
between batches Õ(Kv × Kt × log Kv ). These time complexities are summarized in Table 2.

Further reducing computational complexity for Sinkhorn approach. One may leverage recent
advanced techniques to further speed up the computation of Sinkhorn algorithm, e.g., low-rank
approaches (Forrow et al., 2019; Altschuler et al., 2019; Scetbon et al., 2021).


A PPENDIX E           DATA C ORRUPTIONS D ESCRIPTIONS

We consider 4 different corruptions in our experiments (Section 5) that are applied to the training set
following the settings in Just et al. (2023):

Noisy labels. We corrupt a proportion of the labels in the training set by randomly assigning the
target a different label. This is a common corruption found in webscale vision (Xiao et al., 2015) and
speech (Radford et al., 2023) for instance.

Noisy features. We add Gaussian noise to a certain proportion of the images in the training set to
simulate common background noise corruptions that might occur in real datasets.

Backdoor attacks. A certain proportion of the training set is corrupted with a Trojan square
attack Liu et al. (2018), e.g., corrupted images have 10 × 10 pixel square trigger mask added with
random noise and are relabeled to the trojan “airplane” class, see Figure 4 for an example of a
corrupted image.

Poison detections. A certain proportion of training data from a specific base class is poisoned
such that the features look similar to a target class (Shafahi et al., 2018). Our target is the cat class
from the CIFAR10 dataset, which is a randomly chosen image of a cat from the test set. We take a
certain percentage of the base class which, in our case is the frog class from the CIFAR10 training
dataset. Then we optimize the poisoned images themselves using gradient descent such that the
feature spaces are close in Euclidean distance to the target cat image’s features using a pre-trained
feature extractor model (in our case a pre-trained ResNet18 model). This means that the poisoned
images contain features that look like the cat class and the labels are kept the same, meaning that this
is a very difficult attack to detect, and the features of frogs are poisoned to look like cats and labels
remain uncorrupted. See Figure 4 for an example of a poisoned frog image.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         1.00


                        Detection rate
                                         0.75                            LAVA
                                                                         Random
                                         0.50                            KNN Shapley
                                                                         TracInCP
                                         0.25                            SAVA
                                         0.00
                                                0        2000    4000
                                                    Data Value Ranking
Figure 5: Data value rankings for various methods for the 10% poison frogs corruption. The number
of corrupt datapoints in the prefix determines the detection rate. The black dashed line represents the
N/4 prefix which is used for calculating the detection rates in Figure 2 and Figure 7.


A PPENDIX F        DATA VALUATION R ANKINGS
Corrupt data points are likely to be assigned a high value (a low value for KNN Shapley) and so
can be used for ranking the data by importance. Therefore, following Pruthi et al. (2020), we sort
the training examples by their value in descending order (ascending order for KNN Shapley). An
effective data valuation method would rank corrupted examples toward the start of the data valuation
ranking. We use the fraction of corrupted data recovered by the prefix of size N/4 as our detection
rate to measure the effectiveness of various methods in Figure 2. See Figure 5 for an example of this
using a poison frogs (Shafahi et al., 2018) corruption on 10% of a dataset of size 5k on CIFAR10.

A PPENDIX G         I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
G.1   CIFAR10 C ORRUPTION D ETECTION

We use a single Nvidia K80 GPU to run all experiments.

SAVA. For both SAVA and LAVA the metric between label spaces is computed using the the exact
OT distances between conditional empirical measures for each label and we do not use Gaussian
approximations proposed in Alvarez-Melis & Fusi (2020).

TracInCP. In practice, TracInCP measures the influence of a training point by the dot product
of the gradient of the NN model parameters evaluated on the validation set and the gradient of the
NN model parameters evaluated on the specific training points, summed throughout training using
saved checkpoints of a ResNet18 model trained for 100 epochs and achieves a test accuracy of 83%
and training accuracy of 99%. We calculate gradients over the entire model and use every second
checkpoint to calculate TracInCP values, these design choices result in fewer approximations than
the original implementation (Pruthi et al., 2020).

Influence Functions.      We use the following repository for obtaining results on influence
functions with default parameters as given at https://github.com/nimarb/pytorch_
influence_functions.

KNN Shapley. The method is very sensitive to k which is a hyperparameter in the kNN algorithm
used to approximate the expensive calculation of the Shapley value. We do a grid search over
k ∈ {5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500, 1,000, 2,000} on a validation set of size 1,000 and training set of
size 2,000, where the validation set is taken from the CIFAR10 training set. Our implementation is
the same as that used in the LAVA.

Data-OOB. We use the default hyperparameters and use the implementation, given at https:
//github.com/ykwon0407/dataoob.

Pruning. For the pruning experiments we greedily prune N/4 of the ranked points with the lowest
value; the highest gradient of the OT for SAVA and LAVA. We then train a ResNet18 with the SGD


                                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   95       Noisy Labels             Noisy Features
                                                                90


                Pruned Test Acc.
                                   90
                                                             80
                                   85              LAVA
                                                   LAVA OOM
                                   80              KNN_SV    70
                                                   SAVA
                                   75                        60
                                        1   2    3    4    5    1     2    3     4    5
                                                Task                      Task
Figure 6: SAVA can value more data as a dataset incrementally increases in size. For each task,
we value the data and prune 30% of the data which we then train a CNN to obtain a test accuracy.
Left: 30% noisy labels setting. Right: 30% noisy feature setting. The star symbol (⋆) denotes the
point at which LAVA is unable to continue valuing training due GPU out-of memory errors.


optimizer with weight decay of 5 × 10−4 and momentum of 0.9 for 200 epochs with a learning
rate schedule where for the first 100 epochs the learning rate is 0.1, then for the next 50 epochs the
learning rate is 0.01, then the final 50 epochs the learning rate is 0.001.

G.2     C LOTHING 1M

For all experiments, we use a node with 8 Nvidia K80 GPUs.
We use a ResNet18 model for feature extraction and for obtaining a final performance metric. We use
an Adam optimizer with a weight decay of 0.002. Since the pruned datasets can be of different sizes
depending on the amount of pruning. We train for a fixed number of 100k steps. We use a learning
rate schedule where for the first 30k steps the learning rate is 0.1 then the next 30k steps the learning
rate is 0.05 then the next 20k steps the learning rate is 0.01, then the next 10k steps the learning rate
is 0.001, then the next 5k steps the learning rate is 0.0001 then for the final 5k steps the learning rate
is 0.00001.

G.2.1    SAVA

SAVA has remarkably few design choices in comparison to other data pruning methods like EL2N (Ap-
pendix G.2.2) and supervised prototypes (Appendix G.2.3). We train a ResNet18 encoder using
the clean training set of size 47,570. Note we do not use this training set to obtain final accuracies
in Figure 3, we only use the large noisy training set for obtaining the results in Figure 3. We use a
batch size of 2048 for valuation and we use label-2-label matrix caching (Appendix H).

G.2.2    EL2N

To obtain values for the points in our noisy training set to then decide which training points to prune,
we obtain our EL2N scores by training for 10 epochs 10 separate ResNet18 models on the clean
training set of size 47,570.
We also hyperparameter optimize the offset ∈ {0.0, 0.05, 0.1} using a sliding window which covers
90% of points §4 (Paul et al., 2021). This is to decide which range of ranked values to keep/ prune.
We find that using an offset of 0.0 worked best, so high values of the EL2N score will get pruned.

G.2.3    S UPERVISED P ROTOTYPES

We train an image encoder using a classification objective on the clean training set provided in the
Clothing1M dataset of size 47,570. Note, that we do not use this dataset to train to augment the
pruned noisy training sets after valuation and so are not used for the results in Figure 3.
We use mini-batch k-means clustering to obtain centroids for our image embeddings. We tune the
mini-batch k-means learning rate over the grid {0.1, 0.05, 0.01, 0.005, 0.001} and the number of


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   LAVA         LAVA OOM          KNN Shapley         SAVA

                                   90
                                              Noisy Features (30%)                    Noisy Labels (30%)
                                                                           90
                                   80


                Pruned Test Acc.
                                                                           80
                                   70
                                                                           70
                                   60
                                                                           60
                                   50
                                        0.5       1.0     2.0        5.0        0.5      1.0    2.0          5.0
                                                Training Set Size ×104                 Training Set Size ×104
Figure 7: SAVA can scale to the full CIFAR10 dataset enabling better data selection performance.
After valuation, we prune a prefix of size N/4 and train a ResNet18 model on the remaining points to
report test accuracy. The symbol (⋆) denotes the point at which LAVA is unable to continue valuing
training due to GPU out-of memory (OOM) errors.

Algorithm 2 Incremental learning experimental setup.
Input: noisy training dataset initally empty Dt := ∅ and clean validation set Dv , data pruning
proportion p ∈ [0, 1].
Output: trained model M.
for Tt = 1, ..., T do
    Get new data DTt .
    Merge DTt with existing dataset Dt := Dt ∪ DTt .
    Get valuation scores for Dt by comparing to Dv .
    Prune a proportion p with the highest data values: D̃t .
    Train model M on D̃t and evaluate M on Dv .



centroids over the grid {1,000, 2,000, 5,000, 10,000} using the intra cluster mean-squared error on
the validation dataset.
The best configuration uses a k-means clustering learning rate of 0.05 and 10,000 cluster centers.
Then we can obtain cosine distances between every data point and its assigned cluster center and
prune points which look the most prototypical before training a classifier on the pruned dataset.


A PPENDIX H                   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

H.1   C ORRUPTION E XPERIMENTS P RUNING P ERFORMANCE

We can prune the N/4 data points and train a classifier on the pruned dataset in Figure 7. SAVA can
value a larger and larger pool of training data. The subsequently pruned dataset provides better and
better performance as more clean data—which resembles the validation set—is used for training. In
contrast, LAVA has an OOM issue for the largest dataset when running the Sinkhorn algorithm on a
training set of size 50K. As a result, the performance of the ResNet18 model does not improve when
valuing larger training sets with LAVA.

H.2   I NCREMENTAL LEARNING

We split the CIFAR10 dataset into 5 equally sized partitions with all classes, and we incrementally
build up the dataset such that it grows in size as one would train a production system (Baby et al.,
2022). We inject the data with noisy labels and noisy feature corruptions, then perform the data
valuation. We compare our proposed method with LAVA (Just et al., 2023). After valuing our training
set which is incrementally updated and grows in size throughout the incremental learning, we greedily
discard 30% of the data that are the most dissimilar to the validation set and train on the pruned


                                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                           ×104


                                                                                     Runtime (secs.)
                          Detection rate
                                           0.975
                                                                                                       2
                                           0.950
                                           0.925                                                       1

                                           0.900
                                                   128 256 512 102420484096                                128 256 512 102420484096
                                                         Batch size                                               Batch size
Figure 8: SAVA performance as function of the batch size, Ni . The CIFAR10 dataset with noisy
label detection. Left: Detection rate. Right: detection runtimes in seconds.


                  0.850
                                                            Runtime (sec.)
 Detection rate


                                                                             104                                                 SAVA
                  0.825                                                                                                          LAVA
                  0.800                                                      103                                                 KNN Shapley
                                                                                                                                 Batchwise LAVA + l2l
                  0.775                                                      102                                                 SAVA + l2l
                  0.750
                          0.1                 0.5 1.0 2.0 5.0                      0.1                     0.5 1.0 2.0 5.0
                          Training Set Size                  ×104                  Training Set Size                      ×104

Figure 9: Label-to-label matrix caching significantly reduces runtime. Left: SAVA with and
without label-2-label (l2l) matrix caching performs similarly in detecting noisy label corruption.
Right: SAVA with l2l runs just a quickly as LAVA in terms of runtime in seconds on the same GPU.


dataset. We report the final accuracy of a ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) model. We summarize this
experimental setup in Algorithm 2.

H.3               P ERFORMANCE AS A FUNCTION OF BATCH SIZE

Following the discussion on the batch size in Section 4, we measure our model performance w.r.t.
different batch sizes Ni ∈ {128, 256, ..., 4,096}. We show that the performance converges with
increasing batch sizes. In this particular setting, the batch sizes of 1,024, 2,048, and 4,096 will
perform comparably in terms of detection rate while the batch size of 4,096 will consume less time
for computation of the cost across batches, since there are less and Kt is lower.

H.4               L ABEL - TO - LABEL DISTANCE CACHING

We study the difference in performance and runtime between SAVA Algorithm 1 and using SAVA with
label-to-label (l2l) matrix caching discussed in Section 4 using CIFAR10 with noisy label corruptions.
We show that there are almost identical detection rates between the two variants of SAVA with and
without l2l caching Figure 9. Meanwhile, the runtime is significantly reduced using this caching
strategy and is similar to LAVA despite having to solve a quadratic number of small batch-level OT
problems.

H.5               C ONSTRUCTING BATCHES

We explore two options for constructing the batches including random sampling and stratified
sampling in Figure 10. Since (uniformly) random sampling could result in a batch with an uneven
distribution of classes, this could degrade the calculation of the class-wise Wasserstein distance Eq.
(8). To mitigate, against any imbalance we compare random sampling versus stratified sampling
which evenly samples from each class to construct a batch. When valuing 10k points from the
CIFAR10 dataset with corrupted features, we find little difference in detection rates between these


                                                                                   24
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              0.8


                                             Detection rate
                                                              0.7

                                                              0.6                    Strat. Sampling
                                                                                     Rand. Sampling
                                                                    128 256 512 1024 2048 4096
                                                                             Batch size
   Figure 10: Randomly sampling data for batch construction is robust. Detection rates for SAVA
   for random sampling to construct a batch versus stratified sampling which evenly samples data from
   different classes. The detection rates are calculated after valuation by inspecting the fraction of
   corrupted data for a prefix of size N/4 for CIFAR10 with noisy features.

                                                                       Batch-wise LAVA       SAVA
                         Backdoor Det.                        Poison Det.                  Noisy Features   Noisy Labels
                 0.8                      1.0                                      1.0
                                                                                              0.95
Detection rate


                 0.6                                                               0.8        0.90
                                             0.9
                 0.4                                                                          0.85
                                                                      0.6
                                             0.8                                              0.80
                 0.2                                                  0.4                     0.75
                     128 256 512 102420484096 128 256 512 102420484096 128 256 512 102420484096 128 256 512 102420484096
                          Batch size                           Batch size                    Batch size      Batch size
   Figure 11: Batch-wise LAVA is not robust to different batchsizes. For 4 different corruptions on a
   training dataset of size 5k with validation dataset size 2k we measure the detection rate for varying
   batch sizes for SAVA and Batch-wise LAVA. The dashed grey line centered on 1024 denotes the batch
   size used in Figure 2.


   two sampling schemes. This might be a consideration when the ratio of the number of classes in the
   dataset to the batch size is higher.

   H.6                 O N THE ROBUSTNESS OF BATCH - WISE LAVA

   From the corruption detection experiments, we established that Batch-wise LAVA has remarkable
   performance in Section 5.1. However, as we vary the batch-size we notice that for small batch-sizes
   and large batch-sizes Batch-wise LAVA performance deteriorates dramatically Figure 11. For small
   batches this is due to Batch-wise LAVA not having enough clean points in the validation batch to
   detect corrupt data points in the training batch. For large batches the final batch in the dataloader
   is usually smaller than the specified batch-size and so these data points in the final batch will also
   suffer from not enough points in the validation batch to compare against. SAVA is able to overcome
   this issue since the information from all batches is aggregated and weighted by the optimal plan
                       ∗
   between batches, πij  (µ̄t , µ̄v ), in lines 7 and 10 in Algorithm 1.

   A PPENDIX I                    R ELATED W ORKS

   Data valuation. A simple way to value a datapoint is through the leave-out-out (LOO) error; i.e. the
   change in performance when the point is omitted, this is inefficient to perform in practice. Influence
   functions (Koh & Liang, 2017) approximate LOO retraining using expensive approximations of the
   Hessian of the NN weights. In a similar vein, TracIn (Pruthi et al., 2020) traces the influence of a
   training point on a test point by looking at the difference in the loss throughout training. Another
   way to value data is by using data Shapley values Ghorbani & Zou (2019); Jia et al. (2019b),
   extensions include the Beta Shapley (Kwon & Zou, 2022). K-nearest neighbour models can address
   the computation cost of the data Shapley (Jia et al., 2019a; Wang et al., 2023; 2024). Instead of using


                                                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the Shapley value one can use “the core” from the game theory literature for data valuation (Yan
& Procaccia, 2021). An entire dataset can be valued by its diversity, practically this can be done
by assessing its volume: the determinant of the left Gram (Xu et al., 2021). An initialized model
can also be utilized for data valuation where sets are available from contributors (Wu et al., 2022).
The Banzhaf value can also be used for data valuation (Wang & Jia, 2023). Data valuation using
out-of-bag estimators have also been shown to be effective (Kwon & Zou, 2023). Our approach
builds upon LAVA which uses the gradient OT distance between the validation and training sets to
assign a value to training points (Just et al., 2023). The OpenDataVal benchmark is available with
many implementations of data valuation methods (Jiang et al., 2023).
Active learning. Active learning is characterized by selecting points from an unlabeled pool of data
for labeling and then using the newly labeled datapoint to update a model (Settles, 2009). Active
learning is related to data valuation since a notion of importance is needed to value unlabeled points
to then select a label. Unlabeled samples can be valued by using the prediction disagreement from
a probabilistic model (Houlsby et al., 2011), this disagreement can also be obtained from multiple
models (Freund et al., 1997). This approach of using the disagreement of a probabilistic model can
also be thought of as selecting points to label which are the most uncertain via the predictive entropy
using probabilistic neural networks (Gal et al., 2017; Kirsch et al., 2019). Alternatively picking
points to label can be thought of as a summarization problem by obtaining a coreset of representative
data (Sener & Savarese, 2018; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020; Coleman et al., 2019). Samples to be
labeled can be selected by interpreting the classifier output probabilities as a confidence (Li & Sethi,
2006).
Data selection. Active learning is used to select points to label and so its importance metric doesn’t
use label information, however, it has been shown to achieve competitive results for data selection;
speeding up the generalization curve over the course of training (Park et al., 2022). The influence
a point has on the training loss as a metric of informativeness has been shown to accelerate the
training of neural networks (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2015). Similarly picking points that reduce the
variance of the gradient speeds up training (Katharopoulos & Fleuret, 2018; Johnson & Guestrin,
2018). Instead of focusing on the training loss, one can select data according to the influence
on the validation loss (Mindermann et al., 2022). Instead of selecting data to train on, one can
equivalently prune away uninformative data. The data’s contribution of the gradient norm of the loss
with respect to model parameters is a natural measure for deciding which datapoints to prune from
a dataset (Paul et al., 2021). One can also prune data by how similar embeddings are to a cluster
center or prototype (Sorscher et al., 2022) and by assessing diversity within each cluster (Abbas et al.;
Tirumala et al., 2023). It has also been shown that pruning data according to how easy they are to
be forgotten over the course of training - as a measure of difficulty - results in training on less data
while maintaining performance (Toneva et al., 2018). These data selection methods although related,
do not directly measure the importance of each training datapoint with respect to a clean validation
set like LAVA (Just et al., 2023) and SAVA. Meta-learning is also used to learn datapoint importance
weights by evaluating with a clean validation set (Ren et al., 2018). Similarly to LAVA and SAVA the
distributional distance between a clean validation set and a large noisy dataset can be assessed using
n-grams in NLP for selecting data to train large language models (Xie et al., 2023).

A PPENDIX J        SAVA V ISUALIZATION
To gain insight into how the estimated OT matrices from our proposed SAVA, we visualize the artifacts
Algorithm 1 in Figure 12.

A PPENDIX K         OTHER D ISCUSSIONS
Overfitting and Approximation. Recently, Peyré & Cuturi (2019, §8.4) revealed an important
property that solving exactly the OT problem may lead to overfitting. Therefore, investing excessive
efforts to compute OT exactly would not only be expensive but also self-defeating since it would
lead to overfitting within the computation of OT itself. As a result, our batch approximation can
be considered as a regularization for OT. We show empirically for certain cases that the batch
approximation (SAVA) performs better than the original OT (LAVA) in terms of quality while we
surpass LAVA in memory requirement.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Costs Across Batches                                Plan Across Batches


              Cost Across Datapoints in                        Plan Across Datapoints in


Figure 12: Visualization of the main artifacts in Algorithm 1. For a noisy CIFAR10 valuation
problem with a training and validation set size of 10k and SAVA batch size of 1024, we visualize the
main artifacts of the SAVA algorithm for illustrative purposes. From left to right, from the top row to
the bottom row: the first matrix is the cost matrix between batches: C̄(µ̄t , µ¯v ) and then the optimal
plan π̄ ∗ (µ̄t , µ̄v ) is the associated plan which is the solution to the optimal transport problem. In the
second row we visualize C(µBi , µBj′ ) the optimal transport distance between points in the final batch
Bi from the training set and the final batch Bj′ in the validation set and its corresponding optimal
plan π ∗ (µBi , µBj′ ), we have used a log transform to on the optimal plan between datapoints to help
viewing it.


                                                    27
