Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


BAYESIAN O PTIMIZATION VIA C ONTINUAL
VARIATIONAL L AST L AYER T RAINING
 Paul Brunzema1 , Mikkel Jordahn2 , John Willes3 , Sebastian Trimpe1 ,
 Jasper Snoek4 , James Harrison4
 1
   RWTH Aachen University, 2 Technical University of Denmark, 3 Vector Institute,
 4
   Google DeepMind
 Contact: brunzema@dsme.rwth-aachen.de, jamesharrison@google.com



                                             A BSTRACT

         Gaussian Processes (GPs) are widely seen as the state-of-the-art surrogate models
         for Bayesian optimization (BO) due to their ability to model uncertainty and their
         performance on tasks where correlations are easily captured (such as those defined
         by Euclidean metrics) and their ability to be efficiently updated online. However,
         the performance of GPs depends on the choice of kernel, and kernel selection for
         complex correlation structures is often difficult or must be made bespoke. While
         Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) are a promising direction for higher capacity
         surrogate models, they have so far seen limited use due to poor performance on
         some problem types. In this paper, we propose an approach which shows compet-
         itive performance on many problem types, including some that BNNs typically
         struggle with. We build on variational Bayesian last layers (VBLLs), and connect
         training of these models to exact conditioning in GPs. We exploit this connection
         to develop an efficient online training algorithm that interleaves conditioning and
         optimization. Our findings suggest that VBLL networks significantly outperform
         GPs and other BNN architectures on tasks with complex input correlations, and
         match the performance of well-tuned GPs on established benchmark tasks.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Bayesian optimization (BO) has become an immensely popular method for optimizing black-box
functions that are expensive to evaluate and has seen large success in a variety of applications (Garnett
et al., 2010; Snoek et al., 2012; Calandra et al., 2016; Marco et al., 2016; Frazier & Wang, 2016;
Berkenkamp et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Neumann-Brosig et al., 2019; Griffiths & Hernández-
Lobato, 2020; Colliandre & Muller, 2023). In BO, the goal is to optimize some black-box objective
f : X → RK (where X ⊆ RD ) in as few samples as possible whilst only having access to sequentially
sampled, potentially noisy, data points from possibly multiple objectives.
Gaussian processes (GPs) have long been the de facto surrogate models in BO due to their well-
calibrated uncertainty quantification and strong performance in small-data regimes. However, their
application becomes challenging in high-dimensional, non-stationary, and structured data environ-
ments such as drug-discovery (Colliandre & Muller, 2023; Griffiths & Hernández-Lobato, 2020) and
materials science (Frazier & Wang, 2016). Here, often prohibitively expensive or bespoke kernels are
necessary to capture meaningful correlations between data points. Furthermore, the scaling of GPs
to large datasets typically associated with high-dimensional spaces can be limiting—especially if
combined with online hyperparameter estimation. To address these challenges, integrating Bayesian
Neural Networks (BNNs) into BO as alternative surrogate models has gained increasing attention
(Snoek et al., 2015; Springenberg et al., 2016; Foldager et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). While BNNs
inherently scale with data, challenges like efficient conditioning on new data and consistency across
tasks persist. Moreover, the performance of BNNs on many tasks has so far not matched the perfor-
mance of GPs due to issues like under-fitting (Li et al., 2024; Wenzel et al., 2020; Ovadia et al., 2019;
Izmailov et al., 2021).
In this work, we develop an approach for surrogate modeling in Bayesian optimization that combines
the strengths of GPs (efficient conditioning, strong predictive performance, simple and effective


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              True objective      Observations    VBLL posterior predictive         VBLL posterior samples
          2                    BO Step 1                    BO Step 2                         BO Step 3
 f (x)
          0

         −2
          0.0          0.5             1.0 0.0        0.5               1.0 0.0         0.5               1.0
                  Parameter x ∈ X                Parameter x ∈ X                   Parameter x ∈ X

Figure 1: Variational Bayesian last layer model as a surrogate model for BO on a toy example. The
VBLL model can capture in-between uncertainty and analytic posterior samples are easily obtained
through its parametric form making it a suitable surrogate for BO.


uncertainty quantification) with the strengths of BNNs (scalability and ability to handle highly non-
Euclidean correlation structures). Our approach builds on Variational Bayesian Last Layer (VBLL)
neural networks (Harrison et al., 2024), which are similar to parameteric GPs with a learned kernel.
Contributions: Our main contributions and findings are:
  • We show our VBLL surrogate model can outperform a wide variety of baselines on a diverse set
    of problems, including those with discrete inputs and multi-objective problems.
  • We present a connection between model conditioning (in a Bayesian sense) and model optimiza-
    tion, and develop an efficient online optimization scheme that exploits this connection.
  • We experimentally connect the hyperparameters of the VBLL model to problem features, such as
    stochasticity, and discuss implications for other BNN models.


2        R ELATED W ORK AND BACKGROUND

Various forms of Bayesian or partially-Bayesian neural networks have been explored for BO, including
mean field BNNs (Foldager et al., 2023), networks trained via stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (Springenberg et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2021), and last layer Laplace approximation BNNs
(Kristiadi et al., 2021; Daxberger et al., 2021). Li et al. (2024) find that infinite-width BNNs (I-BNNs)
(Lee et al., 2017; Adlam et al., 2021; 2023) perform particularly well especially on high-dimensional,
non-stationary and non-Euclidean problems, a setting for which standard GP priors are inappropriate
or not well specified, and for which designing suitable kernels is difficult.
While BNNs are promising, they have often proven to be challenging to train and complex to use
in practice. Bayesian last layer networks—which consider uncertainty only over the output layer—
provide a simple (and often much easier to train) partially-Bayesian neural network model (Snoek
et al., 2015; Azizzadenesheli et al., 2018; Harrison et al., 2018; Weber et al., 2018; Riquelme et al.,
2018; Fiedler & Lucia, 2023). Concretely, the standard model for regression with Bayesian last layer
networks and a one-dimensional1 output is

                                             y = w⊤ ϕθ (x) + ε,                                            (1)

where w ∈ Rm is the last layer for which Bayesian inference is performed, and ϕθ are features
learned by a neural network backbone with (point estimated) parameters θ. The noise ε ∼ N (0, σ 2 )
is assumed to be independent and identically distributed.
With this observation model, fixed features ϕθ , and a Gaussian prior on the weights as p(w) =
N (w̄0 , S0 ), posterior inference for the weights is analytically tractable via Bayesian linear regression.
In particular, Bayesian linear regression is possible via a set of recursive updates in the natural

    1
      For multi-variate modeling, we assume each element of ε is independent, and so the N -dimensional problem
is separable into N independent inference problems with shared features ϕθ . Relaxing this assumption is
possible and leads to a matrix normal-distributed posterior.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


parameters
                                         qt = σ −2 ϕt yt + qt−1                                       (2)
                                       St−1 = σ −2 ϕt ϕ⊤    −1
                                                       t + St−1                                       (3)
where w̄t = St qt is the vector of precision-mean and ϕt := ϕθ (xt ). For dataset DT :=
{(xt , yt )}Tt=1 , this recursive update yields posterior p(w | DT ) = N (w̄T , ST ) and posterior predic-
tive
                       p(y | x, DT , θ) = N (w̄T⊤ ϕθ (x), ϕθ (x)⊤ ST ϕθ (x) + σ 2 ) .                  (4)
Since the predictive distribution is Gaussian, it pairs straight-forwardly with conventional acquisition
functions in Bayesian optimization and bandit tasks (Snoek et al., 2015; Riquelme et al., 2018).
Usually, such BLL models are trained using gradient descent on the exact (log) marginal likelihood
over all data points. This can be computed either via the marginal likelihood or by backpropagating
through the recursive last layer update (Harrison et al., 2018). The cost of this is prohibitive, as it
requires iterating over the full dataset for each gradient computation. Moreover, it often is numerically
unstable and can result in pathological behavior of the learned features (Thakur et al., 2020; Ober
et al., 2021). An alternative strategy is to train on mini-batches (Snoek et al., 2015) to learn features
and condition the last layer on the full dataset after training. However, this yields biased gradients
and often results in a severely over-concentrated final model (Ober & Rasmussen, 2019).
To increase efficiency, recent work (Harrison et al., 2024; Watson et al., 2021) developed a determin-
istic variational lower bound to the exact marginal likelihood and proposed to optimize this instead,
resulting in the variational Bayesian last layer (VBLL) model. In our setup, we fix a variational
posterior q(w) = N (w̄, S). The lack of subscript denotes that the last layer parameters belong to
the variational posterior, and we will write η := (w̄, S) for convenience. Following Harrison et al.
(2024, Theorem 1), the variational lower bound for regression with BLLs (under the prior defined
previously) is
                     T
                     X
                                         ⊤        2    1 ⊤         −2
log p(Y | X, θ) ≥         log N (yt | w̄ ϕt , σ ) − ϕt Sϕt σ           −KL(qη (w) ∥ p(w)) =: L(η, θ).
                      t
                                                       2
                                                                                                     (5)
The variational posterior over the last layer is trained with the network weights θ in a standard neural
network training loop, yielding a lightweight Bayesian formulation. We refer to Appendix A for how
VBLLs relate to other BNN methods we benchmark against in this work.

3     T RAINING AND M ODEL S PECIFICATION
In this section, we discuss the training procedure we use for VBLLs in the BO loop. We first identify
a relationship between variational training of Bayesian last layer models (as is used in the VBLL
class of models) and recursive last layer computation (as is used in standard BLL models). We further
present different methods for choosing whether to perform a recursive last layer update or full model
retraining for a newly-observed datapoint. We then describe the feature training procedure, and
discuss early stopping and previous model re-use. Finally, we present the overall training loop that
combines these two training approaches, and relevant hyperparameters. We expand on all design
decisions in the Appendix.

3.1   VARIATIONAL I NFERENCE AND R ECURSIVE L AST L AYER U PDATING

In this subsection, we describe a connection between the VBLL variational objective (5)—which is
optimized through standard mini-batch optimization—and the recursive updating associated with
Bayesian linear regression and BLL models.
Theorem 1. Fix θ. Then, the variational posterior parameterized by
                                 (w̄∗ , S ∗ ) := η ∗ = arg max L(η, θ)                                (6)
                                                         η

is equivalent to the posterior computed by the recursive least squares inferential procedure described
by (2) and (3), iterated over the full dataset.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This result follows from the fact that the true posterior for Bayesian linear regression is contained in
our chosen variational family, and that the variational posterior is tight. The full proof is provided in
Appendix B.1.
This equivalence provides a bridge between two different interpretations of model training:
optimization-based training (as is used in NNs) and conditioning (as is used in GPs). This equivalence
allows us to consider an online optimization procedure that interleaves two steps: full model training
(including feature weights θ) on the variational objective, and last layer-only training via recursive
conditioning. While the former optimizes all parameters and the latter only optimizes the last layer
parameters, they are optimizing the same objective which stabilizes the interleaving of these steps.
We parameterize a dense precision (in contrast to standard VBLL models which parameterized the
covariance) for the variational posterior by Cholesky decomposition, S −1 = LL⊤ (with L lower
triangular). The recursive precision update is then
                                    Lt L⊤       ⊤         ⊤
                                        t = ϕt ϕt + Lt−1 Lt−1 .                                       (7)
The updated Cholesky factor Lt can be computed efficiently via a rank-1 update that preserves trian-
gularity (Krause & Igel, 2015). The mean update can be computed via the natural parameterization
                                          qt = ϕt yt + qt−1                                           (8)
from which the last layer mean can be computed. We do not store the computation graph associated
with these updates and do not backpropagate through model updates. This update has quadratic
complexity in the dimensionality of ϕ, and enables quadratic complexity for (efficient, randomized)
computation of all terms in training. We discuss the numerical complexity of this procedure and the
overall training loop in Appendix B.5.

3.2   F ULL M ODEL T RAINING

In full model training, we directly train the neural network weights θ, the variational posterior
parameters η, and the MAP estimate of the noise covariance σ 2 via gradient descent on (5).
Training efficiency: To improve training efficiency, we perform early stopping based on the training
loss. Whereas standard neural network training will typically do early stopping based on validation
loss, we directly terminate training when training loss does not improve for more than a set number of
epochs. Whereas standard neural networks would typically substantially overfit with this procedure,
we find that VBLL networks are not prone to severe overfitting. We additionally experiment with
a more advanced form of continual learning in which we initialize network weights with previous
training parameters. However, we find that the benefits from this are relatively minor and there are
often exploration advantages to re-initializing the network weights at the start of training. Details of
early stopping and model re-use are provided in Appendix B.2.
Optimization: For each iteration of model training, we will re-initialize the optimizer state. Because
we are interleaving recursive updates, continued use of previous optimizer states such as momentum
and scale normalization (as in e.g. Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015)) actively harm performance. However,
we do find benefits in using adaptive optimizers for training in general and use AdamW (Loshchilov
& Hutter, 2017) throughout our experiments (with no regularization on the variational last layer). All
training details are described in Appendix B.4.

3.3   C ONTINUAL L EARNING T RAINING L OOP AND H YPERPARAMETERS

To alleviate VBLL surrogate fit times, we propose a continual learning training loop (Algorithm 1)
which interleaves two training steps: full model training via minibatch gradient descent, and last layer
conditioning.
Choosing when to re-train model features: There are several possible methods for choosing (for
each new data point) whether to perform full model re-training or a last layer recursive update. We
consider three methods in this paper. First, we consider a simple scheme of re-training the network
every M ≥ 1 steps, and otherwise doing recursive updates. Practically this performs poorly, and
allocating compute to model training earlier in the episode performs substantially better. Therefore,
we also consider a scheduling scheme in which re-training is randomized, with the probability of


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 VBLL Bayesian Optimization Loop with Continual Variational Last Layer Training
Require: Model train frequency Tmodel and total number of evaluations T ; Wishart prior scale V
 1: D ← Dinit obtained from evaluations at a pseudo-random input locations from a Sobol sequence
 2: for t = 0 to T do
 3:     γreinit ← R E -I NIT C RITERION(D, t) ▷ Periodic, scheduled, or event-triggered initialization
 4:     if γreinit then
 5:          Init. model parameters η, θ, V and train via minibatch optimization on (5) using D
 6:     else
 7:          Update η via (rank-1 Cholesky) recursive updates (2) and (3) using (xt−1 , yt−1 ) and Σ
 8:     end if
 9:     Select xt via optimizing acquisition function; query objective function with xt and receive yt
10:     D ← D ∪ {(xt , yt )}
11: end for


re-training declining via a sigmoid curve over the course of the episode. Lastly, we consider a loss-
triggered method for re-training, in which we re-train the full model if the log predictive likelihood
of the new data under the model is below some threshold, and otherwise perform recursive updates.
In the main body of the paper, we will only present the latter approach when performing continual
learning. Details on re-initialization schemes and results for other scheduling methods are provided
in Appendix B.3.
Hyperparameters: The VBLL models have several hyperparameters, some of which are similar to
GPs and some of which are substantially different. We include hyperparameter studies in Appendix E.
We specifically investigate the hyperparameter sensitivity of the noise covariance prior, network
reinitialization rate and neural network architecture. Overall we find that the VBLL models are highly
robust to these hyperparameters, but that proper tuning of them for the problem at hand can further
improve performance.

4     ACQUISITION F UNCTIONS
In this section, we describe acquisition functions for our VBLL models in both the single objective
and multi-objective case.

4.1    S INGLE O BJECTIVE ACQUISITION F UNCTIONS

VBLLs yield a Gaussian predictive distribution and thus most acquisition functions that are straight-
forward to compute for GPs are also straightforward for VBLLs. However, parametric VBLLs are
also especially well suited for Thompson sampling compared to non-parametric models like GPs2 .
For Thompson sampling, we simply sample from the variational posterior of w at iteration t and then
construct a sample from the predictive fˆ (cf. Fig. 1) as a generalized linear model as
        1     ŵ ∼ qηt (w)            2     fˆ(x) := ŵ⊤ ϕθ (x)              3     xt+1 = arg max fˆ(x)          (9)
                                                                                                  x∈X

This sample of the predictive can then be optimized analytically, which differs from classic Thompson
sampling methods used for non-parametric GPs. This can similarly be done for LLLA BNNs (cf.
Sec. 5), although Laplace approximated posterior samples are known to suffer from underfitting on
training data (Lawrence, 2001; Roy et al., 2024). For the analytic optimization of the parametric
sample, we use L-BFGS-B (Zhu et al., 1997) leveraging the fact that we can also easily obtain the
gradient of fˆ. We initialize the optimization at multiple random initial conditions3 and choose the
best argmax as the next query location.
    2
      Thompson sampling for GPs often involves drawing samples from high-dimensional posterior distributions
generated at pseudo-random input locations (e.g., using Sobol sequences) and then selecting the argmax of the
discrete samples as the next query locations (Eriksson et al., 2019). It is worth noting that while it is possible to
construct analytic approximate posterior samples for GPs (Wilson et al., 2020; 2021), this approach is not yet
commonly adopted in current practice, and is not possible to do for all kernels.
    3
      In the following, the number of random initial conditions will be set to the same number of random initial
conditions as for the standard optimization of the acquisition functions for a fair comparison.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             True Pareto front         Pareto front of Thompson sample P̂             Training points
                             Reference point           Index for next point                                              Iteration
                                                                                                                               100
Objective f2 (x)     0   Iteration 7                 Iteration 15             Iteration 23            Iteration 100
                                                                                                                               75
                   −5
                                                                                                                               50
                   −10
                                                                                                                               25
                         Current HV: 0.00            Current HV: 36.99        Current HV: 54.50        Final HV: 58.36
                   −15
                          −100            0           −100            0        −100            0        −100            0
                         Objective f1 (x)            Objective f1 (x)         Objective f1 (x)         Objective f1 (x)

Figure 2: Multi-objective Thompson sampling on BraninCurrin. At each iteration, we optimize the
multi-objective Thompson sample and choose as the next point the index that increases the predicted
hypervolume the most. At the end of the optimization (right with colormap), we can observe that the
true Pareto front is nicely approximated.


4.2                 M ULTI -O BJECTIVE ACQUISITION F UNCTIONS

In multi-objective BO it is common to model each objective with a separate GP (Zitzler et al.,
2003; Daulton et al., 2020; Ament et al., 2024). While it is often preferable to model correlations
between outputs (Swersky et al., 2013), this requires correlation kernels for the objectives, which
may be difficult to specify. With neural network based surrogate models, one can simply set the
number of outputs to the number of objectives, thus sharing feature learning between objectives. For
VBLL networks, we can use the multivariate regression formulation to obtain a multivariate normal
prediction for each point. Since this again is a Gaussian, it is straightforward to use popular acquisition
functions for multi-objective optimization such as expected hypervolume improvement (Zitzler et al.,
2003; Daulton et al., 2020; Ament et al., 2024).
Also for multi-objective optimization problems, we can leverage the parametric form of the VBLLs
to do efficient Thompson sampling. It is also possible to do Thompson sampling with GPs for
multi-objective optimization, but this usually involves approximations with a high number of Fourier
bases functions (Bradford et al., 2018; Belakaria et al., 2019; Paria et al., 2020). For Thompson
sampling with VBLLs, we first sample a NN realization of the VBLL network as in (9) and optimize
the sample with NSGA-II (Deb et al., 2002) using Pymoo (Blank & Deb, 2020). This yields a
predicted Pareto front P̂ := {ŷ1 , . . . , ŷP } with size equal to the population size P of the NSGA-II
solver. In summary, the Thompson sampling procedure for multi-objective optimization is

                         1      Ŵ ∼ qηt (W )             2     fˆ(x) := Ŵ ⊤ ϕθ (x)              3     P̂ = max fˆ(x).       (10)
                                                                                                             x∈X


To choose the next candidate, we greedily select the index of the point in the predicted Pareto front
that maximizes the improvement of the hypervolume. The hypervolume (HV), denoted by HV(P, r),
is a commonly used metric in multi-objective optimization, which measures the volume of the region
dominated by the Pareto front P with respect to a predefined reference point r in the objective space.
Our goal in multi-objective BO is to expand this dominated region by adding a new candidate to
the Pareto front. At each iteration k, the current Pareto front is denoted by Pk . To select the next
candidate, we maximize the hypervolume improvement, which is the increase in hypervolume when
adding a predicted new point ŷ ∈ P̂ to the existing Pareto front Pk as

                                                 4      xk+1 ∈ arg max HV(Pk ∪ {ŷ}, r).                                      (11)
                                                                      ŷ∈P̂

If no points in the predicted Pareto front improve the hypervolume or the solution is non-unique, we
randomly sample from the set of maximizers. Figure 2 shows Thompson sampling with VBLLs on
the BraninCurrin benchmark (cf. Sec. 5). After the initialization, none of the points in the Pareto front
P̂ improve the HV. Therefore a random index from the list of solutions in P̂ is chosen for the next
query location. After some iteration, the P̂ partially includes the true Pareto front. The algorithm
continuously samples points that improve the HV until after 100 iterations P is well approximated.


                                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In all experiments in this paper, we assume the reference point to be known but we should note
that it is also possible to estimate or adaptively choose the reference point r, which can improve
the effectiveness of the optimization process (Bradford et al., 2018). Additionally, this strategy of
maximizing hypervolume can be combined with other acquisition functions; of particular interest are
information-theoretic acquisition functions as in the single objective case. For instance, max-value
entropy search for multi-objective optimization (Belakaria et al., 2019) relies on random Fourier
features to approximate samples from the GP posterior; this can easily be switched to using Thompson
sampling with VBLL networks.

5       R ESULTS

We evaluate the performance of the VBLL surrogate model on various standard benchmarks and
three more complex optimization problems, where the optimization landscape is non-stationary. For
experimental details and ablations of hyperparameters, we refer the reader to Appendix D and E.

5.1       S URROGATE M ODELS

We use the following baselines throughout the experiments in addition to VBLLs: Gaussian Processes
(GPs), Infinite-Width Bayesian Neural Networks (I-BNNs) (Lee et al., 2018; Li et al., 2024),
Deep Kernel Learning (DKL) (Wilson et al., 2016), Last Layer Laplace Approximations (LLLA)
(Daxberger et al., 2021; Kristiadi et al.), and Deep Ensembles (DE). For the configuration of neural
network backbone of the BNN baselines as well as the VBLLs, we closely follow the setup in Li et al.
(2024). For details on all baselines and their configurations, refer to Appendix D.1.
In all subsequent experiments, we select the number of initial points for the single objective bench-
marks equal to the input dimensionality D and for the multi-objective benchmarks we use 2 · (D + 1)
initial points (Daulton et al., 2020; Balandat et al., 2020). We further use a batch size of one as in
the classic BO setting.4 We compare the performance of all surrogates for the following acquisition
functions: (i) log expected improvement (logEI) (Ament et al., 2024), a numerically more stable
version of standard expected improvement, (ii) Thompson sampling (TS) (Thompson, 1933; Russo
et al., 2018), (iii) and log expected hypervolume improvement logEHVI (Ament et al., 2024) for the
multi-objective benchmarks.

5.2       B ENCHMARK P ROBLEMS

We begin by examining a set of standard benchmark problems commonly used to assess the perfor-
mance of BO algorithms (Eriksson et al., 2019; Ament et al., 2024). Figure 3 (top) illustrates the
performance of all surrogates on these benchmark problems. It can be observed that, as expected,
GPs perform well. The BNN baselines also demonstrate strong performance on lower-dimensional
problems, although they do not match the performance of GPs on the Hartmann function. VBLLs,
however, generally perform on par or better than most other BNN surrogates on the classic bench-
marks. Interestingly, for TS, we notice that on the Ackley2D and Ackley5D benchmark, the
VBLLs with analytic optimization of the Thompson samples even surpass the performance of GPs as
well as all other baselines. The continual learning baselines show slightly worse performance than
the standard VBLLs but at the benefit of reduced computing.

5.3       H IGH -D IMENSIONAL AND N ON -S TATIONARY P ROBLEMS

GPs without tailored kernels often struggle in high-dimensional and non-stationary environments (Li
et al., 2024); areas where deep learning approaches are expected to excel. Our results on the 200D
NNdraw benchmark (Li et al., 2024), the real-world 25D Pestcontrol benchmark (Oh et al.,
2019), and the 12D Lunarlander benchmark (Eriksson et al., 2019) are shown in Figure 3 (bot-
tom). On these benchmarks, all BNN surrogates show strong performance; especially LLLA, DEs and
the VBLL networks. While GPs perform well with logEI on NNdraw and the I-BNNs show good
performance on Pestcontrol, the VBLLs and LLLA models are consistently the best-performing
surrogates for TS. Similar to the classic benchmarks, the continual learning version of the VBLLs
    4
        Note that this differs from the experimental setup by Li et al. (2024) which use larger batch sizes.


                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            GP      I-BNN       DKL       LLLA                      DE      VBLL              VBLL (ET CL)
               0                        0
                                                                                                          3
Best value
 logEI       −10                                                  −5
                                      −5                                                                  2
             −20
                                                              −10                                         1
                          Branin (2D) −10      Ackley (2D)                          Ackley (5D)               Hartmann (6D)
             −30
               0
                                        0                                                                 3
Best value


             −10
                                                                  −5
   TS


                                      −5                                                                  2
             −20
                          Branin (2D) −10      Ackley (2D) −10                      Ackley (5D)           1   Hartmann (6D)
             −30
                             20     40          20           40                        50           100           50     100
                          Iteration
                                 GP    I-BNN Iteration
                                                 DKL              LLLA              Iteration
                                                                                       DE           VBLL       Iteration
                                                                                                               VBLL  (ET CL)

             7500                            −12.5
Best value


                                                                                           200
 logEI


             5000
                                             −15.0
             2500                                                                               0
                            NN draw (200D)            Pest control (25D)                                Lunar lander (12D)

             7500                            −12.5
Best value


                                                                                           200
   TS


             5000
                                             −15.0
             2500                                                                               0
                            NN draw (200D)            Pest control (25D)                                Lunar lander (12D)
                    200         400      600             50          100                            0               200
                             Iteration                     Iteration                                         Iteration
Figure 3: Classic benchmarks (top) and high-dimensional and non-stationary benchmarks (bottom).
Performance of all surrogates for logEI (top) and TS (bottom).


shows similar performance to the VBLLs. Additionally, we note that by adjusting the Wishart scale or
changing the re-initialization strategy we can further enhance the performance of continual learning
for logEI (cf. Appendix E.2 and Appendix B.3.3, respectively).


5.4          I MPACT OF R E -I NITIALIZATION M ETHODS
                                                                             VBLL        VBLL (ET CL)          VBLL (SG CL)
We compare our two strategies for determin-                 0
ing when to re-initialize the model: event-
                                                             Best value


triggered and scheduled re-initialization (cf. Ap-       −10
                                                                              −5
                                                                TS


pendix B.3). For this, we define the indica-             −20
tor function I(t), which is 1 if the model is                   Branin (2D) −10     Ackley (5D)
re-initialized at iteration t and 0 if updated re-       −30
                                                              ET: -85.14% RT      ET: -74.16% RT
cursively. We show the expected value of this                 SG: -60.73% RT      SG: -67.35% RT
                                                               Indicator function
                                                                to relearn model


indicator function as well as the performance             1.0                 1.0
(top) over ten seeds (bottom) in Fig. 4. We can
observe that both strategies perform similarly            0.5                 0.5
for TS, achieving near-VBLL performance with
large reductions in runtime as highlighted by the         0.0                 0.0
percentage decreases. Further, the event trigger                    20     40           50     100
adapts more flexibly than the pre-defined sig-                   Iteration           Iteration
moid schedule, particularly for Branin, where Figure 4: Impact of event-triggered (ET) and sig-
it reduces runtime early on. In Appendix B.3.3, moid scheduled (SG) re-initialization on the per-
we included a longer discussion on the compar- formance and runtime (RT) saving.
ison of the re-initialization strategies. We find
that the event-triggered approach provides greater adaptivity compared to the sigmoid schedule but
can lead to stagnation in high-dimensional settings, as observed for NNdraw with logEI in Fig. 3.


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       GP           I-BNN             DKL                LLLA           VBLL              VBLL+TS
                                                                                                               106
Hypervolume diff.
 log(HV ∗ − HV)
                                    BraninCurrin                        DTLZ1                       DTLZ2               Oil Sorbent
                                        (2D, 2K)       104           (5D, 2K)                    (5D, 2K)                  (7D, 3K)
                    101                                                          10−1                          105

                                                                                                               104
                    100
                                                     103                                           103
                                          50     100     ×105 50       100
                                                                      Numerical issues50of logEHVI
                                                                                               100     ×10100
                                                                                                          6     200                 300
                         60            Iteration     1.6    Iteration              Iteration              Iteration
                                                                           0.4
        Hypervolume HV


                         40                                                        0.3                         1.0

                         20                            1.5                         0.2
                                        (2D, 2K)                     (5D, 2K)                    (5D, 2K)      0.5         (7D, 3K)
                             0      BraninCurrin                        DTLZ1      0.1              DTLZ2               Oil Sorbent
                                          50     100                 50      100                 50      100            100 200     300
                                       Iteration                   Iteration                   Iteration                Iteration
Figure 5: Multi-objective benchmarks. Performance of all surrogate models using logEHVI and
VBLLs with TS. A cross indicates the crash of a surrogate’s furthest seed due to a numerically
unstable acquisition function. VBLL+TS successfully navigates the numerically unstable HV plateau
in OilSorbent, enabling a more accurate approximation of its three-dimensional Pareto front.

          GP                           I-BNN          DKL             LLLA           VBLL             DE             VBLL (ET+CL)
                         0                                                         −12
                                  TS                          TS                          TS                  7500    logEI
  Best value


               −10                                                                 −14
                                                      −5                                                      5000
               −20
                                                                                   −16                        2500
                                       Branin(2D)     −10          Ackley(5D)            Pestcont.(25D)                NNDraw(200D)
               −30
                                     101       103                 102       104                 102                     102         105
                                 Total fit time [s]          Total fit time [s]          Total fit time [s]          Total fit time [s]
Figure 6: Performance vs. accumulated surrogate fit time. VBLLs are the most expensive to train
surrogate model. Using the proposed continual learning scheme can significantly reduce runtime
while maintaining good performance.


Interestingly, this stagnation does not occur as early when using TS, suggesting that the additional
randomness helps mitigate this issue.

5.5                M ULTI -O BJECTIVE P ROBLEMS

We evaluate our approach on multi-objective optimization problems. Here, we consider the standard
benchmarks BraninCurrin (D = 2, K = 2), DTLZ1 (D = 5, K = 2), DTLZ2 (D = 5, K = 2), and
the real world benchmark Oil Sorbent (D = 7, K = 3) (Wang et al., 2020; Li et al., 2024). Figure 5
shows the performance of all surrogate in terms of the obtained HV with respect to fixed reference
points, as well as the logarithmic HV difference between the maximum HV5 and the obtained HV as
common metrics in multi-objective BO (Belakaria et al., 2019; Daulton et al., 2020). The performance
of all BNN models is similar. It is however notable that on OilSorbent all baselines using logEHVI
crash due to numerical issues while optimizing the acquisition function. Such numerical issues are
known for expected improvement type acquisition functions due to vanishing gradients (Ament et al.,
2024). Thompson sampling with VBLLs does not result in numerical issues, and we observe that
with this combination of model and acquisition function, the Pareto front can be further refined.

    5
      For BraninCurrin, DTLZ1, and DTLZ2 we use the values provided by BoTorch, and for OilSorbent we
estimate the maximum HV based on the asymptotic performance of the best performing surrogate.


                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.6   T RAINING T IME C OMPARISON

Lastly, we consider a surrogate fit time comparison in which we keep constant BO budget and track
accumulated fit time to highlight that recursive updates can significantly speed up run time. It should
be noted that in the usual BO setting, we assume that the black-box function is expensive to evaluate,
and hence, fit times play only a minor role in many applications, such as drug- or materials discovery.
Still, there may be applications where fit times are important. In Figure 6, we observe that VBLLs
are the most expensive surrogates to train on smaller problems, while on NNDraw, DKL and DE
are the most expensive. The event-triggered re-initializing combined with recursive updates of the
variational posterior significantly reduces the runtime while maintaining good performance.


6     D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have developed a bridge between classical conjugate Bayesian methods for BO and
BNN-based methods. We built upon VBLLs (Harrison et al., 2024) to obtain the expressivity of neural
networks, together with the simple and robust uncertainty characterization associated with GPs.
Continual learning: We introduced an online training scheme that enables online complexity
comparable to GPs. While we have developed an efficient training scheme, further developments
in combining continual learning with our architecture are possible. For our experiments, we use a
simple threshold on the log-likelihood to decide on re-initializing the model. Here, further concepts
from model selection can likely be used to make even more informed decisions. While our approach
was effective, many methods in continual learning (e.g. Nguyen et al. (2018)) have been developed
to improve training efficiency. While the combination of previously-developed continual learning
schemes with our last layer updating may be non-trivial, this is likely a promising direction for
improving efficiency. Balancing the functional randomness afforded by network re-initialization with
efficient continual learning will likely be a necessary focus of future work in this direction.
Additionally, as VBLLs are a new model class, we believe that there exist various options beyond the
approaches developed herein that can be used to speed up runtime further. In our experiments, we
used the default initialization provided in Harrison et al. (2024). Further investigating the initialization
of the VBLLs through a form of stochastic feature re-use and its effect on fit time can likely improve
wall clock performance. Also, standard deep learning best practices, such as learning rate scheduling,
could be beneficial, and exploring these directions is promising if wall clock time is important.
Performance and baselines: VBLLs perform on par with GPs on standard low-dimensional bench-
marks, yet significantly outperform GPs in high-dimensional and non-stationary problems. Fur-
thermore, VBLLs outperform a wide array of Bayesian neural network models, including I-BNNs
(Adlam et al., 2021), Laplace approximation-based models (Daxberger et al., 2021), deep ensembles
(Hansen & Salamon, 1990; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) and deep kernel learning (Wilson et al.,
2016). Especially the combination of VBLLs with TS shows strong performance throughout. While
Laplace-approximation methods perform well in our experiments, we find that they appear more
sensitive to observation noise (see Appendix C.3 for experimental results highlighting this).
Acquistion functions: Because of the parametric architecture of VBLLs, they can efficiently be
combined with Thompson sampling as an acquisition function. This yields reasonable benefits in the
univariate case (as shown by our full set of results) but yields substantial benefits in the multi-objective
case due to better numerical conditioning. Moreover, the ease of use with Thompson sampling also
enable easy use of TS-based information-theoretic acquisition functions such as max-value entropy
search (Wang & Jegelka, 2017; Belakaria et al., 2019).


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Friedrich Solowjow, Alexander von Rohr, Kevin Murphy, and Zi Wang for their
helpful comments and discussions. Paul Brunzema is partially funded by the Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation)–RTG 2236/2 (UnRAVeL). Simulations were
performed in part with computing resources granted by RWTH Aachen University under projects
rwth1579 and p0022034.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Ben Adlam, Jaehoon Lee, Lechao Xiao, Jeffrey Pennington, and Jasper Snoek. Exploring the
  uncertainty properties of neural networks’ implicit priors in the infinite-width limit. International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Ben Adlam, Jaehoon Lee, Shreyas Padhy, Zachary Nado, and Jasper Snoek. Kernel regression with
  infinite-width neural networks on millions of examples. arXiv:2303.05420, 2023.
Sebastian Ament, Samuel Daulton, David Eriksson, Maximilian Balandat, and Eytan Bakshy. Unex-
  pected improvements to expected improvement for Bayesian optimization. Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 36, 2024.
Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Emma Brunskill, and Animashree Anandkumar. Efficient exploration
  through Bayesian deep q-networks. arXiv:1802.04412, 2018.
Maximilian Balandat, Brian Karrer, Daniel R. Jiang, Samuel Daulton, Benjamin Letham, An-
 drew Gordon Wilson, and Eytan Bakshy. BoTorch: A Framework for Efficient Monte-Carlo
 Bayesian Optimization. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Syrine Belakaria, Aryan Deshwal, and Janardhan Rao Doppa. Max-value entropy search for multi-
  objective Bayesian optimization. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 32, 2019.
Felix Berkenkamp, Matteo Turchetta, Angela Schoellig, and Andreas Krause. Safe model-based
  reinforcement learning with stability guarantees. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2017.
Julian Blank and Kalyanmoy Deb. Pymoo: Multi-objective optimization in python. IEEE Access, 8:
  89497–89509, 2020.
Eric Bradford, Artur M Schweidtmann, and Alexei Lapkin. Efficient multiobjective optimization
  employing Gaussian processes, spectral sampling and a genetic algorithm. Journal of Global
  Optimization, 71(2):407–438, 2018.
Roberto Calandra, André Seyfarth, Jan Peters, and Marc Peter Deisenroth. Bayesian optimization
  for learning gaits under uncertainty: An experimental comparison on a dynamic bipedal walker.
  Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, 76:5–23, 2016.
Yutian Chen, Aja Huang, Ziyu Wang, Ioannis Antonoglou, Julian Schrittwieser, David Silver, and
  Nando de Freitas. Bayesian optimization in alphago. arXiv:1812.06855, 2018.
Lionel Colliandre and Christophe Muller. Bayesian optimization in drug discovery. High Performance
  Computing for Drug Discovery and Biomedicine, 2023.
Samuel Daulton, Maximilian Balandat, and Eytan Bakshy. Differentiable expected hypervolume
  improvement for parallel multi-objective Bayesian optimization. Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 33:9851–9864, 2020.
Erik Daxberger, Agustinus Kristiadi, Alexander Immer, Runa Eschenhagen, Matthias Bauer, and
  Philipp Hennig. Laplace redux-effortless Bayesian deep learning. Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and TAMT Meyarivan. A fast and elitist multi-
  objective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 6(2):
 182–197, 2002.
David Eriksson, Michael Pearce, Jacob Gardner, Ryan D Turner, and Matthias Poloczek. Scalable
  global optimization via local Bayesian optimization. In Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), 2019.
Felix Fiedler and Sergio Lucia. Improved uncertainty quantification for neural networks with Bayesian
  last layer. IEEE Access, 2023.
Jonathan Foldager, Mikkel Jordahn, Lars Kai Hansen, and Michael Riis Andersen. On the role of
  model uncertainties in Bayesian optimization. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2023.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Peter I Frazier and Jialei Wang. Bayesian optimization for materials design. Information science for
  materials discovery and design, 2016.
Jacob R Gardner, Geoff Pleiss, David Bindel, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Andrew Gordon Wilson.
  Gpytorch: Blackbox matrix-matrix gaussian process inference with gpu acceleration. In Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.
Roman Garnett, Michael A Osborne, and Stephen J Roberts. Bayesian optimization for sensor set
  selection. International conference on information processing in sensor networks, 2010.
Ryan-Rhys Griffiths and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. Constrained Bayesian optimization for
  automatic chemical design using variational autoencoders. Chemical science, 11(2):577–586,
  2020.
Raia Hadsell, Dushyant Rao, Andrei A Rusu, and Razvan Pascanu. Embracing change: Continual
  learning in deep neural networks. Trends in cognitive sciences, 2020.
L.K. Hansen and P. Salamon. Neural network ensembles. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence, 12(10):993–1001, 1990. doi: 10.1109/34.58871.
James Harrison, Apoorva Sharma, and Marco Pavone. Meta-learning priors for efficient online
  Bayesian regression. Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics (WAFR), 2018.
James Harrison, John Willes, and Jasper Snoek. Variational Bayesian last layers. International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Michael F Hutchinson. A stochastic estimator of the trace of the influence matrix for laplacian
 smoothing splines. Communications in Statistics-Simulation and Computation, 1989.
Carl Hvarfner, Erik Orm Hellsten, and Luigi Nardi. Vanilla bayesian optimization performs great in
  high dimensions. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
Pavel Izmailov, Sharad Vikram, Matthew D Hoffman, and Andrew Gordon Gordon Wilson. What are
  bayesian neural network posteriors really like? In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2021.
Samuel Kim, Peter Y Lu, Charlotte Loh, Jamie Smith, Jasper Snoek, and Marin Soljačić. Deep
  learning for Bayesian optimization of scientific problems with high-dimensional structure.
  arXiv:2104.11667, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
Jeremias Knoblauch, Jack Jewson, and Theodoros Damoulas. Generalized variational inference:
  Three arguments for deriving new posteriors. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.02063, 2019.
Oswin Krause and Christian Igel. A more efficient rank-one covariance matrix update for evolution
  strategies. In ACM Conference on Foundations of Genetic Algorithms, 2015.
Agustinus Kristiadi, Alexander Immer, Runa Eschenhagen, and Vincent Fortuin. Promises and
  pitfalls of the linearized laplace in Bayesian optimization. In Fifth Symposium on Advances in
 Approximate Bayesian Inference.
Agustinus Kristiadi, Matthias Hein, and Philipp Hennig. Learnable uncertainty under laplace
  approximations. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2021.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2017.
Neil David Lawrence. Variational inference in probabilistic models. PhD thesis, Citeseer, 2001.
Gilwoo Lee, Siddhartha S Srinivasa, and Matthew T Mason. GP-iLQG: Data-driven robust optimal
  control for uncertain nonlinear dynamical systems. arXiv:1705.05344, 2017.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Samuel S Schoenholz, Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha
  Sohl-Dickstein. Deep neural networks as Gaussian processes. International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Yucen Lily Li, Tim G. J. Rudner, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. A study of Bayesian neural network
  surrogates for Bayesian optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2024.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
David JC MacKay. A practical bayesian framework for backpropagation networks. Neural Computa-
  tion, 1992.
Alonso Marco, Philipp Hennig, Jeannette Bohg, Stefan Schaal, and Sebastian Trimpe. Automatic lqr
  tuning based on gaussian process global optimization. IEEE International Conference on Robotics
  and Automation (ICRA), 2016.
Raphael A Meyer, Cameron Musco, Christopher Musco, and David P Woodruff. Hutch++: Optimal
  stochastic trace estimation. In SIAM Symposium on Simplicity in Algorithms (SOSA), 2021.
Matthias Neumann-Brosig, Alonso Marco, Dieter Schwarzmann, and Sebastian Trimpe. Data-
 efficient autotuning with Bayesian optimization: An industrial control study. IEEE Transactions
 on Control Systems Technology, 28(3):730–740, 2019.
Cuong V Nguyen, Yingzhen Li, Thang D Bui, and Richard E Turner. Variational continual learning.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Sebastian W Ober and Carl Edward Rasmussen. Benchmarking the neural linear model for regression.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.08416, 2019.
Sebastian W Ober, Carl E Rasmussen, and Mark van der Wilk. The promises and pitfalls of deep
  kernel learning. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2021.
Changyong Oh, Jakub Tomczak, Efstratios Gavves, and Max Welling. Combinatorial bayesian
  optimization using the graph cartesian product. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  32, 2019.
Yaniv Ovadia, Emily Fertig, Jie Ren, Zachary Nado, Sebastian Nowozin, Joshua Dillon, Balaji
  Lakshminarayanan, and Jasper Snoek. Can you trust your model’s uncertainty? evaluating
  predictive uncertainty under dataset shift. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2019.
Biswajit Paria, Kirthevasan Kandasamy, and Barnabás Póczos. A flexible framework for multi-
  objective Bayesian optimization using random scalarizations. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelli-
  gence, pp. 766–776. PMLR, 2020.
Carlos Riquelme, George Tucker, and Jasper Snoek. Deep Bayesian bandits showdown. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Hrittik Roy, Marco Miani, Carl Henrik Ek, Philipp Hennig, Marvin Pförtner, Lukas Tatzel, and Søren
  Hauberg. Reparameterization invariance in approximate Bayesian inference, 2024.
Daniel J Russo, Benjamin Van Roy, Abbas Kazerouni, Ian Osband, Zheng Wen, et al. A tutorial on
  Thompson sampling. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 2018.
Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. Practical Bayesian optimization of machine
  learning algorithms. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2012.
Jasper Snoek, Oren Rippel, Kevin Swersky, Ryan Kiros, Nadathur Satish, Narayanan Sundaram,
  Mostofa Patwary, Prabhat, and Ryan Adams. Scalable Bayesian optimization using deep neural
  networks. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2015.
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Aaron Klein, Stefan Falkner, and Frank Hutter. Bayesian optimization
  with robust bayesian neural networks. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2016.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kevin Swersky, Jasper Snoek, and Ryan P. Adams. Multi-task bayesian optimization. 2013.
Sujay Thakur, Cooper Lorsung, Yaniv Yacoby, Finale Doshi-Velez, and Weiwei Pan. Uncertainty-
  aware (una) bases for Bayesian regression using multi-headed auxiliary networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.11695, 2020.
William R Thompson. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of
 the evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 1933.
Boqian Wang, Jiacheng Cai, Chuangui Liu, Jian Yang, and Xianting Ding. Harnessing a novel
  machine-learning-assisted evolutionary algorithm to co-optimize three characteristics of an electro-
  spun oil sorbent. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 12(38):42842–42849, 2020.
Zi Wang and Stefanie Jegelka. Max-value entropy search for efficient Bayesian optimization. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 3627–3635. PMLR, 2017.
Joe Watson, Jihao Andreas Lin, Pascal Klink, Joni Pajarinen, and Jan Peters. Latent derivative
  Bayesian last layer networks. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2021.
Noah Weber, Janez Starc, Arpit Mittal, Roi Blanco, and Lluı́s Màrquez. Optimizing over a Bayesian
  last layer. In NeurIPS workshop on Bayesian Deep Learning, 2018.
Florian Wenzel, Kevin Roth, Bastiaan S Veeling, Jakub Swiatkowski, Linh Tran, Stephan Mandt,
  Jasper Snoek, Tim Salimans, Rodolphe Jenatton, and Sebastian Nowozin. How good is the bayes
  posterior in deep neural networks really? In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2020.
Andrew Gordon Wilson, Zhiting Hu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Eric P Xing. Deep kernel learning.
  In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2016.
James Wilson, Viacheslav Borovitskiy, Alexander Terenin, Peter Mostowsky, and Marc Deisenroth.
  Efficiently sampling functions from Gaussian process posteriors. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML). PMLR, 2020.
James T Wilson, Viacheslav Borovitskiy, Alexander Terenin, Peter Mostowsky, and Marc Peter
  Deisenroth. Pathwise conditioning of Gaussian processes. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  22(105):1–47, 2021.
Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence.
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Ciyou Zhu, Richard H Byrd, Peihuang Lu, and Jorge Nocedal. Algorithm 778: L-bfgs-b: Fortran
  subroutines for large-scale bound-constrained optimization. ACM Transactions on mathematical
  software (TOMS), 23(4):550–560, 1997.
Eckart Zitzler, Lothar Thiele, Marco Laumanns, Carlos M Fonseca, and Viviane Grunert Da Fonseca.
  Performance assessment of multiobjective optimizers: An analysis and review. IEEE Transactions
  on Evolutionary Computation, 7(2):117–132, 2003.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A Related Work Comparisons                                                                        16
   A.1 VBLL Comparison to Last Layer Laplace Approximations . . . . . . . . . . . . .             16
   A.2 VBLL Comparison to Deep Kernel Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          16

B Algorithmic Details                                                                             16
   B.1 Proof of Theorem 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16
   B.2 Model Re-Use and Early Stopping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        17
   B.3 Recursive Update Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
        B.3.1    Model re-initialization through event triggering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
        B.3.2    Model re-initialization through scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
        B.3.3    Comparison of re-initialization strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
   B.4 Training Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
   B.5 Computational Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       20
   B.6 Further Details on the Setup and Acquisition Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       20

C Discussion and Baseline Ablations                                                               21
   C.1 On Neural Network Thompson Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            21
   C.2 Comparison to D-scaled Gaussian process priors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         22
   C.3 Comparison of Sensitivity to Noise for LLLA and VBLLs . . . . . . . . . . . . .            23

D Experimental Details                                                                            23
   D.1 Baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    23
   D.2 Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24

E Hyperparameter Sensitivity                                                                      25
   E.1 Wishart Scale and Continual Learning Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       25
   E.2 Influence of the Wishart Scale on the Performance of Continual Learning . . . . .          25
   E.3 Model Width Ablation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       25
   E.4 Model Performance in the Presence of Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       26


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     R ELATED W ORK C OMPARISONS

A.1    VBLL C OMPARISON TO L AST L AYER L APLACE A PPROXIMATIONS

Laplace methods approximate the predictive covariance with the (inverse) Hessian. In the line of work
on Laplace approximations for neural networks (e.g. Daxberger et al. (2021)), the Fisher information
matrix—which consists of the outer-product of network gradients, summed over all data—is used as
an approximation to the Hessian. For last layer Laplace in particular, this reduces to the outer product
of features, equivalent to covariance computation for Bayesian last layer methods. The primary
difference is Daxberger et al. (2021) also typically optimize the hyperparameters (including the last
layer prior and hyperparameters) via an empirical Bayes objective. Thus, the last layer Laplace
method in this setting can be interpreted as a form of the (non-Variational) Bayesian last layer model.
While we optimize the noise covariance we do not optimize the last layer prior, which is the primary
difference between our VBLL-based approach and last layer Laplace approximations. Another key
difference is that in the presented VBLL models, the variational posterior is learned jointly with
the features (or basis functions), which is not the case for last layer Laplace where the approximate
posterior distribution is learned post-hoc fitting of the features.

A.2    VBLL C OMPARISON TO D EEP K ERNEL L EARNING

Deep kernel learning (DKL) (Wilson et al., 2016) aims to learn an input transform to a kernel with a
deep neural network to effectively capture non-stationary and complex correlations in the input space.
Specifically, it uses a neural network gθ as input wrapping to the kernel as kDKL := k(gθ (x), gθ (x′ )).
The kernel’s hyperparameters and the neural network are trained simultaneously by optimizing the
exact (log) marginal likelihood of the GP posterior on the full data set. With the learned kernel,
inference is identical to standard non-parametric GPs through explicit conditioning on past data and
therefore scales as O(N 3 ). This explicit conditioning can become especially problematic for larger
datasets. Here, parametric models such as VBLLs and LLLA, which are trained on mini-batches,
are preferable. Intuitively, VBLLs can be considered a parametric version of DKL, also learning
correlations by optimizing the variational posterior of the last layer in tandem with the feature-
extracting backbone network. Optimizing DKL is challenging primarily because of the computational
complexity of gradient computation with a marginal likelihood objective and overparameterized
models (Ober et al., 2021). However, it can still yield good performance on many benchmarks which
we also demonstrate in Figure 3. Still, similar to GPs, it struggles in high-dimensional Thompson
sampling due to its non-parametric nature.


B     A LGORITHMIC D ETAILS

B.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

We restate the theorem for completeness.
Theorem 1. Fix θ. Then, the variational posterior parameterized by
                                 (w̄∗ , S ∗ ) := η ∗ = arg max L(η, θ)                              (12)
                                                         η

is equivalent to the posterior computed by the recursive least squares inferential procedure described
by (2) and (3), iterated over the full dataset.


Proof. There are two methods to prove this result. First, we can note that for the standard ELBO—
constructed from a single application of Jensen’s inequality, exchanging the log and the expectation—
the variational lower bound is tight if the chosen variational family contains the true posterior (see
e.g. Knoblauch et al. (2019) for discussion). Our chosen variational posterior formulation consists of
independent posteriors for each output dimension, with dense covariances. This contains the exact
posterior for multivariate Bayesian linear regression with diagonal Σ and thus the variational lower
bound is tight under our modeling assumptions. Moreover, because the variational lower bound (for
fixed θ) is strictly concave for appropriate choice of priors, the maximizer is unique.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Early stop training
       103
                    70                                                       −0.5


                                                                Best value
                    60
                                                                             −1.0
Loss

                    50                                                                    10000 Epochs
                         2500 5000 7500
                                                                                          10000 Epochs
                                                                             −1.5         w. early stopping
       102                                                                                1000 Epochs

             0   2500      5000 7500          10000                                 2500    5000         7500
                          Epoch                                                        Runtime [s]
(a) Training loss with early stopping for three differ-        (b) Comparison of runtime and performance for dif-
ent model initializations.                                     ferent fixed epochs and using patience on Ackley5D.

Figure 7: Illustration of early stopping in VBLL training (left) and its impact on runtime and
performance (right). By introducing the early stopping, we can significantly reduce runtime while
maintaining good performance.


A second proof approach is constructive: note that the variational lower bound is strictly concave
and compute the maximizer by computing the gradient and using first order necessary conditions for
optimality. By inspection one can see that this is equivalent to the recursive least squares posterior.

B.2     M ODEL R E -U SE AND E ARLY S TOPPING

Early stopping: The training process for BNNs typically follows standard neural network procedures
and relies on a held-out validation set to determine when to stop training (Watson et al., 2021;
Harrison et al., 2024). However, this approach is impractical in the context of BO with limited data,
particularly in the early stages of optimization when the training data size is very small. To address
this, we implement early stopping for VBLL networks based on the training loss. Specifically, we
track the average loss for each training epoch and stop if the average loss does not improve for M
consecutive epochs, using the model parameters that produced the lowest training loss.
Figure 7a shows the training of the same VBLL network with different initialization but using
identical data and optimizer settings. The dashed vertical lines indicate that the training loss reaches
a plateau at significantly different epochs across these initializations. Such a large variance in the
optimal number of training epochs was also observed in the original VBLL paper for regression
tasks (Harrison et al., 2024). By applying an early stopping criterion, we are able to specify a high
maximum number of epochs while still reducing computational costs, as each initialization is only
trained as long as necessary to achieve good empirical performance. In Figure 7b, we can see that by
using early stopping, the runtime can be reduced while maintaining performance. Only training for a
small fixed number of epochs has similar savings in runtime but at the cost of final performance.
It is important to emphasize that this approach is not exclusive to VBLLs; we believe that applying a
similar early stopping criterion could prove beneficial for training neural network-based surrogate
models in BO more broadly. In our experiments, we therefore applied early stopping to all applicable
BNN baselines.
Feature re-use: The naive approach to training requires training a new network for each step of full
model training. While we mitigate the cost of training via the last layer recursive update, we further
explore using continual feature learning for faster convergence. For this, we initialize the VBLLs at
each (full model training) iteration with the feature weights from the last full model training iteration,
and the variational posterior from the previous recursive update iteration. This warm start, combined
with early stopping, yields substantial speed-ups in training. This feature re-use approach follows
conventional continual learning, in which networks are trained for streaming data (Zenke et al., 2017;
Hadsell et al., 2020). However, as discussed in Appendix C.1, re-initializing networks plays an
important role that has strong connections to Thompson sampling over the features, and thus we will
interleave continual (feature) training with occasional model re-initialization.


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         VBLL              VBLL (Periodic CL)                      VBLL (ET CL)
               0                       0                         0
                                                                                                     3
Best value   −10                                                −5
                                      −5
   TS
                                                                                                     2
             −20
                                                               −10                                   1
                    Branin (2D) −10           Ackley (2D)                          Ackley (5D)           Hartmann (6D)
             −30
                       20        40              20        40                         50       100             50       100
                    Iteration                 Iteration                            Iteration                Iteration

Figure 8: Comparison of periodic retraining (Periodic CL) and event-triggered retraining (ET CL).


B.3          R ECURSIVE U PDATE S CHEDULING

We next discuss the different approaches for deciding when to re-initialize the model. There are
different heuristics one can apply to decide when to re-initialize the network. A straightforward
approach would be to fix a re-initialization rate M ≥ 1 a-priori.

B.3.1         M ODEL RE - INITIALIZATION THROUGH EVENT TRIGGERING
A simple rule for deciding online whether to re-initialize the network is to check how consistent a new
observation is with the current variational posterior. For this, we simply compute the log-likelihood
of the incoming point and compare it against a threshold Λ as
                                log Nqηt (yt | xt ) < Λ ⇐⇒ re-initialize model                                            (13)
 Here, Λ is a user-defined threshold and Nqηt is the predictive under the current variation posterior. In
all our experiments, we set Λ = 0 and did not further tune this. Intuitively, this gives practitioners a
tuning nob trading off between computational efficiency and predictive accuracy. In Figure 9, we
show the influence of Λ on both final performance and runtime.
In Figure 8, we compare the event-triggered strategy                           0
to periodic retraining (M = 5) demonstrating an
improved performance on all benchmarks. However,                              −2
                                                                 Best value


it should be noted that with periodic retraining, the
                                                                                                     Λ = -10       Λ=0
total runtime can be better estimated as a fraction                                                  Λ = -5        Λ = 0.1
of retraining at every time step, whereas this is not                         −4                     Λ = -2        Λ = 0.5
possible with the event-triggered strategy.                                                          Λ = -1        Λ=1
                                                                                                     Λ = -0.5      Λ=2
                                                                              −6
                                                                                                     Λ = -0.1
B.3.2 M ODEL
RE - INITIALIZATION THROUGH SCHEDULING                                                     2000        4000        6000
                                                                                                  Runtime [s]
Another idea to decide whether to re-initialize the
model or perform a recursive update is through Figure 9: Performance and runtime for vari-
scheduling. Various scheduling approaches can be ous thresholds Λ on Ackley5D with TS. The
leveraged here, but scheduling re-initialization with a threshold defines a trade-off between final per-
sigmoid arises naturally: in the beginning, when data formance and total runtime.
is still spare, we want a high retrain rate, whereas in
the later stages, the basis functions of the model are expressive enough to model the function. We can
then use efficient recursive updates. Specifically, we parameterize the probability of re-training with
a sigmoid taking as input the current time step
                        1
        1      p(t) =                  2 Zt ∼ Bernoulli(p(t)) ⇐⇒ re-initialize model. (14)
                  1 + e−s(c−t)
Here, c is the center of the sigmoid and s is the stretch parameter. We set the stretch parameter as
s = 2Tln(9)
        ·w where w is the transition window ratio.

Remark. Setting the stretch parameter s = 2Tln(9)
                                              ·w ensures that the sigmoid transition from p(t) = 0.9
                                                                                   1
to p(t) = 0.1 occurs over w · T time steps. With the sigmoid as p(t) = 1+e−s(c−t)        we can set


                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


p(t1 ) = 0.9 and p(t2 ) = 0.1, and solve for t1 and t2 as t1 = c − ln(9)
                                                                     s   and t2 = c + ln(9)
                                                                                        s . The
                                              2 ln(9)
length of the transition window is t2 − t1 = s . Setting this equal to the desired window w · T ,
we have 2 ln(9)
            s    = w · T which implies s = 2Tln(9)
                                               ·w .

As defaults, we set the center to T /2 and w = 0.5. However, similar to the threshold for the event
trigger, practitioners can use these tuning knobs to prioritize computational efficiency or predictive
accuracy.

B.3.3                    C OMPARISON OF RE - INITIALIZATION STRATEGIES
We next compare the two main strategies for determining when to re-initialize the model. For this,
we define the following indicator function:

                              1 if model is re-initialized at iteration t,
                     I(t) =                                                                  (15)
                              0 if model is updated recursively at iteration t.
We compare the performance and re-initialization behavior of the approaches on a selected subset of
experiments in Figure 10. We can observe that for TS, both approaches perform similarly and almost
                                                                  VBLL                VBLL (ET CL)                VBLL (Sigmoid CL)
                         0                            0
                                                                                                                 3
Best value


                  −10
                                                     −5                              −5
   TS


                                                                                                                 2
                  −20
                               Branin (2D) −10     Ackley (2D) −10     Ackley (5D)   1 Hartmann (6D)
                  −30
                            ET: -85.14% RT      ET: -64.77% RT      ET: -74.16% RT     ET: -78.04% RT
                            SG: -60.73% RT      SG: -54.97% RT      SG: -67.35% RT     SG: -68.52% RT
  Indicator function
   to relearn model


                        1.0                 1.0                 1.0                1.0

                        0.5                          0.5                             0.5                        0.5

                        0.0                          0.0                             0.0                       0.0
                                       20       40                  20
                                                                   VBLL         40            50CL)
                                                                                       VBLL (ET             100 VBLL (Sigmoid
                                                                                                                       50      100
                                                                                                                              CL)
                  7500              Iteration                     Iteration
                                                                 −12                        Iteration               Iteration
Best value


                                                                                                   200
 logEI


                  5000                                           −14

                                                                 −16
                  2500                NN draw (200D)                    Pest control (25D)              0       Lunar lander (12D)
                                      ET: -61.42% RT                        ET: -72.49% RT                          ET: -27.86% RT
                                      SG: -25.62% RT                        SG: -50.12% RT                          SG: -30.82% RT
   Indicator function
    to relearn model


                        1.0                                       1.0                                1.0

                        0.5                                       0.5                                0.5

                        0.0                                       0.0                                0.0
                              200         400              600                50          100               0                200
                                       Iteration                                Iteration                             Iteration

Figure 10: Comparison of event-triggered and scheduled re-initialization on a selected subset of
problems. The top row always shows the performance, and the bottom row shows E[I(t)] across
seeds. In between, we report the improvement in runtime compared to the standard VBLL baseline.

on par with the VBLLs but at a significant reduction in total runtime. Through all experiments, we
can observe the more adaptive behavior of the event trigger compared to the pre-defined sigmoid
schedule. Specifically for Branin, we can observe that the event trigger can significantly reduce the
runtime already early on.


                                                                              19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For high-dimensional problems using logEI, we observe a notable difference in performance for
NNdraw. When employing the event trigger, the algorithm stagnates resulting in poor performance.
In contrast, sigmoid scheduling allows the algorithm to achieve performance levels that approximate
those of the VBLLs. Interestingly, we do not observe the same behavior when using TS (cf. Figure 3).
Here, the additional exploration introduced by Thompson sampling appears to mitigate these issues.
Based on these observations, we hypothesize that especially the interplay of TS with an online
strategy leveraging event-triggered re-learning offers significant potential for practical applications.
Finally, it is important to acknowledge that the comparisons in this section are based on a single set
of parameters, limiting the scope for direct comparisons, particularly due to differences in runtime
savings. Moreover, while both strategies arise naturally, an intriguing direction for future work would
be to investigate more advanced approaches, such as those from model selection.

B.4   T RAINING D ETAILS

For training the VBLL models, we closely follow Harrison et al. (2024). For all experiments, we use
AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) as our optimizer with a learning rate of 10−3 , set the weight
decay for the backbone (not including the parameters of the VBLL) to 10−4 , and use norm-based
gradient clipping with a value of 1. For the VBLL, we set the prior scale to 1 and the the Wishart scale
to 0.01. A sensitivity analysis of the Wishart scale on the performance and run time is in Appendix E.
As mentioned in Sec. 3, we employ early stopping for all VBLL models based on the training loss.
We track the average loss of a training epoch and if this average loss does not improve for a 100
epochs in a row, we stop training and use the model parameters that yielded the lowest training loss.

B.5   C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY

The update formula for the last layer (defined by the rank-1 Cholesky update for the covariance and
(8)) has quadratic computational complexity in the feature dimension. Computing w̄t can similarly
be computed with quadratic complexity as the product L−⊤              −1
                                                                 t Lt qt . This can be computed via
efficient linear solves due to the triangularity of Lt . We also note that computing the log determinant
− log det St is equivalent to computing log det St−1 = 2 log det Lt , which is equal to the sum of the
log diagonal elements, and thus has linear complexity.
The KL penalty on the last layer variational posterior requires computing the trace of the covariance,
tr(L−1  −⊤                                −1 2
     t Lt ). This can be expressed as ∥Lt ∥F , and complexity for this is cubic. We can turn instead
to randomized algorithms—in particular, Hutchinson estimators (Hutchinson, 1989)—to yield an
approximate solution with quadratic complexity. This estimator is
                                                              N
                     −⊤ −1            ⊤              2     1 X ⊤
                 tr(Lt Lt ) = E[1 solve(Lt , ϵ) ] ≈               1 solve(L⊤t , ϵi )
                                                                                    2
                                                                                                  (16)
                                                          N i=1
for appropriately sampled ϵ (for example, ϵ ∼ N (0, I)). Here, solve(·, ·) denotes a linear solve. Thus
this estimator is quadratic in the feature dimension and linear in N . The MSE convergence rate for
this estimator is linear, but modifications exist that achieve quadratic convergence (Meyer et al., 2021)
by exploiting quasi-Monte Carlo methods.
With the exception of the trace computation, the computational complexity is quadratic in the feature
dimension. Therefore, for an exact solution the complexity is cubic (due to the cubic complexity trace
computation), and a rapidly convergent randomized solution is possible with quadratic complexity.

B.6   F URTHER D ETAILS ON THE S ETUP AND ACQUISITION F UNCTIONS

We implement the VBLLs within BoTorch (Balandat et al., 2020). We further build on the imple-
mentation of Li et al. (2024) for the different baselines which are also based on BoTorch as well as
GPyTorch (Gardner et al., 2018). As best-practice in BO, we standardize the data to mean zero and a
variance of one at each iteration. We further transform the input space specified by the problem intro
the hypercube X ∈ [0, 1]D . For completeness, we again list all the baselines below and then discuss
the optimization of the acquisition functions.
Acquisition functions: We use 10 restarts and 512 raw samples for optimizing the acquisition
functions UCB and logEI for all models. For TS we optimize the analytic sample of the VBLLs


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with 10 random restart using L-BFGS-B (Zhu et al., 1997) as the optimization method. For TS
from the non-parametric models, we use the same heuristic as in Eriksson et al. (2019) and generate
min{5000, max{2000, 200 · D}} pseudo-random input points from a Sobol sequence and then
sample from the high-dimensional multi-variate normal. The next location is then the argmax of
the sample path. For the multi-objective problems, we use logEHVI for all models with consistent
reference points. For TS with VBLLs, we follow the procedure described in Sec. 4. For NSGA-II,
we use a population size of 100 and terminate after 200 generations.


C        D ISCUSSION AND BASELINE A BLATIONS

C.1          O N N EURAL N ETWORK T HOMPSON S AMPLING

We further investigated the use of using neural network based Thompson samples. With VBLLs,
we effectively maintain a distribution over plausible deterministic NNs that are in accordance with
the current data set and noise level. Instead of maintaining such a distribution and then sampling
from the variational posterior of the weights w, a straight-forward idea would be to directly train
a deterministic neural network using the same optimizer (including the same early stopping etc.),
and L2 loss, as well as L2 regularization for the backbone directly generating a MAP Thompson
sample. Note that with such an approach, one would no longer be able to leverage acquisition
functions that rely on good uncertainty quantification such as logEI or more sophisticated such as
information-theoretic acquisition functions based on entropy search such as MES Wang & Jegelka
(2017), which may require large ensembles (up to 100 NNs), making it computationally expensive.
Still, we tested this baseline and the results are summarized in Fig. 11.


                       GP             I-BNN               DKL        LLLA              VBLL           MAP
               0                                                 0
                                      0                                                3
Best value


             −20                                                −5
   TS


                                     −5                                                2

                                                                                       1
             −40    Branin (2D) −10           Ackley (2D) −10        Ackley (5D)           Hartmann (6D)
                       20       40               20        40           50       100             50       100
                    Iteration                 Iteration              Iteration                Iteration

Figure 11: Comparison of neural network Thompson sampling on synthetic benchmarks. The
deterministic MAP Thompson sample shows surprisingly good performance however also yields
large variance on simple benchmarks which is undesirable.


Here MAP refers to the MAP Thompson sample baseline. We can observe that this simple baseline
performs surprisingly well but cannot match the performance of the other baselines. We also observe
that in relatively simple problems, such as Branin and Ackley2D, the variance is significantly
larger compared to the other baselines, which is undesirable in BO applications. We also compared
this baseline on the high-dimensional and real-world benchmarks and the results are shown in Fig. 12.

The MAP approach demonstrates superior performance on the NNdraw task. This is likely because
the Wishart scale in the VBLL baselines is not well-tuned for the NNdraw problem (cf. Sec. E).
The data is normalized to zero mean and a standard deviation of one; however, with a Wishart scale
greater than zero, the assumed noise in this normalized space affects the accuracy of the correlations
between data points–especially for the large value range in NNdraw. In contrast, the MAP baseline
does not, by design, account for noise, which may contribute to its better performance in this
context. Additionally, the MAP baseline exhibits slightly faster convergence on Pestcontrol.
For Lunarlander, the MAP approach shows considerable variance and fails to match the final
performance of the VBLLs.


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           GP         I-BNN               DKL           LLLA                  VBLL           MAP
                                            −12                                   300
             8000

Best value   6000                                                                 200
                                            −14
   TS


             4000                                                                 100
                                            −16
             2000         NN draw (200D)             Pest control (25D)             0       Lunar lander (12D)
                    200      400      600                 50          100               0              200
                          Iteration                         Iteration                           Iteration

Figure 12: Comparison of neural network Thompson sampling on high-dimensional and real-world
benchmarks. On these benchmarks, the MAP Thompson sample baseline shows mixed performance.
It performs better on NNdraw but exibits large variance for Lunarlander.

                                       GP                GP (with D-scaled hyperprior)               VBLL
                                                                                  −12
                                            7500
Best value


             −5                                                                   −14
   TS


                                            5000

                                            2500                                  −16
             −10            Ackley (5D)                    NN draw (200D)                    Pest control (25D)
               0                                                                  −12
                                            7500
Best value
 logEI


             −5                                                                   −14
                                            5000
                                                                                  −16
             −10            Ackley (5D)     2500           NN draw (200D)                    Pest control (25D)
                             50       100          200         400          600                50          100
                          Iteration                         Iteration                            Iteration

      Figure 13: Comparison of a standard GP with and without a D-scaled hyperprior to VBLLs.


C.2          C OMPARISON TO D- SCALED G AUSSIAN PROCESS PRIORS

We further compare the VBLLs to a Gaussian process with so-called D-scaled hyperpriors on all the
lengthscales which has demonstrated promising results in high-dimensional settings (Hvarfner et al.,
2024). With this, we aim to test the hypothesis that the VBLL’s improvement in performance over
the GPs on tasks such as Pestcontrol does not come from bad GP hyperparameters but rather from its
ability to capture complex non-Euclidean input correlations. For the hyperprior, we closely follow
Hvarfner et al. (2024) and define a log-normal distribution as the hyperprior for all lengthscales ℓi as

                                                        log D
                                   p(ℓi ) ∼ LN µ0 +           , σ0                                  (17)
                                                          2
                                √             √
and set the constants to µ0 = 2 and σ0 = 3. As in Hvarfner et al. (2024), we no longer use box
constraints on the lengthscales for the D-scaled GP. The lengthscales are initialized with the mean of
the hyperprior at each iteration and then optimized by minimizing the marginal log-likelihood. In the
following, we focus only on Ackley (5D), Pestcontrol, and NNDraw. The results are in Figure 13
We can observe that for Ackley, the additional hyperprior does not have an influence on the per-
formance. For the NNDraw example, the inductive bias introduced by the hyperprior benefits
performance when using logEI, but it is negligible for Thompson sampling. In high-dimensional
settings, the critical factor for Thompson sampling is not the kernel choice but whether the surrogate
model is parametric or non-parametric. On Pestcontrol, the hyperprior not only fails to improve
performance but also negatively impacts it when using logEI. Even with the additional hyperprior,
the GP model is not able to capture the input correlations, which prevents it from yielding good


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


performance. Here a change in kernel is necessary to achieve competitive performance with a GP
surrogate model. The VBLLs and the other parametric BNN models can capture this complex
input correlation and can converge fairly quickly to the optimum, given that the problem has 25
dimensions. Lastly, it is important to note that also for the VBLLs and the other baselines, different
hyperparameters such as network architecture can also improve performance (see Appendix E.3).

C.3              C OMPARISON OF S ENSITIVITY TO N OISE FOR LLLA AND VBLL S

We conduct additional experiments to compare the robustness of the LLLA and VBLL surrogates to
objective noise. Specifically, we consider Ackley2D and Ackley5D and set the output noise standard
deviation to σ ∈ [0.0, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1] to test a broad spectrum. For each σ, we run 10 seeds.
The results are summarized in Figure 14. The left plot displays the mean and the 10th and 90th
percent quantiles across all σ. We can observe that the performance is more consistent for VBLLs on
the lower dimension problem. The center and right plots show mean and quantiles for each σ for
LLLA and VBLLs, respectively. As a reference, we overlay the performance of the noise-free case
in blue. Also here we can observe that while the mean of the best observed values6 remains similar
for Ackley2D, VBLLs display higher consistency compared to LLLA considering the quantiles. A
similar but less amplified trend can be observed on Ackley5D.
                                 σ=1            σ = 0.1         σ = 0.01               σ = 0.001           σ = 0.0
                   0                              0                                0
 TS (Ackley2D)
   Best value


                 −5                             −5                               −5
                                     LLLA
                 −10                 VBLL       −10                              −10
                                                                       LLLA                                VBLL
                                20σ = 1     40 σ = 0.1        20σ = 0.01 40            σ = 0.001  20          40
                                                                                                         σ = 0.0
                   0         Iteration           0         Iteration               0           Iteration
 TS (Ackley5D)
   Best value


                 −5                             −5                               −5
                                     VBLL
                 −10                 LLLA       −10                              −10
                                                                       LLLA                                VBLL
                                50        100                 50           100                    50          100
                             Iteration                     Iteration                           Iteration

                  Figure 14: Sensitivity to noise on Ackley2D and Ackley5D for LLLA and VBLLs.


D            E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

D.1              BASELINES

GPs: As the de-facto standard in BO, we compare against GPs. As kernel, we choose a Matérn
kernel with ν = 2.5 and use individual lengthscales ℓi for all input dimensions that are optimized
within box constraints following recommended best practices (Eriksson et al., 2019; Balandat et al.,
2020). We use box constraints as ℓi ∈ [0.005, 4] (Eriksson et al., 2019)–we refer to Appendix C.2
for further discussion on this choice as well as a comparison to D-scaled GPs (Hvarfner et al., 2024).
We expect the performance of GPs to be particularly good on stationary benchmarks.
I-BNNs: We compare against infinite-width Bayesian neural networks (I-BNNs) (Lee et al., 2018),
which have shown promising results in recent work (Li et al., 2024). As in Li et al. (2024), we set the
depth to 3 and initialize the weight variance to 10 and the bias variance to 1.6. Note that the I-BNN
is expressed as a kernel and therefore the model is still non-parametric and does not learn features.
  6
    Note that we track the best observed value. Therefore, values greater zero are possible (see σ = 1 for the
VBLLs on Ackley2D) even though maxx∈X E[f (x)] = 0 for Ackley.


                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DKL: Deep kernel learning (DKL) (Wilson et al., 2016) combines feature extracting with neural
networks with GPs. It uses a neural network gθ as input wrapping to the kernel as kDKL :=
k(gθ (x), gθ (x′ )) to allow for non-stationary modeling and exact inference. For the neural network,
we use the same architecture as in (Li et al., 2024), i.e., 3 layers with 128 neurons. We further use
ELU activations for all layers.
LLLA: Last layer Laplace approximations (LLLA) are a computationally efficient way obtain
uncertainty estimates after training a neural network (MacKay, 1992; Daxberger et al., 2021). With
this, they are a well suited BNN surrogate model for BO (Kristiadi et al.; Li et al., 2024). As NN, we
also use 3 layers with 128 neurons and ELU activations. Note that for TS, we can also optimize the
parametric neural network function numerically with LLLA.
DE: Deep ensembles are a cheap and efficient way to obtain predictions with uncertainty. Each
member of the ensemble is initialized with a different random seed, and all are trained on the same
data, minimizing an MSE loss using weight decay. We use 5 ensemble members. We parameterize
the predictive as a normal distribution with mean and variance from the ensemble. We note that an
ensemble of VBLL networks is also possible, although we do not include this approach.
VBLL: For the VBLLs, we use the same architecture as for DKL and LLLA. In the body of the
paper, we include two VBLL models: training the features from scratch every iteration (performant
but expensive) and re-training the features based on an event trigger and otherwise doing recursive
last layer updates (VBLL (ET CL)).

D.2   E XPERIMENTS

Branin: A standard two dimensional optimization benchmark with three global optima.
Ackley: A standard optimization benchmark with various local optima (depending on the dimen-
sionality) and one global optimum. In out experiments, we compare the surrogates on a 2D and 5D
version and set the feasible set to the hypercube X = [−5, 10]d as in Eriksson et al. (2019).
Hartmann: A standard six dimensional benchmark with six local optima and one global optimum.
NN draw: In this optimization problem, our goal is to find the global optimum of a function defined
by a sample from a neural network within the hypercube X = [0, 1]d . This benchmark was also
employed in Li et al. (2024). We use a fully connected neural network with two hidden layers, each
containing 50 nodes, and ReLU activation functions. The input size corresponds to the dimensionality
of the optimization problem (in our case, 200), and the output size is one. To generate a function, we
sample all weights from the standard normal distribution N (0, 1). For a fair comparison, we use the
same fixed seed across all baselines ensuring that the same objective function is used.
Pest control: This optimization problem was also in Li et al. (2024) and aims to minimizing the
spread of pests while minimizing the prevention costs of treatment and was introduced in Oh et al.
(2019). In this experiment, we define the setting as a categorical optimization problem with 25
categorical variables corresponding to stages of intervention, with 5 different values at each stage.
As mentioned in Oh et al. (2019), dynamics behind this problem are highly complex resulting in
involved correlations between the inputs.
Lunar lander: Lunar lander is an environment from OpenAI gym. The objective is to maximize the
average final reward over 50 randomly generated environments. For this, 12 continuous parameters
of a controller have to be tuned as in Eriksson et al. (2019).
Branin Currin: A standard two dimensional benchmark with two objectives.
DTLZ1: A standard benchmark of which we choose a five dimensional version with two objectives.
DTLZ2: A standard benchmark of which we choose a five dimensional version with two objectives.
Oil Sorbent: Building on the implemention by Li et al. (2024), we optimize the properties of a
material to maximize its performance as a sorbent for marine oil spills as introduced by Wang et al.
(2020). The problem consists of five ordinal parameters and two continuous parameters which control


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the manufacturing process of electrospun materials, and the three objectives are water contact angle,
oil absorption capacity, and mechanical strength.

E     H YPERPARAMETER S ENSITIVITY

The parametric VBLL surrogate has hyperparameters that have to be specified a-priori. In the
following, we present results on the hyperparameter sensitivity of the VBLL surrogate model and
demonstrate that tuning hyperparameters can improve empirical performance but also that the VBLL
surrogate model is rather robust for a wide range of specifications. In Sec. E.1, we will first consider
the sensitivity with respect to the Wishart scale and the reinitialization rate for continual learning.
Following this, Sec. E.3 then studies the sensitivity regarding the width of the neural network
backbone. Lastly, Sec. E.4 considers the robustness to different noise levels.

E.1   W ISHART S CALE AND C ONTINUAL L EARNING S ENSITIVITY

We sweep a number of hyperparameters in the VBLLs in order to experiment with the hyperparameter
sensitivity of the VBLL models. In particular we sweep the Wishart scale and the re-initialization
rate of the model. The re-initialization rate determines how often the VBLL model is re-initialized
rather than using CL on the backbone and the variational posterior.
The results of the hyperparameter sweep of the Wishart scale and reinitialization rate on Ackley
(5D) can be seen in Fig. 15 and on Pestcontrol in Fig. 16. Please note that we have computed
running averages on these figures to make qualitative assessment easier. We find that both of these
hyperparameters have impact on BO performance, but that the VBLL models are not exceedingly
brittle to the values of these hyperparameters. These results also indicate that continual learning for
VBLLs is an area of interest, not only to reduce fitting time, but also because there are indications
that the VBLL surrogate benefits from not always being re-initialized (see e.g., Fig. 15 (b) for
reinitialization rates 3 and 5). Based on these results we also hypothesise that tuning the Wishart
scale appropriately for the problem at hand may lead to increased model performance.

E.2   I NFLUENCE OF THE W ISHART S CALE ON THE P ERFORMANCE OF C ONTINUAL L EARNING

We can leverage the insights from the previous section also to improve the performance of the
continual learning baseline for logEI. We saw that decreasing the Wishart scale can improve
performance. The default value of the Wishart scale used in all experiments in Section 5.2 and
Section 5.3 was V = 0.01. This induces a hyperprior on the noise with a mass centered at σ 2 = 0.01.
However, expected improvement is known to get stuck for noisy objectives. We can observe that
combined with recursive updates this effect is increased compared to the standard VBLL baseline
which still converges well due to the additional randomness of a new initialization (cf. Figure 3). In
Figure 17, we set the Wishart scale to V = 10−5 for the continual learning baseline. We include
the standard VBLLs as a reference. We can observe that with this tuned Wishart scale, we can
significantly improve the performance on benchmarks such as Pestcontrol. This further shows that
similar to tuning a hyperprior for a GP, tuning hyperparameters can have a benefit.

E.3   M ODEL W IDTH A BLATION

To evaluate the impact of model width on the performance of both the MAP and VBLL Thompson
sampling methods, we conducted a series of experiments on the Ackley5D and Pestcontrol
benchmarks varying the model width.
As illustrated in Fig. 18 (a) and 19 (a), increasing the model capacity (width) of the MAP baseline
results in a significant increase in variance, especially pronounced in the Ackley5D benchmark.
This high variance suggests that the MAP method is highly sensitive to changes in model width,
making it challenging to tune effectively for consistent performance across different tasks.
In comparison, the VBLL method exhibits more robustness to model capacity, as shown in Fig. 18 (b)
and 19 (b). Despite increasing the model width, VBLL does not suffer from the high variance
observed in the MAP baseline. Additionally, the next x distance metric plots in both Fig. 18 and 19
indicates that at later BO stages the VBLL models return to exploring uncertain regions of the input


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       1e-05        0.0001       0.001                       0.01     0.1       1.0   1.5                     2.0    5.0        10.0

               0                                                       1.0


                                                                                                       Accum. Fit Time
                                                     Next x distance
Best value
                                                                                                                         40
             −5
                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                         20
             −10
                       1e-05        0.0001       0.001                 0.0 0.01       0.1       1.0   1.5                 0   2.0    5.0        10.0
                   0                50                                      0           50                                    0         50
               0


                                                                                                       Accum. Fit Time
                                Iteration                              1.0          Iteration                                       Iteration


                                                     Next x distance
                                                                                                                         50
Best value


             −5
                                                                       0.5                                               25
             −10
                                                                       0.0                                                0
                   0                50                                       0          50                                    0         50
                                Iteration                                           Iteration                                       Iteration
                                   (a) Sensitivity to the Wishart scale (noise free (top), noisy (bottom))

                          1         3        5      10                       20      50

               0


                                                                                                       Accum. Fit Time
                                                     Next x distance


                                                                                                                         40
Best value


             −5                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                         20

             −10
                          1         3        5      10                 0.0 20        50                                   0
                   0                50                                     0            50                                    0         50
               0
                                                                                                       Accum. Fit Time



                                Iteration                                           Iteration                                       Iteration
                                                     Next x distance


                                                                                                                         40
Best value


             −5                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                         20
             −10
                                                                       0.0                                                0
                   0                50                                       0          50                                    0         50
                                Iteration                                           Iteration                                       Iteration
                           (b) Sensitivity to network reinitialization rate (noise free (top), noisy (bottom))

                               Figure 15: Hyperparameter sensitivity on the Ackley5D benchmark.


space whereas the MAP models get stuck in local optima accounting for the continous improvement
in best values for the VBLL models. This robustness is advantageous in practical application where
extensive model tuning is unfeasible and hints that VBLL may also perform better when scaling to
larger model sizes.

E.4           M ODEL P ERFORMANCE IN THE P RESENCE OF N OISE

Lastly, we also benchmark the different surrogates on different noise levels. We again only consider
Ackley5D (Fig. 20) and Pestcontrol (Fig. 21). For these experiments, we use the same Wishart
scale of 0.01 for the VBLL baseline. We can observe that all models, besides the MAP baseline in
Ackley5D, are rather robust the change in noise level.


                                                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       1e-05       0.0001       0.001                         0.01     0.1       1.0   1.5                     2.0    5.0        10.0


             −12


                                                                                                        Accum. Fit Time
                                                                          2


                                                        Next x distance
Best value


             −14                                                                                                          50
                                                                          1
             −16
                       1e-05       0.0001       0.001                     0 0.01       0.1       1.0   1.5                 0   2.0    5.0        10.0
                   0               50                                        0           50                                    0         50


                                                                                                        Accum. Fit Time
             −12               Iteration                                  2          Iteration                                       Iteration
                                                        Next x distance
Best value


                                                                                                                          50
             −14
                                                                          1
             −16
                                                                          0                                                0
                   0               50                                         0          50                                    0         50
                               Iteration                                             Iteration                                       Iteration
                                 (a) Sensitivity to the Wishart scale (noise free (top), noisy (bottom))

                          1       3         5      10                         20      50


             −12                                                          2
                                                                                                        Accum. Fit Time
                                                        Next x distance


                                                                                                                          50
Best value


             −14
                                                                          1                                               25
             −16
                          1       3         5      10                         20      50                                   0
                   0               50                                         0          50                                    0         50
                                                                          2
                                                                                                        Accum. Fit Time


             −12               Iteration                                             Iteration                                       Iteration
                                                        Next x distance


                                                                                                                          50
Best value


             −14
                                                                          1                                               25
             −16
                                                                                                                           0
                   0               50                                         0          50                                    0         50
                               Iteration                                             Iteration                                       Iteration
                           (b) Sensitivity to network reinitialization rate (noise free (top), noisy (bottom))

                         Figure 16: Hyperparameter sensitivity on the Pestcontrol benchmark.


                                                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 VBLL                VBLL (ET CL), V = 0.01           VBLL (ET CL), V = 1e − 5

               0                           0                            0
                                                                                                  3
Best value


             −10
 logEI


                                          −5                          −5
                                                                                                  2
             −20
                                                                      −10                         1
                          Branin (2D) −10            Ackley (2D)             Ackley (5D)              Hartmann (6D)
             −30
                             20   VBLL
                                     40              VBLL
                                                        20(ET CL),
                                                               40 V = 0.01       50   VBLL
                                                                                        100 (ET CL), V 50
                                                                                                        = 0.00001
                                                                                                                100
                          Iteration                  Iteration                Iteration                 Iteration
                                                     −12

                                                                                      200
Best value


             6000
 logEI


                                                     −14
             4000                                                                     100
                                                     −16
                                                                                          0
             2000            NN draw (200D)                 Pest control (25D)                    Lunar lander (12D)
                    200         400            600               50          100              0              200
                             Iteration                             Iteration                          Iteration

Figure 17: Classic benchmarks (top) and high-dimensional and non-stationary benchmarks (bottom).
Performance of all surrogates for logEI (top) and TS (bottom).


                                  (a) MAP Thompson sampling with varying model width


                                  (b) VBLL Thompson sampling with varying model width

Figure 18: Comparison of neural network Thompson sampling methods on the Ackley5D bench-
mark with varying model width. The models were trained with width of 64, 128 and 512 neurons.


                                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      (a) MAP Thompson sampling with varying model width


                      (b) VBLL Thompson sampling with varying model width

Figure 19: Comparison of neural network Thompson sampling methods on the Pestcontrol
benchmark with varying model width. The models were trained with width of 64, 128 and 512
neurons.


                      (a) Noisy objective with noise standard deviation of 0.01.


                      (b) Noisy objective with noise standard deviation of 0.1.

 Figure 20: Performance comparison of baseline methods on Ackley5D benchmark with noise.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      (a) Noisy objective with noise standard deviation of 0.01.


                      (b) Noisy objective with noise standard deviation of 0.1.

Figure 21: Performance comparison of baseline methods on Pestcontrol benchmark with noise.


                                                 30
