Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


PAL: S AMPLE -E FFICIENT P ERSONALIZED R EWARD
M ODELING FOR P LURALISTIC A LIGNMENT
 Daiwei Chen, Yi Chen, Aniket Rege, Zhi Wang, and Ramya Korlakai Vinayak
 University of WisconsinβÄ™Madison, Madison, WI, USA


                                                 A BSTRACT
          Foundation models trained on internet-scale data benefit from extensive align-
          ment to human preferences before deployment. However, existing methods typ-
          ically assume a homogeneous preference shared by all individuals, overlook-
          ing the diversity inherent in human values. In this work, we propose a gen-
          eral reward modeling framework for pluralistic alignment (PAL), which incor-
          porates diverse preferences from the ground up. PAL has a modular design
          that leverages commonalities across users while catering to individual person-
          alization, enabling efficient few-shot localization of preferences for new users.
          Extensive empirical evaluation demonstrates that PAL matches or outperforms
          state-of-the-art methods on both text-to-text and text-to-image tasks: on Red-
          dit TL;DR Summary, PAL is 1.7% more accurate for seen users and 36% more
          accurate for unseen users compared to the previous best method, with 100Ο½
          less parameters. On Pick-a-Pic v2, PAL is 2.5% more accurate than the best
          method with 156Ο½ fewer learned parameters. Finally, we provide theoretical
          analysis for generalization of rewards learned via PAL showcasing the reduc-
          tion in number of samples needed per user. Our code is publicly available at
          https://github.com/RamyaLab/pluralistic-alignment.


Figure 1: (a) Using preference data, the PAL framework learns a personalized reward model for each user i,
 (i)
rΈΗ (¬Ζ), which captures the userβÄôs preference for any output x given context xc . (b) PAL models the common
perceptions of similarity across users through a shared representation f (¬Ζ), and represents the individual aspects
of preferences via either a preference point a(i) in PAL-A or a preference mapping z (i) (xc ) in PAL-B. In
particular, we assume a low-rank structure with K prototypical preference points or preference mappings;
see Section 2 for details. (c) PAL enables efficient few-shot preference learning for a new userβÄîonly a K-
dimensional weight vector is learned. This reduces computational cost as well as data needed for generalization.

1      I NTRODUCTION
Foundation models trained on internet data are often not readily deployable and undergo alignment
to human preferences using large amounts of pairwise comparison feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022).
While aligning AI/ML models to human preferences, it is important to consider whose preferences
are we aligning them to? The status quo for popular alignment frameworks is to assume a homo-
geneous preference shared by all humans. However, humans have diverse preferences, values and
opinions (Bakker et al., 2022; Durmus et al., 2024; Nadal & Chatterjee, 2019; Wildavsky, 1987).
The need to capture this plurality in the context of AI alignment was also highlighted recently
by Sorensen et al. (2024). However, the methods suggested therein and other recent works look at


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


learning multiple rewards with a top-down approach, where the system designer decides the number
and axes that one should care about (Cheng et al., 2023; KovacΧ¨ et al., 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022;
Santurkar et al., 2023), e.g., helpfulness vs. harmlessness (Bai et al., 2022b;a; Ganguli et al., 2022;
Rame et al., 2024). In reality, human preferences are more complex than the designer-specified axes
(Bakker et al., 2022), especially on subjective aspects, which leads us to propose the following goal.

 Goal: Develop a sample-efficient, personalized reward modeling framework for pluralistic align-
 ment from the ground up which learns and generalizes to heterogeneous preferences.

Our Contributions. Towards this goal, we make the following contributions:
1. We propose PAL, a novel, sample-efficient, personalizable reward modeling framework for
   pluralistic alignment from the ground up (Section 2). Our modular and versatile framework
   achieves superior performance to the state-of-the-art (SoTA) in both language (Section 3.1)
   and vision (Section 3.2, 3.3) tasks, while utilizing only a fraction of their learnable parameters.
2. PAL reward models achieve competitive performance with simple 2-layer MLPs on top of
   frozen foundation models of varying sizes in practical settings across modalities (Section 3).
   PAL enables democratic alignment via strong accuracy-compute optimality (Rege et al., 2023).
3. PAL is complementary to existing alignment frameworks, and works seamlessly across compute
   budgets (see Figure 2) demonstrating the strength of its flexible and modular design.
4. We provide sample complexity guarantees for generalization towards new preference pre-
   dictions for users in the dataset as well as for unseen users via few-shot learning, in the fully
   connected linear layer setting for one of our models (Section 4.1), and we verify these results
   with extensive numerical simulations (Section 4.2).
The learned PAL reward models can be used flexibly for personalizing downstream task of alignment
through (i) train-time methods such as PPO-based RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2023a)
and (ii) inference time methods via best-of-n sampling such as controlled decoding (Liu et al., 2024;
Mudgal et al., 2024). In addition, the modular nature of PAL has high potential for future adaptability
as it enables seamlessly updating learned reward models via switching data encoders and distance
metrics, or adding new prototypes to account for dynamically changing heterogeneous preferences.
We note that, in this paper, we focus on developing sample-efficient personalizable reward modeling,
and understanding its efficacy via extensive experiments and theoretical analysis.
Background. Our reward modeling builds on the popular preference learning models, the
Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952) and the ideal point model (Coombs,
1950), both of which are special cases of the linear stochastic transitivity (LST) models. We pro-
vide a brief discussion of these models, including their assumptions and limitations here. Let D
denote the dimension of the representation space of the foundation models. Given a context/prompt
xc βàà RD , generative model(s) can produce different outputs, denoted by x βàà RD .1 The LST
models make the following assumption: Suppose each output for the prompt is associated with
a true score sβ΄Ü (x; xc ) βàà R. Given any list of alternates, the true scores lead to a true ranking
of them: for any two alternates, xl is preferred over xr if sβ΄Ü (xl ; xc ) > sβ΄Ü (xr ; xc ). However,
when we elicit comparison feedback from humans, the answers may be noisy and are modeled as,
Pr(xl βâΜ xr |xc ) = h(sβ΄Ü (xl ; xc ) βà£ sβ΄Ü (xr ; xc ))), where h : R βÜ£ [0, 1] is a strictly monotonic
link function that satisfies h(z) = 1 βà£ h(βà£z). In other words, Pr(xl βâΜ xr |xc ) = 1/2 when
sβ΄Ü (xl , xc ) = sβ΄Ü (xr , xc ) and Pr(xl βâΜ xr |xc ) > 1/2 when sβ΄Ü (xl , xc ) > sβ΄Ü (xr , xc ).
The BTL model uses the logistic sigmoid function as the link function:
                                                          1
                    Pr(xl βâΜ xr |xc ) =                                          .                        (1)
                                        1 + exp (sβ΄Ü (xr ; xc ) βà£ sβ΄Ü (xl ; xc ))
On the other hand, the ideal point model uses a latent vector a βàà RD to denote the ideal preference
point of a user, along with (negative) distance-based scoring function; the model is given by,
                           Pr(xl βâΜ xr |xc ) = h(dist2 (xr , a) βà£ dist2 (xl , a)),                        (2)
where h can be any valid link function. The key idea here is that the larger the difference in distances
between the alternates to the ideal point, the easier it is to choose between them, and hence the
   1
     These representations can be taken from penultimate layer(s) of a foundation model. While we use the
same D for the prompt and output for simplicity, this can easily be extended to different dimensional spaces.


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


answer is less noisy. We note that with a sigmoid link function, the ideal point model can be viewed
as the BTL model with a distance-based scoring function.
A key limitation of these approaches is that they assume a single true ranking of the alternates
and model the differences in elicited preference as noisy observations. In reality, the differences in
elicited preferences are not merely noise, instead a reflection of plurality of human preferences.
The ideal point model provides a nat-
ural starting point to incorporate in-
dividual preferences since each user
can be modeled using their own latent
preference. However, the assumption
that we know the distance function
that reflects a human notion of sim-
ilarity of alternates can be too strong
in practice. Further, completely in-
dividualized models devoid of any
shared structure will lead to unneces-
sary burden on per user sample com-
plexity for learning and would be dif-
ficult to generalize. Our aim is to cap-
ture the heterogeneity of preferences
while also leveraging commonalities             Figure 2: On Reddit TL;DR, PAL is accuracy-compute op-
(Section 2), allowing for sample effi-          timal and shows state-of-the-art (SoTA) performance.
cient learning and generalization.

2    PAL: R EWARD M ODELING FOR P LURALISTIC AL IGNMENT
In this section, we describe our proposed personalizable reward modeling framework that captures
commonalities shared across the population which can be learned using the pooled data and indi-
vidual aspects that is learned per user in a sample efficient way. For user i, given a context xc , the
probability of alternate xl being preferred over xr is as follows,
                                                            (i)              (i)
                           Pr(xl βâΜ xr |xc , i) = h(i) (rΈΗ (xr ; xc ) βà£ rΈΗ (xl ; xc )),                       (3)
         (i)                                                                             (i)
where h is any valid link function that can depend on the user, and r (¬Ζ) is the personalized
reward function for user i.2 We do not assume the knowledge of the link function for our learning
algorithms (Section 2.1). We propose two models for the personalized reward function3 :
PAL-A: Diverse preferences modeled via latent ideal preference points. The shared sense of
similarity of different alternates being compared is modeled as Euclidean distance in an unknown
mapped space, captured by f : R2D βÜ£ Rd that jointly maps the output and context, (x; xc ),
to this unknown space. The latent preference of each user i is modeled using an unknown ideal
preference point a(i) βàà R2D . How much the user i values output x for given context xc is modeled
as inversely proportional how far away the mapping of (x; xc ) is from the userβÄôs ideal point. To
further capture the commonality in the preferences among users, each userβÄôs preference points is
                                                                             PK       (i)
modeled as a convex combination of K prototypical points, that is, a(i) := k=1 wk pk where
               (i)           PK       (i)
the weights wk βâΞ 0 and k=1 wk = 1, and {p1 , ..., pK } with pi βàà R2D are K prototypical
ideal preference points. More formally, the personalized reward function and the corresponding
personalized probabilistic preference model is given by,
                                             (i)
                              PAL-A:        rΈΗ (x; xc ) := ||f (x; xc ) βà£ f (a(i) )||22 ,                    (4)
               Pr(xl βâΜ xr |xc , i) = h(||f (xr ; xc ) βà£ f (a(i) )||22 βà£ ||f (xl ; xc ) βà£ f (a(i) )||22 ),    (5)
Denoting P := [p1 , ¬Ζ ¬Ζ ¬Ζ , pK ], each userβÄôs preference point a(i) := Pw(i) , where w(i) :=
  (i)          (i)
[w1 , ¬Ζ ¬Ζ ¬Ζ , wK ]βäΛ , lies in the (K βà£ 1)-dimensional simplex, βàÜKβà£1 .
   2
     We drop the superscript i on h denoting user specificity for simplicity in the rest of discussions, however,
we note that the link function need not be the same for all users and our learning methods are agnostic to them.
   3
     In Appendix B.2, we discuss when to choose one model over the other in practice.


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


PAL-B: Diverse preferences modeled via latent preference mappings. Here each userβÄôs pref-
erence also incorporates the given context and is modeled using an unknown preference mapping
z : RD βÜ£ Rd . The shared sense of similarity of different alternates being compared is modeled
as cosine similarity in an unknown mapped space, f : RD βÜ£ Sdβà£1 . The commonality in the
preferences among users is captured by modeling each userβÄôs preference mapping as a convex com-
                                                          PK   (i)
bination of K prototypical mappings, i.e., z (i) (xc ) = k=1 wk gk (xc ), where {g1 , ..., gK } with
                                                        (i)        PK      (i)
gk : RD βÜ£ Sdβà£1 are the prototypical mappings, wk βâΞ 0 and k=1 wk = 1. Formally, the
personalized reward function and the corresponding probabilistic preference model is given by,
                                            (i)
                               PAL-B:    rΈΗ (x; xc ) := βü®f (x), z (i) (xc )βü©,                      (6)

                   Pri (xl βâΜ xr |xc ) = h βü®f (xr ), z (i) (xc )βü© βà£ βü®f (xl ), z (i) (xc )βü© ,        (7)
For any context xc , denoting G(xc ) := [g1 (xc ), ¬Ζ ¬Ζ ¬Ζ , gK (xc )], each userβÄôs preference mapping of
the given context is, z (i) (xc ) := G(xc )w(i) with w(i) βàà βàÜKβà£1 .
PAL modeling framework is modular, i.e., it provides a systematic way to incorporate shared and
personalized portions of preferences, as well as transparent way to control multiple notions of com-
plexity via cross validation: (i) the complexity of mapping f (and gβÄôs in PAL-B) captures the shared
human notion of similarity between alternates. If the underlying foundation model used to obtain
the representations of outputs and contexts (x and xc ) are rich and semantically meaningful, then
much smaller models suffice in capturing the rewards (Figure 2); (ii) the number of prototypes K
capture the level of heterogeneity of human preferences in the dataset: more diverse preferences
mandate a larger K for good generalization (Figure 5(b); and (iii) in conjunction with the proto-
types, the individualized weights allow for personalization with much fewer samples per user for
both seen and unseen users. This reduces the annotation burden on individuals during data collec-
tion (Figure 5(c)) and the amount of samples needed for few-shot learning for new users arriving on
deployment (Figure 3). We illustrate the PAL framework in Figure 1 and Figure B.2 (Appendix B).

2.1    L EARNING PAL MODELS FROM D IVERSE P REFERENCES
           n                         oN
                             (i)
Let D := {(xl , xr ; xc , y)j }m   i
                                 j=1      be a dataset of preference comparisons, where mi denotes
                                      i=1
the number of pairs answered by user i, and y is the answer given to the pair (y = βà£1 if xl is
preferred, y = 1 otherwise). This can be looked at as a supervised learning problem with binary
labels. The goal of the learning algorithm in the PAL framework is to learn the mappings and
prototypes shared across the population, and for each user i, the weights w(i) βàà βàÜKβà£1 . For PAL-A,
the mapping f and the prototypes {pk }K    k=1 are shared, while for PAL-B, the mapping f and the
prototype mappings {gk }K  k=1 are shared. These shared portions are learned using data pooled from
all users while the user specific weights are learned using each individual userβÄôs preferences.
Given the comparison dataset D, loss function β³™ : R βÜ£ [0, 1], model class for fΈΗ and prototypi-
cal mappings {g1 , ..., gK }, the learning algorithm for PAL-B starts by randomly initializing these
functions, and user weights w(i) βàà βàÜKβà£1 , i = 1, ..., N . Then, in each iteration until convergence
criteria, the following steps are repeated,
                                   n                o
                                                    (i)
βÄΔ Sample a random mini-batch (xl , xr ; xc , y)j  of comparison data from D.
βÄΔ For each comparison j from user i:
  βÄ™ Compute user ideal mappings: z (i) (xc ) := [g1 (xc ) . . . gK (xc )] ¬Ζ w(i) .
                              (i)                           (i)
  βÄ™ Compute distances: dl,j = βü®fΈΗ (xl ) , z (i) (xc )βü©, dr,j = βü®fΈΗ (xr ) , z (i) (xc )βü©.

                      (i)                            (i)     (i)
  βÄ™ Compute loss: œàj (xl , xr ; xc , y) = β³™ y ¬Ζ (dl,j βà£ dr,j ) .
                                                P        (i)
βÄΔ Update Step: argminΈΗ,{g1 ,...,gK },{w(i) }N
                                            i=1   i,j œàj (xl , xr ; xc , y).
Learning steps are similar for PAL-A. See Appendix B for pseudocode details.

2.2   G ENERALIZATION OF PREFERENCE PREDICTIONS FOR seen VERSUS unseen USERS

When learning a reward function from diverse preferences, there are two types of generalization to
consider: Predicting preferences for (1) unseen pairs for seen users, i.e., the people for whom the


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


weights have already been learned from the training data; (2) unseen users, i.e., people whose data
was not part of the training data at all. For such new users, a portion of their data will be used
to learn weights to localize them within the learned model while keeping the shared mappings and
prototypes fixed. We also note that the weighted combination of the prototypes, i.e., an average of all
the seen users, can be used as the zero-shot ideal point for new users (e.g. Netflix recommendations
for new accounts). However, we emphasize that it is important for reward functions to generalize to
unseen users and PAL provides a natural way to localize new users, as we demonstrate in Section 3.1.
Section 4.1 provides theoretical guarantees on the per-user sample complexity of PAL for few-shot
generalization to unseen users.

3     E XPERIMENTS ON R EAL DATASETS
In this section, we verify the following claims through extensive empirical evaluation:
      C1. PAL can effectively capture the diversity of user preferences and outperform status-quo
          homogeneous reward models.
      C2. Compared to existing pluralistic reward modeling methods, PAL can achieve state-of-the-
          art (SoTA) performance with significantly fewer parameters.
      C3. PAL works for both text-to-text (T2T) and text-to-image (T2I) tasks.
      C4. PAL demonstrates strong few-shot generalization to new, unseen users.
We employ two strategies for defining and training the learnable mapping f between the embed-
dings from a foundation model and latent space. In the Tiny strategy, f is a simple two-layer MLP
operating on a frozen foundation model. In the Large strategy, f is a combination of the founda-
tion model and a two-layer MLP, with both components being learnable. Models employing these
strategies are referred to as PAL-A-Tiny/ PAL-B-Tiny and PAL-A-Large/ PAL-B-Large
respectively. Appendix D.1 describes the general training procedure of our algorithm.
We perform experiments on datasets in different domains: the Reddit TL;DR Summary dataset (Sec-
tion 3.1) and the Pick-a-Pic dataset (Section 3.2). Due to limitations in currently available datasets
for pluralistic alignment, which we highlight in Section 3.2, we also created semi-synthetic datasets,
Pick-a-Filter (Section 3.3) and Persona (Appendix D.4), to further validate the above claims.

3.1    R EDDIT TL;DR S UMMARY (T EXT- TO -T EXT )
Dataset. Reddit TL;DR Summary dataset curated by Sti-
ennon et al. (2020) contains a series of preferences over
summaries generated by language models. For each pair
of summaries, xl and xr , a labeler i determines if xl is
preferred or not. Each pair is also accompanied by the
unique identifier of the labeler. We used the variant of
the TL;DR dataset proposed by Li et al. (2024), which
uses the summary length as the preference. The major-
ity group prefers longer summaries while the minority
prefers shorter summaries.
Setup. We train PAL with sentence embeddings from
foundation models including OPT-350M (Zhang et al.,
2022), DistilBERT (Sanh et al., 2019), BGE-M3 (Chen
et al., 2024), and gte-Qwen2-1.5B (Li et al., 2023), Figure 3: On Reddit TL;DR, PAL gen-
which make up Large and Tiny variants depending on eralizes well to unseen data using just
their size (#parameters). The loss design follows the typ- 20 samples per unseen user (few-shot).
ical loss of the Reward Model, we use the cumulative loss
which weights the per-token reward loss. Details of the loss function, hyperparameter setting, un-
seen dataset, and training setup are deferred to Appendix D.3.
Baselines. We compare to personalized (Li et al., 2024) and vanilla DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024).
Results. We train our model with 5 different seeds and report the mean and standard devia-
tion. Figure 2 shows the performance of PAL with foundation models of different sizes. PAL
shows strong accuracy-compute optimality with no hyperparameter tuning: compared to SoTA,
PAL-B-Large ( gte-Qwen2-1.5B) is 5.9% more accurate on seen users with 4Ο½ less param-
eters while PAL-B-Tiny (DistilBERT) is on-par with 1000Ο½ fewer parameters. Furthermore,


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: On Reddit TL;DR Sum-
mary, PAL-B-Large outperforms
SoTA P-DPO on seen users (+1.7%)
and unseen users (+36%) with 6.3
billion fewer parameters. Note that
we use only 10 samples per unseen
user to localize their weights.
Model                   Seen Acc (%)   Unseen Acc (%)
Vanilla DPO             58.91          55.37
P-DPO Individual        91.04          55.34
P-DPO Cluster (K = 5)   91.12          54.55
PAL-B-Tiny (K = 2)      79.54 ¬± 0.54   74.72 ¬± 0.54
PAL-B-Large (K = 2)     92.82 ¬± 0.95   91.63 ¬± 0.54

                                                        Figure 4: On Pick-a-Filter, PAL-B-Tiny outperforms homoge-
                                                        neous models as user groups become more heterogeneous (βÜë Έ≤).

Figure 3 illustrates PALβÄôs ability to generalize effectively to unseen users in few-shot settings. As the
number of samples per unseen user increases, PAL progressively adapts to their preferences. With
just 20 samples per unseen user, PAL achieves performance comparable to that of seen users. Addi-
tionally, as depicted in Figure D.3 (Appendix D), PAL exhibits superior performance over baseline
models on unseen users, even when provided with as few as 2 samples.
Table 1 reports the performance of PAL-B-Large (OPT-350M) compared to SoTA P-DPO ( (Li
et al., 2024)). We observe that PAL, with around 6.3 billion fewer parameters, is 1.7% more accurate
on seen users, and 36% more accurate on unseen users (C2, C4). Figure 3 shows that for new users,
PAL can match seen user performance with only 20 samples, showing its promising potential to
flexibly adapt to new users. We further highlight PALβÄôs strong few-shot generalization to unseen
users compared to baselines in Figure D.3 in the Appendix. Lastly, we also show exhaustive results
for all our model configurations based on OPT-350M in Table D.1 and D.3 (Appendix D.3).
3.2      P ICK - A -P IC (T EXT- TO -I MAGE )
In this section, we examine how agnostic PAL is to data modality (C3) via the Pick-a-Pic
dataset (Kirstain et al., 2024). Popular T2I reward models usually require fine-tuning foundation
models with billions of parameters (Wu et al., 2023b; Kirstain et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024). We
show that PAL achieves competitive performance or SoTA performance while having significantly
fewer parameters than baselines (C2).
Dataset. The Pick-a-Pic dataset (Kirstain et al., 2024) is a large, open dataset for human feedback
in T2I generation. There are two versions of Pick-a-Pic, v1 and v2, where v2 extends v1. To ensure
a fair model evaluation, we divide the v2 test set into βÄ€no-leakageβÄù and βÄ€leakageβÄù subsets due to
overlap (βÄ€leakageβÄù) with the v1 train set. We only consider the 18391 samples with no preference
ties, i.e. one generated image is always preferred to the other. Out of these, 10587 samples (βàΦ 58%)
overlap with the training and validation sets of v1, which was used to train PickScore Kirstain et al.
(2024) βÄ™ we call this the v2 βÄ€leakageβÄù subset. The remaining 7804 test samples (βàΦ 42%) in v2 do
not overlap with v1 train and val, ensuring they are distinct for evaluation purposes βÄ™ we call this the
v2 βÄ€no-leakageβÄù subset.
Setup. We train PAL-B with logistic loss on both v1 and v2 for 10 epochs on top of CLIP-H/14 or
PickScore (Kirstain et al., 2024) embeddings. We discuss hyperparameter tuning in Appendix D.5.
Baselines. We compare to SoTA PickScore (Kirstain et al., 2024) and a vanilla CLIP-H/14.
Results. Table 2 shows (a) PAL matches SoTA PickScore when trained on V1 with 165Ο½ fewer
parameters (b) PAL exceeds SoTA performance on v2-no-leakage (i.e. fair comparison) by 2%
when training on v1, and by 2.5% if training on v2 (C1, C3). Training PAL from βÄ€scratchβÄù i.e. with
CLIP-H embeddings, outperforms training on PickScore embeddings (which were trained on v1).
We note that PAL-B-Tiny (βàΦ6M params) exceeds SoTA performance while training on a single
RTX 4090 GPU (see Appendix E), whereas PickScore (βàΦ1B params) is trained with 8Ο½A100 GPUs
βÄ™ highlighting the suitability of PAL for efficient and democratic reward modeling (C2).
Remark. Since the data collection process for existing datasets involves the usage of strict
rubrics (Stiennon et al., 2020; Kirstain et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2023b), labeler performance mon-
itoring (Xu et al., 2024), and a disproportionate amount of data provided by a small fraction of


                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Seen user test accuracy of PAL compared to baselines on Pick-a-Pic v2. Entries with asteriskβà½ have
inflated accuracy due to the V2 test set overlap with V1 train (See dataset details in Section 3.2).
                                                                                    V2 Test Accuracy (%)
         Model               Params      Trainset    V1 Test Accuracy (%)
                                                                                 No-Leakage            Leakage
       CLIP-H/14              986M             -              59.23                 62.57              58.59
      ImageReward             447M             -              61.10                   -                   -
        HPS v2.1              986M             -              66.70                   -                   -
        PickScore             986M            V1              71.85                 68.04              74.16*
 PAL-A-Tiny (CLIP-H)          8.4M            V1            69.29 ¬± 0.6               -                 -
 PAL-B-Tiny (CLIP-H)          6.3M            V1            71.13 ¬± 0.3         70.02 ¬± 0.39      79.32 ¬± 1.68*
 PAL-B-Tiny (CLIP-H)          6.3M            V2                 -              70.51 ¬± 0.22      68.67 ¬± 0.51
PAL-B-Tiny (Pickscore)        6.3M            V2                 -              70.16 ¬± 0.19      74.79 ¬± 0.13*

users, these datasets may not be heterogeneous. We note that a strict rubric leads to uniformity as
it essentially crowdsources the criteria of the rubric instead of eliciting the preferences of the users.
Therefore, even using PAL with K = 1, we can surpass existing SoTA performance. These results
highlight the need for more nuanced approaches to collect datasets that elicit diverse opinions.
3.3   P ICK - A -F ILTER (T EXT- TO -I MAGE )
As PickScore has been shown to lack significant heterogeneity (Kirstain et al., 2024), we artifi-
cially inject plurality to create the Pick-a-Filter dataset, and show that PAL significantly surpasses
homogeneous reward models when pluralistic preferences are present (C1, C2, C3).
Dataset. Motivated by a natural human color preference distribution Palmer & Schloss (2010),
we choose adding different color filters to the generated images as the mechanism by which we
explicitly βÄ€injectβÄù preference diversity into the v1 dataset (group 1 prefers βÄôredβÄô tones and group
2 prefers βÄôblueβÄô tones). To avoid the model latching on purely to color features when learning
preferences, we use a hyperparameter called mixture ratio Έ≤ = Nf /No , where Nf is the number of
v1 pairs we choose to apply filters on, and No is the total number of original v1 pairs. The larger the
Έ≤, the more color-filtered v1 pairs in the training set. We show and discuss our careful construction
of Pick-a-Filter in Figure D.7 and Appendix D respectively.
Setup. We train PAL-B-Tiny with logistic loss on the Pick-a-Filter dataset with different mixture
ratios. Detailed training setups are deferred to Appendix D.6.
Baselines. We compare PAL to CLIP-H, following Kirstain et al. (2024), as well as two strong T2I
reward models: ImageReward (Xu et al., 2024) and HPS v2 (Wu et al., 2023b). Note that we cannot
compare to PickScore as its train set overlaps with Pick-a-FilterβÄôs val set (leakage).
Results. Figure 4 shows that PAL-B-Tiny can learn diverse user preference groups across mixture
ratios (C1, C3). We can view Έ≤ as indicating how much the two user groups prefer their respective
color filters (higher Έ≤ βÜ£ affinity for filters). PAL significantly outperforms the homogeneous reward
model in predicting user preferences βÄ™ at Έ≤ =1, PAL achieves 95.2% test accuracy compared to
75.4% from the homogeneous reward model (C2).

4     S AMPLE COMPLEXITY FOR LEARNING REWARDS UNDER PAL MODELING
In this section, we shed light on the per-user sample complexity of PAL for (1) generalization to un-
seen pairs involving known users, and (2) few-shot generalization to unseen users. We present the-
oretical guarantees in Section 4.1, and empirical results from numerical simulations in Section 4.2.

4.1 T HEORETICAL G UARANTEES
To shed light on the benefits of using mixture modeling approach, we provide theoretical analysis of
PAL-A with fully-connected linear layer in neural network mapping f . For simplicity of exposition,
we subsume the context/prompt vectors into the    item  embeddings, treating (x; xc ) as x βàà RD .
Consider a class linear transformations, F βä² f : R βÜ£ RD f (x) = Ax, A βàà RDΟ½D . Then,
                                                      D

the difference of scores between two items for a user with ideal point a = Pw is given by
                  2                       2
βàΞf (xl ) βà£ f (a)βàΞ2 βà£ βàΞf (xr ) βà£ f (a)βàΞ2 = (xl βà£ a)βäΛ AβäΛ A(xl βà£ a) βà£ (xr βà£ a)βäΛ AβäΛ A(xr βà£ a)
                                              = xβäΛ   βäΛ        βäΛ   βäΛ                  βäΛ  βäΛ
                                                 l (A A)xl βà£ xr (A A)xr βà£ 2(xl βà£ xr ) (A A)Pw.


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Observe that the right-hand side of the first equality represents the difference between the squared
Mahalanobis distances4 from xl to a and from xr to a, where the Mahalanobis distance is defined by
AβäΛ A. In other words, the problem is equivalent to simultaneously learning a Mahalanobis distance
and the user ideal points (Xu & Davenport, 2020; Canal et al., 2022).
Now, let M := AβäΛ A and Q := βà£2MP. The difference in scores can then be written as:
                            2                    2
           βàΞf (xl ) βà£ f (a)βàΞ2 βà£ βàΞf (xr ) βà£ f (a)βàΞ2 = xβäΛ        βäΛ                 βäΛ
                                                      l Mxl βà£ xr Mxr + (xl βà£ xr ) Qw.

Given these reparameterizations from f to M and from P to Q, for the remainder
of this section, we assume that the reward
                                                    modeling problem is defined over M βàà
  M βàà RDΟ½D : βàΞMβàΞF βâΛ ΈΕM , M βΣΑ 0 , Q βàà Q βàà RDΟ½K : βàΞQk βàΞ2 βâΛ ΈΕv βàÄk βàà [K] , and w(i) βàà
βàÜKβà£1 for each user i. In addition, we let β³™ : R βÜ£ [0, 1] be an L-Lipschitz loss function.
Work of Canal et al. (2022, Theorem 3.1) shows that a set of N βâΞ β³Π(D2 ) known users, the per-
user sample complexity for generalization to unseen pairs of items is OΧÉ (D). Key questions remain:
Does our mixture modeling lead to improved per-user sample complexity, e.g., OΧÉ(K)? Can we char-
acterize PALβÄôs generalization ability to unseen users, and determine the per-user sample complexity
for few-shot localization of preference points (going beyond analysis in Canal et al. (2022))?
Generalization for seen users and unseen pairs. Without loss of generality, let us assume that each
                                                         (i) (i) (i)   m
user answers m preference comparisons. Let Si = xj,l , xj,r , yj        j=1
                                                                            denote an i.i.d. sample
                                     SN
of size m from user i, and let S = i=1 Si represent the dataset from N users. Given S, for any
(M, Q, {w(i) }N                                                (i) N
              i=1 ), we define its empirical risk RΧ²S (M, Q, {w }i=1 ) as
              1 X   (i)   (i)βäΛ           (i)     (i)βäΛ    (i)    (i)   (i)

                      β³™ yj xj,l Mxj,l βà£ xj,r Mxj,r + (xj,l βà£ xj,r )βäΛ Qw(i) .                    (8)
             Nm
                    (i,j)

                                                                       βà½   βà½     βà½(i) N
Let (MΧ², QΧ², {wΧ²(i) }N
                     i=1 ) minimize the empirical risk given D, and (M , Q , {w      }i=1 ) minimize
                                  (i) N
the true risk, ES [RΧ²S (M, Q, {w }i=1 )]. Theorem 1 below provides an upper bound on the excess
risk. All proofs are deferred to Appendix C; see Section C.1 for the proof of Theorem 1.
Theorem 1. (Seen user generalization) Suppose K < min(N, D), and for each comparison, the
user is asked to compare two items drawn i.i.d. from the uniform distribution on the unit sphere,
Unif(SDβà£1 ). Then, with probability at least 1 βà£ Έ¥,
                                                 βà½   βà½     βà½(i) N
       ES [RΧ²S (MΧ², QΧ², {wΧ²(i) }N
                                i=1 )]βà£ES [RΧ²S (M , Q , {w     }i=1 )]
                                                 s                                    s
                                                    2 + KN + K ΈΕ 2                      2 log 2Έ¥

                                                   ΈΕM       D          v
                                          βâΛ 12L                          log(N + D) +            .
                                                           Nm                            Nm

To interpret this result in a practical setting, let us further assume
                                                                  βàö     that the entries of Mβà½ and Qβà½
are bounded by some constant, and set ΈΕM = D and           ΈΕv = D, as done in (Canal et al., 2022).
                                        q
                                           D 2 +KD+KN
Then, the above bound becomes OΧÉ                Nm         , where OΧÉ hides the parameters Έ¥ and L and
ignores logarithmic terms. Observe first that the bound decays as either the number of users N or
thepnumber of samples per user m increases. In addition, when N βâΞ β³Π(D2 ), the bound simplifies to
OΧÉ( K/m), which implies a per-user sample complexity of OΧÉ (K). This contrasts with the existing
result of OΧÉ (D) without mixture modeling (Canal et al., 2022, Theorem 3.1, see also Section C.1.3
in the Appendix). The result captures the intuition that if the users amortize the cost of learning the
common M and Q, then each user only needs to individually learn their weights w(i) βàà βàÜKβà£1 .
Generalization for unseen users. So far, we have discussed the generalization ability of PAL to
unseen pairs among known users, but how well does our model generalize to new users, whose data
was not included in the training set at all? In this work, we provide the first answer to this question in
the context of preference alignment under the ideal point model, leveraging the framework and tools
for multi-task learning and learning-to-learn (Maurer et al., 2016) (Remark C.6 of the Appendix).
   4
    The Mahalanobis
            p       distance defined by a symmetric, positive semidefinite matrix M is given by
dM (x, y) := (x βà£ y)βäΛ M(x βà£ y).


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Suppose there is a distribution ΈΖ over a set of users U. Given any representation M and prototypes
                                                        m
Q, along with an i.i.d. sample S = (xj,l , xj,r , yj ) j=1 of m comparisons from some new user
u βàà U, the natural approach is to few-shot learn the weights that minimize the empirical loss:
                                 m
                           1 X
                                 β³™ yj xβäΛ            βäΛ                         βäΛ

       wΧÉS;M,Q := argmin               j,l Mxj,l βà£ xj,r Mxj,r + (xj,l βà£ xj,r ) Qw    ;
                    wβààβàÜKβà£1 m j=1

and one can evaluate the expected performance of (M, Q, wΧÉS;M,Q ) for user u:
      LΧÉ(M, Q; u, S) := E(xl ,xr ,y) β³™ y xβäΛ          βäΛ                   βäΛ

                                          l Mxl βà£ xr Mxr + (xl βà£ xr ) QwΧÉS;M,Q     .
                                                      unseen
                  h of (M, Q) iis defined as:L user (M, Q) := Eu [L(M, Q; u)], where
The unseen-user risk
L(M, Q; u) := ES LΧÉ(M, Q; u, S) . Suppose that for training, N users are drawn according to
ΈΖ, and each answers m comparison queries, resulting in the dataset, S1 βàΣ . . . βàΣ SN . Let (MΧ², QΧ²) be
components of the minimizer of the empirical risk given by Eq. (8). Theorem 2 provides an upper
bound on its excess risk when compared with

 (Mβà½ , Qβà½ ) := argmin Eu      min E(xl ,xr ,y) β³™ y xβäΛ            βäΛ                       βäΛ

                                                      l Mx  l βà£ xr  Mx  r +   (x l βà£ xr )  Qw       ,
                 M,Q        wβààβàÜKβà£1

which assumes oracle knowledge of each userβÄôs preferences. See Section C.2 for its proof.
Theorem 2. (Unseen user generalization) Suppose K < min(N, d), and for each comparison,
the user is asked to compare two items that are drawn i.i.d. from the uniform distribution on the unit
sphere, Unif(SDβà£1 ). Then, with probability at least 1 βà£ Έ¥ over S1 , . . . , SN ,
                                                   r                        r         s
        unseen            unseen                       2
                                                     ΈΕM + K ΈΕv  2 2            KΈΕv2     8 log 4Έ¥
      L user (MΧ², QΧ²) βà£ L user (Mβà½ , Qβà½ ) βâΛ 18L                     + 3L            +            .
                                                           N                   Dm          N

                                       βàö
                                                                              q                 q
                                                                                  D 2 +DK 2      K
Again, let us set ΈΕM = D and ΈΕv =          D. The above bound becomes OΧÉ               N    +    m .
Intuitively, the first term captures how well the common mapping and the prototypes learned on
seen usersβÄô dataset translate to new unseen users. This term decays as the number of seen users N
increases. The second term characterizes how well our few-shot preference localization for a new
unseen user generalizes to unseen pairs of this user. This term indicates a sample complexity of
OΧÉ (K) and suggests efficient generalization, especially since K can be quite small in practice.

4.2   N UMERICAL S IMULATION

In this section, we carefully and systematically examine how PAL adapts to a plurality of preferences
via numerical simulations. To this end, we construct a synthetic, heterogeneous dataset similar to
(Canal et al., 2022), where each item x βàΦ N (0, d1 I) and the user weight W βàΦ N (0, I). The
true f β΄Ü is a linear mapping from Rd βÜ£ Rd . Let K β΄Ü denote the number of user prototypes and let
              β΄Ü
                                                                          1
P = {pi }K  i=1 denote the set of user prototypes, where each pi βàΦ N (0, d I). We assume that the
distance between any pair of user prototypes is lower bounded by some value Έ¥.
Experiment Setting. We study a mixture setting, where each user is located in the convex hull of
P. Let ai denote the ith user. To learn this userβÄôs ideal point, we draw n pairs of items {xl , xr }
uniformly at random and assign the userβÄôs preference as sign(βàΞf βà½ (xl ) βà£ f βà½ (ai )βàΞ2 βà£ βàΞf βà½ (xr ) βà£
f βà½ (ai )βàΞ2 ). We generate datasets with different K β΄Ü , K, latent dimension d, number of prototypes,
and number of samples per user n. We evaluate PAL-A on these synthetic datasets.
Results. Figure 5 (a) shows that PAL can learn the user ideal points in the representation space.
Figure 5 (b) shows that the homogeneous reward model (K = 1) can only achieve sub-optimal per-
formance when diverse preferences exist. Incorporating plurality via multiple learnable prototypes
with PAL, we gain a significant 7% accuracy boost. Figure 5 (c) shows that as we increase the num-
ber of training samples for seen users, PAL achieves higher test accuracy, and is also more accurate
in capturing the true number of prototypes in the dataset. Figure 5 (d) presents PALβÄôs potential to
generalize to new unseen users via few-shot learning to only learn their weights. We also studied a


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: (a) shows that PAL can accurately capture the user prototypes and each userβÄôs ideal point. We set
d = 2 for visualization of the userβÄôs ideal point. (b) illustrates the performance of PAL on diverse preference
datasets. (c) empirically highlights the importance of the number of samples per seen user and the number of
prototypes in PAL. (d) demonstrates the sample efficiency of the PAL framework on unseen users. With as few
as 40 samples, we can still achieve performance comparable to that of seen users.

partition setting, where each user is drawn from P uniformly at random. Figure D.1 in the Appendix
D.2 shows the learned ideal points under partition setting have similar trends to the mixture setting.
To further validate our findings, we also examine PALβÄôs generalization properties via Anthropic
personas (Perez et al., 2022), which we restrict to Appendix D.4 for brevity.


5    R ELATED W ORK

We provide a brief summary of related works here, and a more detailed version in Appendix A. Pop-
ular foundation models (Achiam et al., 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023) typically
use RLHF (Azar et al., 2024; Ethayarajh et al., 2024; Rafailov et al., 2024; Stiennon et al., 2020) to
align models after pretraining. These methods assume homogeneity either explicitly or implicitly by
using BTL-model (Bradley & Terry, 1952). Consensus-based methods (Bakker et al., 2022) aims to
find agreement among labelers for specific designed-defined goals (Bai et al., 2022b;a; Irvine et al.,
2023; Ganguli et al., 2022), which prioritize the universal preference (and biases) induced by the la-
belers (Cheng et al., 2023; KovacΧ¨ et al., 2023; Santurkar et al., 2023). Many works have highlighted
that in reality, humans have diverse preferences (Nadal & Chatterjee, 2019; Sorensen et al., 2024;
Wildavsky, 1987). However, approaches to suit this heterogeneity are still top-down in nature (Rame
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b; Wu et al., 2024), where the system designer makes learning deci-
sions apriori, such as collecting datasets to train diverse rewards or multi-objective training. Li et al.
(2024) propose personalized reward modeling with a cluster structure for users in the dataset, but
model unseen users homogeneously. There is a rich literature on preference learning (FuΧàrnkranz
& HuΧàllermeier, 2010) and metric learning (Bellet et al., 2022). For the ideal point model, several
works (Ding, 2016; Huber, 1976; Jamieson & Nowak, 2011; Massimino & Davenport, 2021; Singla
et al., 2016) study sample complexity of ranking and localization when the distance is known, and
some recent works (Canal et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024c; Xu & Davenport, 2020) have studied
simultaneous learning of the Mahalanobis distance which is equivalent to learning a common linear
map along with unknown user preference point(s).


6    C ONCLUSIONS

We propose PAL, a novel framework for modeling personalizable rewards for pluralistic alignment
(Section 2) which leverages shared structures across the population while learning to personalize in
a sample-efficient way. We demonstrate that PAL is agnostic to modality, showing strong results
on both text (Section 3.1) and image (Section 3.2, 3.3) tasks. We also provide sample complexity
bounds for generalization of the learned rewards to both seen and unseen users (Section 4.1). Our
work aids in building much-needed foundations toward plurality for the alignment of ML/AI mod-
els. Our experiments also highlight the limitations of many real human preference datasets that are
collected with rubrics that make the dataset homogeneous, and call for a more nuanced approach to
data collection in the future (Section 3.2). While the mixture modeling approach of PAL is flexible,
a limitation of using it in a static setting is that it will not generalize to new users who fall outside the
convex hull of learned prototypes (Section 4.2). A more pragmatic and exciting approach would be
a continually learning prototypes to adapt to new users on the fly, which we leave for future work.


                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

PAL makes a strong case for open, democratic alignment by enabling training alignment mod-
ules with cheap encoders on simple GPUs in relatively short wall clock time (e.g. see Sec-
tion 3.2, Results and Appendix E). To enable reproducibility and the practical utility of PAL for
downstream tasks, we describe our algorithm in Appendix B, and give detailed experiment setups
in Appendix D. We provide exhaustive hyper-parameter details for our experiments (Tables D.2
in Appendix D). We also attempt to provide insights over our design choices (which configu-
rations worked and which didnβÄôt throughout the course of our experimentation) to aid others in
using PAL for their own data and tasks. Lastly, our code and datasets are openly available at
https://github.com/RamyaLab/pluralistic-alignment.

8   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Zaid Harchaoui for providing feedback on the manuscript. We would also like to thank the
anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback, which helped polish this paper. This work was
also partially supported by NSF grants NCS-FO 2219903 and NSF CAREER Award CCF 2238876.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Robert J. Adler. An Introduction to Continuity, Extrema, and Related Topics for General Gaussian
  Processes, volume 12 of Lecture Notes-Monograph Series. Institute of Mathematical Statistics,
  1990.

Rie Kubota Ando, Tong Zhang, and Peter Bartlett. A framework for learning predictive structures
  from multiple tasks and unlabeled data. Journal of machine learning research, 6(11), 2005.

AI Anthropic. The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku. Claude-3 Model Card, 2024.

Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland,
 Michal Valko, and Daniele Calandriello. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learn-
 ing from human preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
 pp. 4447βÄ™4455. PMLR, 2024.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022a.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
  lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b.

Michiel Bakker, Martin Chadwick, Hannah Sheahan, Michael Tessler, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham,
 Jan Balaguer, Nat McAleese, Amelia Glaese, John Aslanides, Matt Botvinick, et al. Fine-tuning
 language models to find agreement among humans with diverse preferences. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 35:38176βÄ™38189, 2022.

AureΧ¹lien Bellet and Amaury Habrard. Robustness and generalization for metric learning. Neuro-
  computing, 151:259βÄ™267, 2015.

AureΧ¹lien Bellet, Amaury Habrard, and Marc Sebban. Metric learning. Synthesis lectures on artificial
  intelligence and machine learning, 9(1):1βÄ™151, 2015.

AureΧ¹lien Bellet, Amaury Habrard, and Marc Sebban. Metric learning. Springer Nature, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324βÄ™345, 1952.
Mark Braverman and Elchanan Mossel.          Noisy sorting without resampling.      arXiv preprint
 arXiv:0707.1051, 2007.
Gregory Canal, Blake Mason, Ramya Korlakai Vinayak, and Robert Nowak. One for all: Simul-
  taneous metric and preference learning over multiple users. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.03609,
  2022.
Jianlv Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. Bge m3-embedding:
   Multi-lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text embeddings through self-knowledge dis-
   tillation, 2024.
Myra Cheng, Esin Durmus, and Dan Jurafsky. Marked personas: Using natural language prompts
 to measure stereotypes in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18189, 2023.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017.
Clyde H Coombs. Psychological scaling without a unit of measurement. Psychological review, 57
  (3):145, 1950.
Cody Ding. Evaluating change in behavioral preferences: Multidimensional scaling single-ideal
  point model. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development, 49(1):77βÄ™88, 2016.
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Nir Levine, Daniel J Mankowitz, Jerry Li, Cosmin Paduraru, Sven Gowal,
  and Todd Hester. Challenges of real-world reinforcement learning: definitions, benchmarks and
  analysis. Machine Learning, 110(9):2419βÄ™2468, 2021.
Esin Durmus, Karina Nguyen, Thomas I. Liao, Nicholas Schiefer, Amanda Askell, Anton Bakhtin,
  Carol Chen, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Nicholas Joseph, Liane Lovitt, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Orowa Sikder, Alex Tamkin, Janel Thamkul, Jared Kaplan, Jack Clark, and Deep Ganguli.
  Towards measuring the representation of subjective global opinions in language models, 2024.
Brian Eriksson. Learning to top-k search using pairwise comparisons. In Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 265βÄ™273. PMLR, 2013.
Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto: Model
  alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01306, 2024.
Johannes FuΧàrnkranz and Eyke HuΧàllermeier. Preference learning and ranking by pairwise compari-
  son. In Preference learning, pp. 65βÄ™82. Springer, 2010.
Deep Ganguli, Liane Lovitt, Jackson Kernion, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Ben
  Mann, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer, Kamal Ndousse, et al. Red teaming language models to
  reduce harms: Methods, scaling behaviors, and lessons learned. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07858,
  2022.
Wassily Hoeffding. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables. The collected
 works of Wassily Hoeffding, pp. 409βÄ™426, 1994.
Joel Huber. Ideal point models of preference. ACR North American Advances, 1976.
David R Hunter. Mm algorithms for generalized bradley-terry models. The annals of statistics, 32
  (1):384βÄ™406, 2004.
Robert Irvine, Douglas Boubert, Vyas Raina, Adian Liusie, Ziyi Zhu, Vineet Mudupalli, Aliaksei
  Korshuk, Zongyi Liu, Fritz Cremer, Valentin Assassi, et al. Rewarding chatbots for real-world
  engagement with millions of users. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06135, 2023.
Kevin G Jamieson and Robert Nowak. Active ranking using pairwise comparisons. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiaming Ji, Tianyi Qiu, Boyuan Chen, Borong Zhang, Hantao Lou, Kaile Wang, Yawen Duan,
   Zhonghao He, Jiayi Zhou, Zhaowei Zhang, et al. Ai alignment: A comprehensive survey. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2310.19852, 2023.
Claire Kenyon-Mathieu and Warren Schudy. How to rank with few errors. In Proceedings of the
  thirty-ninth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 95βÄ™103, 2007.
Yuval Kirstain, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Shahbuland Matiana, Joe Penna, and Omer Levy. Pick-
  a-pic: An open dataset of user preferences for text-to-image generation. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
MatthaΧàus Kleindessner and Ulrike Luxburg. Uniqueness of ordinal embedding. In Conference on
 Learning Theory, pp. 40βÄ™67. PMLR, 2014.
Grgur KovacΧ¨, Masataka Sawayama, ReΧ¹my Portelas, CeΧ¹dric Colas, Peter Ford Dominey, and Pierre-
  Yves Oudeyer. Large language models as superpositions of cultural perspectives. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.07870, 2023.
Brian Kulis. Metric learning: A survey. Foundations and Trends¬° in Machine Learning, 5(4):
  287βÄ™364, 2013.
Xinyu Li, Zachary C Lipton, and Liu Leqi. Personalized language modeling from personalized
  human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05133, 2024.
Zehan Li, Xin Zhang, Yanzhao Zhang, Dingkun Long, Pengjun Xie, and Meishan Zhang. Towards
  general text embeddings with multi-stage contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03281,
  2023.
Zhixuan Liu, Zhanhui Zhou, Yuanfu Wang, Chao Yang, and Yu Qiao. Inference-time language
  model alignment via integrated value guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.17819, 2024.
R Duncan Luce. Individual choice behavior: A theoretical analysis. New York: Wiley, 1959.
Blake Mason, Lalit Jain, and Robert Nowak. Learning low-dimensional metrics. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Andrew K Massimino and Mark A Davenport. As you like it: Localization via paired comparisons.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(186):1βÄ™39, 2021.
Andreas Maurer. Bounds for linear multi-task learning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  7:117βÄ™139, 2006.
Andreas Maurer, Massimiliano Pontil, and Bernardino Romera-Paredes. The benefit of multitask
  representation learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(81):1βÄ™32, 2016.
Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of machine learning.
 MIT press, 2018.
Sidharth Mudgal, Jong Lee, Harish Ganapathy, YaGuang Li, Tao Wang, Yanping Huang, Zhifeng
  Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Michael Collins, Trevor Strohman, et al. Controlled decoding from
  language models. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Marcos Nadal and Anjan Chatterjee. Neuroaesthetics and artβÄôs diversity and universality. Wiley
 Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 10(3):e1487, 2019.
Sahand Negahban, Sewoong Oh, and Devavrat Shah. Iterative ranking from pair-wise comparisons.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to fol-
  low instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  27730βÄ™27744, 2022.
Stephen E Palmer and Karen B Schloss. Human preference for individual colors. In Human Vision
  and Electronic Imaging XV, volume 7527, pp. 353βÄ™364. SPIE, 2010.

                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ethan Perez, Sam Ringer, KamileΧ΅ LukosΧ¨iuΧ³teΧ΅, Karina Nguyen, Edwin Chen, Scott Heiner, Craig Pet-
  tit, Catherine Olsson, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Ben Mann,
  Brian Israel, Bryan Seethor, Cameron McKinnon, Christopher Olah, Da Yan, Daniela Amodei,
  Dario Amodei, Dawn Drain, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Guro Khundadze, Jackson Kernion,
  James Landis, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeeyoon Hyun, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Lan-
  don Goldberg, Liane Lovitt, Martin Lucas, Michael Sellitto, Miranda Zhang, Neerav Kingsland,
  Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Joseph, NoemΡ±Χ¹ Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Oliver Rausch, Robin Lar-
  son, Sam McCandlish, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Tamera Lanham, Timo-
  thy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Brown, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Yuntao Bai, Zac Hatfield-Dodds,
  Jack Clark, Samuel R. Bowman, Amanda Askell, Roger Grosse, Danny Hernandez, Deep Gan-
  guli, Evan Hubinger, Nicholas Schiefer, and Jared Kaplan. Discovering language model behaviors
  with model-written evaluations, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.09251.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Arun Rajkumar and Shivani Agarwal. A statistical convergence perspective of algorithms for rank
  aggregation from pairwise data. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 118βÄ™126.
  PMLR, 2014.
Alexandre Rame, Guillaume Couairon, Corentin Dancette, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Mustafa Shukor,
  Laure Soulier, and Matthieu Cord. Rewarded soups: towards pareto-optimal alignment by in-
  terpolating weights fine-tuned on diverse rewards. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Aniket Rege, Aditya Kusupati, Alan Fan, Qingqing Cao, Sham Kakade, Prateek Jain, Ali Farhadi,
  et al. Adanns: A framework for adaptive semantic search. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36:76311βÄ™76335, 2023.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and BjoΧàrn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684βÄ™10695, 2022.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of
  bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. ArXiv, abs/1910.01108, 2019.
Shibani Santurkar, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Cinoo Lee, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto.
  Whose opinions do language models reflect? In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun
  Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 29971βÄ™30004. PMLR, 23βÄ™29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v202/santurkar23a.html.
Matthew Schultz and Thorsten Joachims. Learning a distance metric from relative comparisons.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 16, 2003.
Nihar Shah, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, Aditya Guntuboyina, and Martin Wainwright. Stochastically
  transitive models for pairwise comparisons: Statistical and computational issues. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11βÄ™20. PMLR, 2016.
Nihar B Shah and Martin J Wainwright. Simple, robust and optimal ranking from pairwise compar-
  isons. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):7246βÄ™7283, 2017.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding machine learning: From theory to algo-
  rithms. Cambridge university press, 2014.
Roger N Shepard. The analysis of proximities: multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance
  function. i. Psychometrika, 27(2):125βÄ™140, 1962a.
Roger N Shepard. The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance
  function. ii. Psychometrika, 27(3):219βÄ™246, 1962b.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Roger N Shepard. Metric structures in ordinal data. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 3(2):
  287βÄ™315, 1966.
Adish Singla, Sebastian Tschiatschek, and Andreas Krause. Actively learning hemimetrics with
  applications to eliciting user preferences. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  412βÄ™420. PMLR, 2016.
Taylor Sorensen, Jared Moore, Jillian Fisher, Mitchell Gordon, Niloofar Mireshghallah, Christo-
  pher Michael Rytting, Andre Ye, Liwei Jiang, Ximing Lu, Nouha Dziri, et al. A roadmap to
  pluralistic alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05070, 2024.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008βÄ™3021, 2020.
Omer Tamuz, Ce Liu, Serge Belongie, Ohad Shamir, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Adaptively learning
 the crowd kernel. arXiv preprint arXiv:1105.1033, 2011.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Joel A Tropp et al. An introduction to matrix concentration inequalities. Foundations and Trends¬°
  in Machine Learning, 8(1-2):1βÄ™230, 2015.
Lewis Tunstall, Edward Beeching, Nathan Lambert, Nazneen Rajani, Kashif Rasul, Younes Belkada,
  Shengyi Huang, Leandro von Werra, CleΧ¹mentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, et al. Zephyr: Direct
  distillation of lm alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16944, 2023.
Martin J Wainwright. High-dimensional statistics: A non-asymptotic viewpoint, volume 48. Cam-
 bridge university press, 2019.
Binghai Wang, Rui Zheng, Lu Chen, Yan Liu, Shihan Dou, Caishuang Huang, Wei Shen, Senjie Jin,
  Enyu Zhou, Chenyu Shi, et al. Secrets of rlhf in large language models part ii: Reward modeling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06080, 2024a.
Haoxiang Wang, Yong Lin, Wei Xiong, Rui Yang, Shizhe Diao, Shuang Qiu, Han Zhao, and Tong
  Zhang. Arithmetic control of llms for diverse user preferences: Directional preference alignment
  with multi-objective rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18571, 2024b.
Zhi Wang, Geelon So, and Ramya Korlakai Vinayak. Metric learning from limited pairwise prefer-
  ence comparisons. In UAI, 2024c.
Aaron Wildavsky. Choosing preferences by constructing institutions: A cultural theory of preference
  formation. American political science review, 81(1):3βÄ™21, 1987.
Tianhao Wu, Banghua Zhu, Ruoyu Zhang, Zhaojin Wen, Kannan Ramchandran, and Jiantao Jiao.
  Pairwise proximal policy optimization: Harnessing relative feedback for llm alignment. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.00212, 2023a.
Xiaoshi Wu, Yiming Hao, Keqiang Sun, Yixiong Chen, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hongsheng Li.
  Human preference score v2: A solid benchmark for evaluating human preferences of text-to-
  image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09341, 2023b.
Zeqiu Wu, Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Nouha Dziri, Alane Suhr, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Noah A Smith,
  Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained human feedback gives better rewards for
  language model training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Austin Xu and Mark Davenport. Simultaneous preference and metric learning from paired compar-
  isons. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:454βÄ™465, 2020.
Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao
   Dong. Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation.
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models, 2022.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O UTLINE OF THE A PPENDICES

A Extended Related Work                                                                          18

B Detailed Model Overview                                                                        20
   B.1 Illustrations and Pseudocode for the PAL Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20
   B.2 Modeling Choices: When to Use PAL-A or PAL-B in Practice? . . . . . . . . . .             21

C Proofs and Additional Theoretical Results                                                      22
   C.1 Generalization for Seen Users and Unseen Pairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      22
   C.2 Generalization for Unseen Users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     28
   C.3 Auxiliary Lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      34

D Experiment Details                                                                             36
   D.1 General Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     36
   D.2 Numerical Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    36
   D.3 Reddit TL;DR Summary (Text-to-Text) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         37
   D.4 Persona (Text-to-Text) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    41
   D.5 Pick-a-Pic (Text-to-Image) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    42
   D.6 Pick-a-Filter (Text-to-Image) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   43

E Computational Resources                                                                        45


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A       E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK

Alignment Status Quo. Popular existing foundation models (Achiam et al., 2023; Anthropic, 2024;
Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023) typically use RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017; Ethayarajh
et al., 2024; Stiennon et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2023a) to align models after pretraining. Recent
foundation models such as Zephyr (Tunstall et al., 2023) and the Archangel suite5 have shifted to
directly optimizing on human preferences (Azar et al., 2024; Ethayarajh et al., 2024; Rafailov et al.,
2024) to avoid the nuances of RL optimization (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2021). There has also been
significant recent work in collecting large human preference datasets for reward model training in
the text-to-image space (Kirstain et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2023b; Xu et al., 2024) (typically diffusion
models (Rombach et al., 2022)).
Reward Modeling. These existing alignment frameworks generally assume that all humans share
a single unified preference (e.g. LLM βÄ€helpfulnessβÄù or βÄ€harmlessnessβÄù (Bai et al., 2022a)) and as-
cribe to the Bradley-Terry (Bradley & Terry, 1952) model of pairwise preferences. Consensus-based
methods (Bakker et al., 2022) aim to find agreement among labelers for specific goals like harmless-
ness (Bai et al., 2022b; Ganguli et al., 2022), helpfulness (Bai et al., 2022a), or engagement (Irvine
et al., 2023). By design, these methods inherently prioritize the universal preference (and biases)
induced by the labelers (Cheng et al., 2023; KovacΧ¨ et al., 2023; Santurkar et al., 2023). In reality,
humans have diverse, heterogeneous preferences (Nadal & Chatterjee, 2019; Sorensen et al., 2024;
Wildavsky, 1987) that depend on individual contexts, and may even share a group structure (Bakker
et al., 2022). Rewarded soups (Rame et al., 2024) make a case to capture diversity through post-hoc
weight-space interpolation over a mixture of experts that learn diverse rewards. However, these re-
wards are learned by pre-defining what aspects are important which is done by the system designer.
Separate datasets are collected to elicit human preferences on these axes as to how much people
care of them. DPA (Wang et al., 2024b) models rewards as directions instead of scalars, and trains
a multi-objective reward model for RLHF. Wu et al. (2024) propose fine-grained multi-objective
rewards to provide more focused signal for RLHF. Recently, Li et al. (2024) propose personalized
reward modeling by learning a general user embedding and treating each individual as a perturbation
to the embedding. As this preference formulation is still homogeneous for users not in the dataset,
they use the fixed general user embedding for generalizing to unseen users, i.e., do not personalize
to new users.
Recent survey works provide excellent summaries of literature for alignment (Ji et al., 2023) and
reward modeling (Wang et al., 2024a).
Human Preference Datasets. The preference universality assumption also extends into the data
annotation/labeling processing, where labelers are given a rubric to select preferences (e.g. to rank
an image pair considering image aesthetics and image-prompt alignment (Kirstain et al., 2024)).
Due to this rubric, the current largest scale text-to-image generation preference datasets (Kirstain
et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2023b; Xu et al., 2024) show limited diversity among labelers. In the Pick-a-
Pic train set (Kirstain et al., 2024), there are only 701 disagreements among the 12487 image pairs
labeled by different users (94.38% agreement), and there are zero disagreements in validation (1261
pairs) and test (1453 pairs) sets. HPS (Wu et al., 2023b) found that labeler agreement over diffusion
model generations was higher for models of similar quality or size, though this diversity comes with
the caveat of the labelers being provided a rubric to provide their preferences. Imagereward (Xu
et al., 2024) use researcher agreement as a criteria to hire labelers. In the LLM domain, the popular
Summarize from Feedback dataset (Stiennon et al., 2020) is also collected with rigid rubric, with
labeler performance measured via agreement to the preferred answer of the authors. During the
data collection period, only labelers with satisfactory agreement were retained, which led to a small
number of users, all in agreement with the authorsβÄô rubric, being responsible for a majority of labeled
comparisons. Status quo preference datasets used to align foundation models thus suffer from a lack
of diversity due to the nature of their data collection.
Preference learning. There is rich literature on preference learning and ranking in various do-
mains ranging from psychology, marketing, recommendation systems, quantifying social science
surveys to crowdsourced democracy, voting theory and social choice theory. We provide a few
relevant works here and direct reader to surveys such as (FuΧàrnkranz & HuΧàllermeier, 2010). Rank-
ing based models, e.g., BTL-model (Bradley & Terry, 1952; Luce, 1959), stochastic transitivity
    5
        https://github.com/ContextualAI/HALOs


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure B.1: In the ideal point model considered in PAL-A, items and users (represented by their
ideal points) are mapped to Rd via an unknown function f . A userβÄôs preference for an item (e.g., an
image or a text summary) is inversely related to the distance between the item and the userβÄôs ideal
point. For example, the yellow user prefers the green text summary, and the purple user prefers the
orange text summary, as these items are βÄ€closerβÄù to their respective ideal points.


models (Shah et al., 2016) focus on finding ranking of m items or finding top-k items by pairwise
comparisons (Hunter, 2004; Kenyon-Mathieu & Schudy, 2007; Braverman & Mossel, 2007; Negah-
ban et al., 2012; Eriksson, 2013; Rajkumar & Agarwal, 2014; Shah & Wainwright, 2017). Ranking
m items in these settings requires O(m log m) queries. There is also rich literature that stems from
ideal point model (Coombs, 1950; Huber, 1976; Jamieson & Nowak, 2011; Ding, 2016; Singla et al.,
2016; Xu & Davenport, 2020; Canal et al., 2022). Under the ideal point based models, the query
complexity for ranking m items reduces to O(d log m), where d is the dimension of the domain of
representations which is usually much smaller than the number of items being ranked (Jamieson &
Nowak, 2011). This is due to the fact that once the preference point is learned, it can then be used
to predict rankings of new items without needing more comparisons.
Metric learning has been studied quite extensively and we direct the reader to surveys (Kulis, 2013)
and books (Bellet et al., 2022). In particular, metric learning based on triplet querying has also been
quite extesively studied (Shepard, 1962a;b; 1966; Schultz & Joachims, 2003; Kulis, 2013; Tamuz
et al., 2011; Kleindessner & Luxburg, 2014; Bellet et al., 2015; Bellet & Habrard, 2015; Mason et al.,
2017) which aims to learn the underlying unknown metric under the assumption that the people base
their judgement for a triple query with concepts xa , xb , xc βàà D on the relative similarities based on
the distances between these concepts under the unknown metric.
Simultaneous metric and preference learning. More recently a few works have considered the
problem of unknown metric in preference learning and proposed methods (Xu & Davenport, 2020;
Canal et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024c) and provided sample complexity analysis (Canal et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2024c) for simultaneously learning an unknown Mahalanobis metric and unknown user
preference(s). Learning the unknown Mahalanobis metric can be viewed as learning linear layer on
top of the embeddings from a foundation model. From our reframing of alignment, these works can
be looked as PAL-A with linear function for f and individual user preferences instead of having any
structure over them.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure B.2: Illustration of PAL framework for learning from diverse preferences (Section 2). For
any user i, the probability of preferring xl to xr for the context xc is computed by a reward model
 (i)
rΈΗ which uses a mixture modeling approach to assign a scalar reward to a sample (e.g. xl or xr )
given context (xc ). In PAL-A, each user iβÄôs preference a(i) is modeled as a convex combination
of K prototypical preferences, i.e. a(i) = P w(i) . In PAL-B, each user iβÄôs preference z (i) (xc ) is
modeled as a convex combination of K prototypical functions g1 ¬Ζ ¬Ζ ¬Ζ gK , i.e. z (i) (xc ) =. Reward
functions formulated using the PAL framework can be used flexibly, e.g., with fixed preference
points (PAL-A), with preference points that are functions of the context/prompt xc (PAL-B).



B     D ETAILED M ODEL OVERVIEW

B.1   I LLUSTRATIONS AND P SEUDOCODE FOR THE PAL F RAMEWORK

Figure B.1 illustrates the ideal point model considered in PAL-A. We show the modeling mechanism
of PAL (Section 2) in slightly more detail in Figure B.2. Algorithm 1 and 2 provide the pseudocode
for the learning algorithms of PAL-A and PAL-B.



Algorithm 1 Learning algorithm for PAL-A
                        SN   (i) (i) (i) (i)   mi
Require: Dataset D = i=1 xj,l , xj,r ; xj,c , yj j=1
                                                     , loss function β³™, model class for fΈΗ ,
    prototypes P = [p1 , ..., pK ] where pk βàà RD , user weights W = [w(1) , ..., w(N ) ] where
    w(i) βàà βàÜKβà£1 .
 1: for each iteration do       (i) (i) (i) (i)
 2:     Sample a mini-batch xj,l , xj,r ; xj,c , yj             β•Ζ random pairs, not ordered by users
 3:     User Ideal Points: a(i) = P ¬Ζ w(i)
 4:     Distances:
           (i)           (i)  (i)                     (i)          (i)   (i)
 5:       dl,j = ||fΈΗ xl,j ; xc,j βà£ fΈΗ (a(i) )||22 , dr,j = ||fΈΗ xr,j ; xc,j βà£ fΈΗ (a(i) )||22
                 (i)   (i)   (i)   (i)   (i)      (i)        (i)   (i)
 6:    Loss: œàj (xl,j , xr,j ; xc,j , yj ) = β³™(yj ¬Ζ (dl,j βà£ dr,j ))
                                               P     (i) (i)    (i)    (i)    (i)
 7:    Update Step: argminΈΗ,P,{w(i) }N     i=1  i,j œàj (xl,j , xr,j ; xc,j , yj )
 8: end for


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Learning algorithm for PAL-B
                       SN   (i) (i) (i) (i)   mi
Require: Dataset D = i=1 xj,l , xj,r ; xj,c , yj j=1
                                                     , loss function β³™, mapping function fΈΗ ,
                                                                            (i)   (i)
    prototype mapping functions {gΈΗk }K   k=1 , user weights {w
                                                                (i)
                                                                    := [w1 , ..., wK ]}N
                                                                                       i=1 .
 1: for each iteration do        (i) (i) (i) (i)
 2:     Sample a mini-batch xj,l , xj,r ; xj,c , yj               β•Ζ random pairs, not ordered by users
 3:     User Ideal Point (conditioned on prompts):
                  h                           iβäΛ
                         (i)             (i)
 4:       a(i) = gΈΗi (xc,j ), ..., gΈΗK (xc,j ) ¬Ζ w(i)
 5:     Distance:
           (i)           (i)              (i)          (i)
 6:       dl,j = βü®fΈΗ xl,j , a(i) βü©, dr,j = βü®fΈΗ xr,j , a(i) βü©
                 (i)   (i)   (i)   (i)   (i)      (i)        (i)   (i)
 7:    Loss: œàj (xl,j , xr,j ; xc,j , yj ) = β³™(yj ¬Ζ (dl,j βà£ dr,j ))
                                               P (i) (i) (i) (i) (i)
 8:    Update Step: argminΈΗ,P,{w(i) }N     i=1
                                                 œàj (xl,j , xr,j ; xc,j , yj )
 9: end for


B.2   M ODELING C HOICES : W HEN TO U SE PAL-A OR PAL-B IN P RACTICE ?

We note that PAL-B is more natural in generative modeling settings, as it learns a personalized
mapping z (i) (xc ) for each user i and any given prompt xc , and it learns a separate mapping for
outputs x. In contrast, PAL-A learns an ideal point a(i) for each user i fixed across all prompts and
it learns to jointly map the prompt xc and output x in the same space.
From experiments, we found that PAL-B serves as a reliable default choice (see Figure 2, Figure 3
and Table 1 on Reddit TL;DR Summary; Table 2 on Pick-a-Pic; and Figure 4 on Pick-a-Filter). We
are able to get PAL-A to work competitively to PAL-B in most settings (see Table D.1, Table D.3
and Section D.4 in the Appendix); however, in practice, this may require additional engineering
effort to optimize effectively.


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C      P ROOFS AND A DDITIONAL T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
Additional notation. Given two matrices A and B, we use βü®A, Bβü© to denote the Frobenius inner
product between them, i.e., βü®A, Bβü© = tr(AβäΛ B). As an example, recall that, given the reparame-
terization in Section 4.1, the difference of scores for a user can be written as xβäΛ        βäΛ
                                                                                  l Mxl βà£ xr Mxr +
           βäΛ
(xl βà£ xr ) Qw; in what follows, for better clarity, we express it in an equivalent form using the
Frobenius inner product, xl xβäΛ           βäΛ
                                l βà£ xr xr , M + βü®xl βà£ xr , Qwβü©.


C.1     G ENERALIZATION FOR S EEN U SERS AND U NSEEN PAIRS

C.1.1       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Theorem 1. (Seen user generalization) Suppose K < min(N, D), and for each comparison, the
user is asked to compare two items drawn i.i.d. from the uniform distribution on the unit sphere,
Unif(SDβà£1 ). Then, with probability at least 1 βà£ Έ¥,
                                                βà½   βà½     βà½(i) N
      ES [RΧ²S (MΧ², QΧ², {wΧ²(i) }N
                               i=1 )]βà£ES [RΧ²S (M , Q , {w     }i=1 )]
                                                s                                    s
                                                   2 + KN + K ΈΕ 2                      2 log 2Έ¥

                                                  ΈΕM       D          v
                                         βâΛ 12L                          log(N + D) +            .
                                                          Nm                            Nm

Proof of Theorem 1. We use standard Rademacher complexity theory; see, e.g., (Shalev-Shwartz
& Ben-David, 2014; Mohri et al., 2018) for general background and (Canal et al., 2022) for its
application in preference and metric learning without mixture modeling.

Recall that β³™ : R βÜ£ [0, 1] is an L-Lipschitz loss function. Let W = w(1) , . . . , w(N ) βàà RKΟ½N
denote the matrix containing the individual weights of all users.
Consider the following class of functions parameterized by M, Q and W:

      H = hM,Q,W : (i, xl , xr , y) 7βÜ£ β³™ y xl xβäΛ           βäΛ

                                                   l βà£ xr xr , M + βü®xl βà£ xr , QWi βü©

                                                                       Kβà£1
                     βàΞMβàΞF βâΛ ΈΕM , βàΞQk βàΞ2 βâΛ ΈΕv βàÄk βàà [K], Wi βàà βàÜ                 βàÄi βàà [N ] ,

where Qk denotes the k-th column of Q, i.e., the k-th prototypical ideal point, and Wi denotes the
i-th column of W, i.e., the weights for user i.
To prove Theorem 1, we use Lemma C.1, which relates the excess risk to the Rademacher complex-
ity of H. In particular, the lemma addresses settings with multiple distributions, where data consists
of i.i.d. samples from each distribution. Similar notions of task-averaged Rademacher complexity
have been considered in (e.g., Ando et al., 2005; Maurer, 2006; Maurer et al., 2016).
Here, to apply Lemma C.1, we slightly abuse notation by considering S as a dataset where, for
                                            (i)    (i)    (i)
each i βàà [N ] and j βàà [m], the comparison (xj,l , xj,r , yj ) is augmented with the user index i:
      (i)   (i)   (i)
(i, xj,l , xj,r , yj ).
Let œÉ = (œÉ1 , . . . , œÉN ) βàà {βà£1, +1}N be an array of independent Rademacher random variables.
Then, by Lemma C.1, with probability at least 1 βà£ Έ¥,
                                                                                      s
                                                      βà½     βà½     βà½(i) N                2 log 2Έ¥
        ES [RΧ²S (MΧ², QΧ², {wΧ²(i) }N
                                 i=1 )] βà£ ES [RΧ²S (M , Q , {w         }i=1 )] βâΛ (βà½) +            ,
                                                                                         Nm
where        οΘ°                                                                                             οΘΙ
                              N X  m
                           1  X
                                               (i)
                                                    D
                                                        (i)  (i)βäΛ     (i) (i)βäΛ
                                                                                  E D
                                                                                         (i)       (i)
                                                                                                       E
(βà½) = 2ES,œÉ οΘΑ sup                      œÉi,j β³™ yj      xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M + xj,l βà£ xj,r , QWi        οΘΜ.
               M,Q,W N m i=1 j=1

It suffices to show that
                                     s
                                                KN
                                          2 +

                                         ΈΕM      D +K        ΈΕv2
                           (βà½) βâΛ 12L                               log(N + D).                      (9)
                                                Nm


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To this end, observe that
                   οΘ°                                                                          οΘΙ
    (a) 2L                       N X  m
                             1  X             D
                                                (i) (i)βäΛ     (i) (i)βäΛ
                                                                       E D
                                                                           (i)    (i)
                                                                                           E
(βà½) βâΛ        ES,œÉ οΘΑ sup                  œÉi,j xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M + xj,l βà£ xj,r , QWi οΘΜ
        Nm          M,Q,W N m i=1 j=1
                   οΘ°                                             οΘΙ
                          N Xm
    (b) 2L
                                    D                          E
                                       (i) (i)βäΛ    (i) (i)βäΛ
                          X
    =         ES,œÉ οΘΑsup         œÉi,j xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M οΘΜ
        Nm            M i=1 j=1
        |                           {z                           }
                                    (i)
                                                             οΘ°                                οΘΙ
                                                                 N X
                                                                   m
                                               2L                X         D
                                                                             (i)    (i)
                                                                                             E
                                          +       ES,œÉ οΘΑ sup           œÉi,j xj,l βà£ xj,r , QWi οΘΜ,
                                              Nm        Q,W i=1 j=1
                                              |                    {z                         }
                                                                   (ii)
                                                                                                  (10)
where (a) applies TalagrandβÄôs contraction
                                            lemma (Mohri et al., 2018, Lemma 5.7) and uses the
                                            (i)
observation that, for any i and j, Pr œÉi,j yj = 1 = Pr (œÉi,j = 1) = 12 ; and (b) follows because
for C = {a + b : a βàà A, b βàà B}, sup C = sup A + sup B.
We tackle the two terms separately. For (i), by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
                             οΘ°                                                         οΘΙ
                                               N X m
                    2L                        X
                                                              (i) (i)βäΛ   (i) (i)βäΛ

            (i) βâΛ      ES,œÉ οΘΑsup βàΞM βàΞF ¬Ζ              œÉi,j xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r       οΘΜ
                   Nm          M              i=1 j=1
                                                                                     F
                            v οΘ° οΘ°                                                    οΘΙοΘΙ
                                                                                   2
                            u
                (a) 2L      u                 n X m
                                                            (i) (i)βäΛ   (i) (i)βäΛ
                                             X
                βâΛ      ΈΕM ¬Ζ tES οΘΑEœÉ οΘΑ                œÉi,j xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r
                            u                                                        οΘΜοΘΜ
                    Nm                           i=1
                                                  l=1                              F

               (b) 4L        βàö
                βâΛ       ΈΕM ¬Ζ N m
                   Nr m
                         ΈΕM2
                = 4L         ,
                        Nm
where (a) uses JensenβÄôs inequality; (b) follows from Lemma C.11 and the observation that for any
                    (i) (i)βäΛ    (i) (i)βäΛ
realization of S, xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r      βâΛ 2 for i βàà [N ] and j βàà [m], as the items are drawn
                                              F
from Sdβà£1 .
                                                                h                           i
                                                            (i)           (i)    (i)
We now bound term (ii). For each i βàà [N ] and j βàà [m], let Xj := 0 ¬Ζ ¬Ζ ¬Ζ xj,l βà£ xj,r ¬Ζ ¬Ζ ¬Ζ 0 βàà
RdΟ½N have zeros everywhere except for the i-th column. Then,
                           οΘ°                                    οΘΙ
                                  N X  m
                  2L             X             D
                                                   (i)
                                                              E
         (ii) =      ES,œÉ οΘΑ sup           œÉi,j Xj , QW οΘΜ
                  Nm        Q,W i=1 j=1
                                            οΘ°                          οΘΙ
              (a) 2L                             N X  m
                                                                 (i)
                                                X
              βâΛ        sup βàΞQWβàΞβà½ ¬Ζ ES,œÉ οΘΑ                 œÉi,j Xj      οΘΜ
                  N m Q,W                       i=1 j=1
                                                                     2
                                  s                                              !
              (b) 2L p                 N  m      N m
              βâΛ         KN ΈΕv2 2             +           log(N + D) + log(N + D)
                  Nm                     D        N
                   s                                      s
                       KN                                      K 2

                           + K   ΈΕ 2                            ΈΕ
                                   v
              βâΛ 4L      D
                                     log(N + D) + 2L m v log(N + D),
                          Nm                                  Nm
                    s
                      2 KN

                                     2
                          D + K ΈΕv
              (c)
              βâΛ 6L                     log(N + D),
                            Nm


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                    p
where (a) uses HoΧàlderβÄôs inequality; (b) follows from the observation that βàΞQWβàΞ βà½ βâΛ   rank(QW)¬Ζ
             q P
                     N            2                                          βàö    βàö     p
βàΞQWβàΞF βâΛ K i=1 βàΞQWi βàΞ and Lemma C.2; (c) uses the facts that a + b βâΛ 2(a + b)
and 2 log(N + D) βâΞ 1 for N, D βâΞ 1, along with some algebraic simplifications.
Combining the bounds on (i) and (ii) and by Eq. (10), we have
                              οΘΪr          s                                οΘΕ
                                                 KN

                                  4ΈΕ 2       18        + K   ΈΕ 2
                                     M            D            v
                    (βà½) βâΛ 2L οΘ≠          +                        log(N + D)οΘΗ
                                  Nm                Nm
                               s
                                  2 + KN + K ΈΕ 2

                        (a)      ΈΕM       D          v
                        βâΛ 12L                          log(N + D),
                                         Nm
                             βàö    βàö
where (a) uses the facts that a + b βâΛ 2(a + b) and 3 log2 (N + D) βâΞ 1 for N, D βâΞ 1. This
                                         p
completes the proof.

C.1.2     K EY L EMMAS
We now present the key lemmas used in the proof of Theorem 1.
Lemma C.1 (See also Ando et al. (2005); Maurer (2006); Maurer et al. (2016)). Let
H βä² {h : [N ] Ο½ Z βÜ£ [0, 1]}, and p1 , . . . , pN be probability measures on Z. For each i βàà [N ],
                     m
let Si = {(i, zi,j )}j=1 where zi,1 , . . . , zi,m are i.i.d. data points drawn according to pi , and
     SN                                     PN Pm
S = i=1 Si . Let hΧ² βàà argminhβààH N1m i=1 j=1 h(i, zi,j ) minimize the empirical risk, and let
                     PN
hβà½ βàà argminhβààH N1 i=1 Ezi,1 βàΦpi [h(i, zi,1 )] minimize the true risk.

Then, with probability at least 1 βà£ Έ¥ over S,
                                                                                      s
           N                              N
        1 X            h            i  1 X                                                2 log 2Έ¥
              Ezi,1 βàΦpi hΧ²(i, zi,1 ) βà£      Ez βàΦp [hβà½ (i, zi,1 )] βâΛ 2RN,m (H) +                    .
        N i=1                          N i=1 i,1 1                                         Nm

Here,                                       οΘ°                            οΘΙ
                                                  N X m
                                              1  X
                       RN,m (H) := ES,œÉ οΘΑ sup            œÉi,j h(i, zi,j )οΘΜ
                                         hβààH N m i=1 j=1

denotes the user-averaged Rademacher complexity of H, where œÉ = (œÉi,j )iβàà[N ],jβàà[m] is an array of
independent Rademacher random variables.

Proof. We use standard techniques for deriving generalization bounds using Rademacher com-
plexity (e.g., Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014; Mohri et al., 2018). For any h βàà H, let
                 PN Pm                                 PN
LΧ²S (h) := N1m i=1 j=1 h(i, zi,j ) and L(h) := N1 i=1 Ezi,1 βàΦpi [h(i, zi,1 )]. Notice that
            h       i
L(h) = ES LΧ²S (h) .

Since gΧ² minimizes LΧ²S (h), we have

              L(hΧ²) βà£ L(hβà½ ) = L(hΧ²) βà£ LΧ²S (hΧ²) + LΧ²S (hΧ²) βà£ LΧ²S (hβà½ ) +LΧ²S (hβà½ ) βà£ L(hβà½ )
                                                  |        {z       }
                                                           βâΛ0

                             βâΛ L(hΧ²) βà£ LΧ²S (hΧ²) + LΧ²S (hβà½ ) βà£ L(hβà½ ) .

We first look at the second summand. Notice that hβà½ is independent of S. Since h(i, z) βàà [0, 1]
for any h βàà H, i βàà [N ], and z βàà Z, by HoeffdingβÄôs inequality (Hoeffding, 1994), with probability
1 βà£ 2Έ¥ ,
                                                      s
                                                        log 2Έ¥
                                 LΧ²S (hβà½ ) βà£ L(hβà½ ) βâΛ          .
                                                        2N m

                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then, by the union bound and a little algebra, it suffices to show that, with probability at least 1 βà£ 2Έ¥ ,
                                                                    s
                                                                        log 2Έ¥
                        sup L(h) βà£ LΧ²S (h) βâΛ 2RN,m (H) +                       .
                       hβààH                                             2N m

To this end, let ΈΚ(S) = suphβààH L(h) βà£ LΧ²S (h) . It is easy to verify that, since h(i, z) βàà [0, 1]
for any h βàà H, i βàà [N ], and z βàà Z, ΈΚ(S) satisfies the bounded difference property, i.e., for any S βÄ≤
that differs from S by exactly one data point, |ΈΚ(S) βà£ ΈΚ(S βÄ≤ )| βâΛ N1m . We can therefore apply the
bounded difference inequality (e.g., Mohri et al., 2018, Theorem D.8) on ΈΚ(S). With probability at
least 1 βà£ 2Έ¥ ,
                                                         s
                                                            ln 2Έ¥
                                  ΈΚ(S) βâΛ ES [ΈΚ(S)] +              .
                                                           2N m

It only remains to show that ES [ΈΚ(S)] βâΛ 2RN,m (H), which follows from a standard  symmetriza-               m
tion argument (see, e.g., Mohri et al., 2018, Chapter 3). For each i βàà [N ], let SiβÄ≤ = i, zi,j         βÄ≤
         βÄ≤ m                                                                                       βÄ≤
                                                                                                       SN i=1βÄ≤
where zi,j   j=1
                  is another   i.i.d.  sample  of  size m    drawn  according   to p i , and let S   =   i=1 Si .
Then,
                                h         i
 ES [ΈΚ(S)] = ES sup ES LΧ²S (h) βà£ LΧ²S (h)
                             βÄ≤        βÄ≤
                   hβààH
                     οΘ°     οΘΪ                                                οΘΕοΘΙ
                                        N X m
                                  1     X
                                                                      βÄ≤

           βâΛ ES,S βÄ≤ οΘΑ sup οΘ≠                      h(i, zi,j ) βà£ h(i, zi,j ) οΘΗοΘΜ
                       hβààH     N m i=1 j=1
                       οΘ°     οΘΪ                                                    οΘΕοΘΙ
                                         N X  m
                                    1    X
                                                                             βÄ≤

           = ES,S βÄ≤ ,œÉ οΘΑ sup οΘ≠                    œÉi,j h(i, zi,j ) βà£ h(i, zi,j ) οΘΗοΘΜ
                        hβààH       N m i=1 j=1
                    οΘ°                                       οΘΙ            οΘ°                                      οΘΙ
                                    N X  m                                               N Xm
                            1      X                                             1    X
                                                                                                            βÄ≤
           βâΛ ES,œÉ οΘΑ sup                     œÉi,j h(i, zi,j )οΘΜ + ES βÄ≤ ,œÉ οΘΑ sup                  βà£œÉi,j h(i, zi,j )οΘΜ
                      hβààH N m i=1 j=1                                     hβààH N m i=1 j=1

            = 2RN,m (H).
Lemma C.2. For i βàà [N ] and j βàà [m], let Zi,j = œÉi,j Di,j , where œÉi,j is an independent
Rademacher ramdom variable, and Di,j = [0 . . . ΈΨi,j . . . 0] βàà RDΟ½N has ΈΨi,j = zi,j βà£ zβÄ≤i,j βàà RD
in its i-th column and zeros elsewhere, with zi,j and zβÄ≤i,j drawn independently from Unif(SDβà£1 ).
Then,           οΘ°               οΘΙ     s
                   N X m
                  X                       Nm Nm
              E οΘΑ         Zi,j  οΘΜ βâΛ2            +          log(N + D) + log(N + D),
                  i=1 j=1
                                            D       N
                                   2
where βàΞ¬ΖβàΞ2 denotes the spectral norm.

Proof. For any i βàà [N ] and j βàà [m], observe that E [Zi,j ] = 0 and βàΞZi,j βàΞ2 = βàΞΈΨi,j βàΞ2 βâΛ 2. The
Lemma then follows straightforwardly from the Matrix Bernstein inequality (e.g., Tropp et al., 2015,
Theorem 1.6.2 , reproduced as Lemma C.10) and Lemma C.3.
Lemma C.3. Under the same definitions as in Lemma C.2,
          οΘ±                                                                  οΘΦ
             N X  m                     N X m
          οΘ≤ X                          X                                     οΘΫ            Nm Nm
                     E Zi,j ZβäΛ                 E ZβäΛ

     max                     i,j    ,             i,j Zi,j                       βâΛ2          +          .
          οΘ≥
                   i=1 j=1                      i=1 j=1
                                                                             οΘΨ             D   N
                                            2                            2

Proof. We first show that
                         N X
                           m
                         X                                2N m          Nm Nm
                             E Zi,j ZβäΛ

                                     i,j              βâΛ        βâΛ2          +                  .
                         i=1 j=1
                                                           D             D   N
                                                  2


                                                          25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This follows from the simple observation that, for any i βàà [N ] and j βàà [m],

                                                                  βäΛ (a) 2I
                       E Zi,j ZβäΛ                    βäΛ
                                        2
                               i,j = E œÉi,j ¬Ζ ΈΨi,j ΈΨi,j = E ΈΨi,j ΈΨi,j =    ,
                                                                        D
where (a) holds because for any x, xβÄ≤ drawn independently from Unif(SDβà£1 ),
                                                               βäΛ   2I
                        E (x βà£ xβÄ≤ )(x βà£ xβÄ≤ )βäΛ = E xxβäΛ + E[xβÄ≤ xβÄ≤ ] = .

                                                                   D

It now suffices to show that
                        N X
                          m
                        X                              2N m          Nm Nm
                            E ZβäΛ

                               i,j Zi,j            βâΛ        βâΛ2          +            .
                        i=1 j=1
                                                        N             D   N
                                               2

Observe that, for any i βàà [N ] and j βàà [m], E ZβäΛ                               N Ο½N

                                                     i,j Zi,j is a matrix in R      with zeros everywhere
but in the (i, i)-th entry, which has value
                                            βäΛ                       βäΛ
                                   2
                               E œÉi,j   ¬Ζ ΈΨi,j ΈΨi,j = tr E ΈΨi,j ΈΨi,j     = 2.
                      PN Pm
Therefore, we have i=1 j=1 E ZβäΛ

                                          i,j Zi,j = 2mI, and it follows that its largest singular value is
2m = 2NNm .

C.1.3    E XISTING R ESULT WITHOUT M IXTURE M ODELING (C ANAL ET AL ., 2022)
For completeness, we adapt (Canal et al., 2022, Theorem 3.1) to our specific setting, and pro-
vide a proof. Recall that, for the class of linear transformations, F, considered in Section 4.1,
the difference of scores for a pair of items (xl , xr ) and a user with ideal point a can be written as
 xl xβäΛ         βäΛ    βäΛ
     l βà£ xr xr , A A + xl βà£ xr , βà£2A Aa .
                                              βäΛ

                  βäΛ       (i)             (i)
                                                                (1)          (N )

Let
     M    :=   A    A,  v     :=   βà£2Ma       , and V    :=    v     . . . v       . We consider M βàà
          DΟ½D                                                 DΟ½N
  MβààR           : βàΞMβàΞF βâΛ ΈΕM , M βΣΑ 0 and V βàà V βàà R                   : βàΞVi βàΞ2 βâΛ ΈΕv , βàÄi βàà [N ] , as done
                                            (i) (i) (i)   m
in (Canal et al., 2022). Again, let Si := xj,l , xj,r , yj     j=1
                                                                   denote    a set of m i.i.d. comparisons
                                  SN
from user i βàà [N ], and let S := i=1 Si . Then, the empirical risk of (M, V) given S is:
                            N m
                        1 X X   (i) D (i) (i)βäΛ       (i) (i)βäΛ
                                                                 E D
                                                                     (i)    (i)
                                                                                    E
      JΧ² S (M, V) :=               β³™ yj xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M + xj,l βà£ xj,r , Vi ,
                       N m i=1 j=1

where we again assume β³™ : R βÜ£ [0, 1] is L-Lipschitz. Let (MΧÉ, VΧÉ) βàà argminM,V JΧ² S (M, V), and
                             h            i
let (Mβ΄Ü , Vβ΄Ü ) βàà argminM,V ES JΧ² S (M, V) .
Proposition C.4 (Canal et al. 2022, Theorem 3.1). Suppose that for each comparison, the user is
asked to compare two items drawn i.i.d. from Unif(SDβà£1 ). Then, with probability at least 1 βà£ Έ¥,
                                                         r                s
                h           i       h             i         ΈΕ 2 + ΈΕ 2N
                                                                   v        2 log 2Έ¥
            ES JΧ² S (MΧÉ, VΧÉ) βà£ ES JΧ² S (Mβ΄Ü , Vβ΄Ü ) βâΛ 6L        M
                                                                        +
                                                                Nm            Nm
                                        βàö
                                                                                    q
                                                                                        D 2 +DN
Remark C.5. Setting ΈΕM = d and ΈΕv = d, the above excess risk bound becomes OΧÉ             Nm      ,
                                                                                    q
                                                                                       D
where OΧÉ hides the parameters L and Έ¥. When N βâΞ β³Π(D2 ), the bound becomes OΧÉ           N , which
suggests a per-user sample complexity of OΧÉ (D).

Proof. See (Canal et al., 2022, Section D.1) for the original proof in a slightly different setting. We
include a proof here for the readerβÄôs convenience.


                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Consider a class of functions parameterized by M and V:

  G = gM,V : (i, xl , xr , y) 7βÜ£ β³™ y xl xβäΛ          βäΛ

                                            l βà£ xr xr , M + βü®xl βà£ xr , Vi βü©

                                                                              βàΞMβàΞF βâΛ ΈΕM ,            βàΞVi βàΞ2 βâΛ ΈΕv βàÄi βàà [N ] ,

where Vi denotes the i-th column of V, i.e., the reparameterized ideal point for user i.
We again apply Lemma C.16 . Let œÉ = (œÉ1 , . . . , œÉN ) be an array of independent Rademacher
random variables. By Lemma C.1, we have, with probability at least 1 βà£ Έ¥,
                                                                        s
                         h           i        h              i             2 log 2Έ¥
                     ES JΧ² S (MΧÉ, VΧÉ) βà£ ES JΧ² S (Mβ΄Ü , Vβ΄Ü ) βâΛ (βà½) +                  ,
                                                                            Nm
where           οΘ°                                                                                   οΘΙ
                             N Xm
                        1   X
                                            (i)
                                                 D
                                                    (i) (i)βäΛ    (i) (i)βäΛ
                                                                              E D
                                                                                      (i) (i)
                                                                                                E
(βà½) := 2ES,œÉ οΘΑ sup                 œÉi,j β³™ yj       xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M + xj,l βà£ xj,r , Vi     οΘΜ.
                 M,V N m i=1 j=1
                                  q 2
                                     ΈΕ +ΈΕ 2 N
It suffices to show that (βà½) βâΛ 6L MN mv .
To this end, we first introduce some definitions
                                                 and notations. For i  βàà [N ] and j βàà [m], let
  (i)           (i) (i)βäΛ        (i)       (i)βäΛ         (i)                    (i)       (i)                         (i)
Zj := xj,l xj,l βà£xj,r xj,r , and Xj := 0 . . . 0 xj,l βà£ xj,r 0 . . . 0 . Note that Zj βàà RDΟ½D
                                                   | {z }
                                    h             i i-th column
     (i)                       (i)    (i)     (i)                                          (i)
and Xj βàà RDΟ½N . Then, let Έûj := Zj        Xj          βàà RDΟ½(D+N ) be the concatenation of Zj
          (i)
and Xj . Since items are all drawn from Unif(SDβà£1 ), we have
                                                                                                             βàö
                           r
                                                                              2                       2
                              (i)                  (i) (i)βäΛ     (i)    (i)βäΛ              (i)   (i)
                           Έûj             =       xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r             + xj,l βà£ xj,r         βâΛ 2 2.          (11)
                                      F                                       F                       2

In addition, let T := [M V] βàà RDΟ½(D+N ) be the concatenation of M and V. Observe that
                               v
                               u
                               u         N
                                         X            q
                                    2             2       2 + ΈΕ 2N .
                        βàΞTβàΞF = tβàΞMβàΞF +       βàΞVi βàΞ2 βâΛ ΈΕM        v                     (12)
                                                                 i=1

We are now ready to bound (*). We have
                                   οΘ°                                      οΘΙ
                                         N X m
                          2              X
                                                         (i)
                                                             D
                                                                (i)
                                                                      E
                  (βà½) =       ES,œÉ οΘΑ sup        œÉi,j β³™ yj Έûj , T οΘΜ
                         Nm         M,V i=1 j=1
                                   οΘ°                            οΘΙ
                     (a) 2L              N X m       D         E
                                                        (i)
                                         X
                      βâΛ       ES,œÉ οΘΑ sup        œÉi,j Έûj , T οΘΜ
                         Nm         M,V i=1 j=1
                                         v οΘ° οΘ°                               οΘΙοΘΙ
                                         u                                 2
                     (b) 2L
                                         u              N X  m
                                                                      (i)
                                         u οΘ· οΘ· X
                     βâΛ       sup βàΞTβàΞF ¬Ζ u                       œÉi,j Έûj
                                                                             οΘΚοΘΚ
                        N m M,V          tES οΘΑEœÉ οΘΑ                           οΘΜοΘΜ
                                                       i=1 j=1
                                                                                                          F
                                              r
                                ΈΕM2 + ΈΕ 2N
                                    (c)
                                       v
                                    βâΛ 6L    ,
                                    Nm
where (a)
         uses TalagrandβÄôs
                           contraction lemma (Mohri et al., 2018, Lemma 5.7) and the observation
              (i)
that Pr œÉi,j yj = 1 = Pr (œÉi,j = 1) = 21 for any i and j; (b) uses the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality
and JensenβÄôs inequality; and (c) uses Eq. (12) and Lemma C.11 along with Eq. (11). This completes
the proof.
    6                                                                                          (i)     (i)    (i)
        Again, for each i βàà [N ] and j βàà [m], we augment the comparison (xj,l , xj,r , yj ) in S with the user
                  (i)   (i)     (i)
index i: (i, xj,l , xj,r , yj )


                                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2    G ENERALIZATION FOR U NSEEN U SERS

Theorem 2. (Unseen user generalization) Suppose K < min(N, d), and for each comparison,
the user is asked to compare two items that are drawn i.i.d. from the uniform distribution on the unit
sphere, Unif(SDβà£1 ). Then, with probability at least 1 βà£ Έ¥ over S1 , . . . , SN ,
                                                   r                        r         s
        unseen             unseen                      ΈΕ 2 + K 2ΈΕ 2
                                                                               KΈΕ 2     8 log 4Έ¥
      L user (MΧ², QΧ²) βà£ L user (Mβà½ , Qβà½ ) βâΛ 18L          M        v
                                                                     + 3L         v
                                                                                    +            .
                                                            N                  Dm          N
Remark C.6. Maurer et al. (2016) consider multi-task learning and learning-to-learn, modeling
each task as a composite function hi β½Π f , where f is a shared representation and hi is task-specific.
They consider two settings: (1) multi-task learning with a given set of tasks, and (2) learning-to-
learn where tasks are drawn from a distribution. Setting (1) is analogous to seen-user generalization,
as studied in (Canal et al., 2022) for simulatenous metric and preference learning. To derive our
generalization bound for unseen users in preference alignment (Theorem 2), we build upon the
framework and employ the proof techniques from setting (2) in (Maurer et al., 2016).
We note that, in our mixture modeling for learning rewards, different users/tasks share not only a
common representation, but also a set of prototypical ideal points. In addition, to the best of our
knowledge, one cannot directly apply the results in (Maurer et al., 2016) to achieve the bound we
present in Theorem 2, particularly the second term which implies OΧÉ (K) sample complexity for
few-shot localization of preferences.

Proof of Theorem 2. We closely follow the proof strategy of (Maurer et al., 2016, Section 4.3),
and tailor it to our specific learning framework and function classes to achieve tighter results (e.g.,
Lemma C.7 and Lemma C.9).

Additional notations. To facilitate our proof, we first introduce some additional notations. For
any user u βàà U, let Pu denote the data-generating distribution for user u. (To be more precise, we
assume that items for all users and comparison are drawn independently from a common distribution,
specifically Unif(SDβà£1 ), but the conditional distribution of the user preference answer y given a pair
of items is user-dependent.) Given any (M, Q, w) and x = (xl , xr ), we denote the difference of
scores by
                      ΈΠ(x; M, Q, w) := xl xβäΛ            βäΛ
                                              l βà£ xr xr , M + βü®xl βà£ xr , Qwβü© .
Note that, when the context is clear, we sometimes slightly abuse notation and refer to (xl , xr ) as x;
                                                                                             m
for example, we may denote a sample of m comparisons from some user by {(xj , yj )}j=1 , where
xj = (xj,l , xj,r ). Given any representation M, prototypes Q, and a P  sample of m comparisons from
                             m                                       1    m
some user, S = {(xj , yj )}j=1 , recall that wΧÉS;M,Q βàà argminw m          j=1 β³™ (yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; M, Q, w));
we also let
                                                    m
                                                1 X
                       œ¹(S; M, Q) := min               β³™ (yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; M, Q, w)) .
                                       wβààβàÜKβà£1 m
                                                   j=1

We now prove Theorem 2. Given S1 , . . . , SN , consider the following decomposition of the excess
risk:
      unseen          unseen
   L user (MΧ², QΧ²) βà£ L user (Mβà½ , Qβà½ )
                           N
                                            !          N                        N
                                                                                                 !
        unseen         1 X                          1 X                       1 X          βà½   βà½
 βâΛ L user (MΧ², QΧ²) βà£         œ¹(Si ; MΧ², QΧ²) +              œ¹(Si ; MΧ², QΧ²) βà£        œ¹(Si ; M , Q )
                       N i=1                       N i=1                     N i=1
    |                 {z                    } |                            {z                     }
                          (i)                                            (ii), βâΛ0
             N
                                                             !
           1 X
                           βà½   βà½
                                                     βà½   βà½

   +               œ¹(Si ; M , Q ) βà£ Eu ESβàΦPum [œ¹(S; M , Q )]
           N i=1
       |                               {z                         }
                                      (iii)
                                   unseen
   + Eu ESβàΦPum [œ¹(S; Mβà½ , Qβà½ )] βà£ L user (Mβà½ , Qβà½ ) .

     |                    {z                     }
                                (iv), βâΛ0
                                                                                                   (13)


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let us look at the four terms separately:

  (i) Observe that, for any M, Q,
                                        N
                  unseen            1 X
                L user (M, Q) βà£           œ¹(Si ; M, Q)
                                    N i=1

              = Eu ESβàΦPum E(xl ,xr ,y)βàΦPu [β³™ (y ¬Ζ ΈΠ(x; M, Q, wΧÉS;M,Q ))] βà£ œ¹(S; M, Q)
                |                                  {z                                  }
                                                         (1)
                                              N
                                                             !
                                           1 X
                + Eu ESβàΦPum [œ¹(S; M, Q)] βà£       œ¹(Si ; M, Q) .
                                           N i=1
                 |                    {z                     }
                                              (2)

      Lemma C.7 and Lemma C.9 establish uniform bounds on (1) and (2), respectively. It follows
      that, with probability at least 1 βà£ 2Έ¥ ,
                                                                                    s
                                 N
                                                        r                 r
          unseen             1 X                           2 + K 2ΈΕ 2
                                                          ΈΕM       v        KΈΕv
                                                                               2      log 4Έ¥
        L user (MΧ², QΧ²) βà£           œ¹(Si ; MΧ², QΧ²) βâΛ 18L              + 3L       +3          .
                            N i=1                             N             Dm          2N
                                                                                            (14)

  (ii) This term is non-positive by the definition of (MΧ², QΧ²), which are components of the minimizer
       of the empirical risk for the seen users.
 (iii) Since (Mβà½ , Qβà½ ) does not depend on S1 , . . . , SN and œ¹(Si ; M, Q) βàà [0, 1] for any i βàà [N ]
       and M, Q, we can apply HoeffdingβÄôs inequality (Hoeffding, 1994). We have, with probability
       at least 1 βà£ 2Έ¥ ,
                                                                              s
                         N
                       1 X                                                       log 2Έ¥
                            œ¹(Si ; Mβà½ , Qβà½ ) βà£ Eu ESβàΦPum [œ¹(S; Mβà½ , Qβà½ )] βâΛ

                                                                                        .       (15)
                      N i=1                                                        2N

 (iv) This term is non-positive:
      For any u βàà U, let wuβà½ βàà argminwβààβàÜKβà£1 E(xl ,xr ,y)βàΦPu [β³™ (y ¬Ζ ΈΠ(x; Mβà½ , Qβà½ , w))]. Then,

                 Eu ESβàΦPum [œ¹(S; Mβà½ , Qβà½ )]

                    οΘ°          οΘ°                                         οΘΙοΘΙ
                                          m
                                      1  X
               = Eu οΘΑESβàΦPum οΘΑmin             β³™ (yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; Mβà½ , Qβà½ , w))οΘΜοΘΜ
                                 w m
                                         j=1
                    οΘ°          οΘ°                                       οΘΙοΘΙ
                                     m
                                 1 X
               βâΛ Eu οΘΑESβàΦPum οΘΑ           β³™ (yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; Mβà½ , Qβà½ , wuβà½ ))οΘΜοΘΜ
                                 m j=1
                                                                          unseen
               = Eu E(xl ,xr ,y)βàΦPu [β³™ (y ¬Ζ ΈΠ(x; Mβà½ , Qβà½ , wuβà½ ), y)] =: L user (Mβà½ , Qβà½ ).



The proof is completed by combining Eq. (13), Eq. (14), and Eq. (15) and applying the union
bound.
Lemma C.7. With probability at least 1 βà£ 2Έ¥ ,
                                                                           s
                                    N
                                                         r
                                 1 X                       ΈΕ 2 + K 2ΈΕ 2
                                                             M       v       log 4Έ¥
    sup Eu ESβàΦPum [œ¹(S; M, Q)] βà£       œ¹(Si ; M, Q) βâΛ 18L               +3          .
    M,Q                          N i=1                          N             2N


Proof. To avoid cluttering the notation, we denote EuβàΦΈΖ ESβàΦPum [¬Ζ] by Eu,S [¬Ζ]. Let œΒ =
(œΒ1 , . . . , œΒN ) be an array of independent standard normal random variables. Then, by (Mohri et al.,


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2018, Theorem 3.3) and (Wainwright, 2019, Excercise 5.5), with probability at least 1 βà£ 2Έ¥ ,

                                                             N
                                                         1 X
                            sup Eu,S [œ¹(S; M, Q)] βà£            œ¹(Si ; M, Q)
                            M,Q                          N i=1
                                        "                             #   s
                                                   N
                            βàö                1 X                               log 4Έ¥
                        βâΛ       2œÄ ¬Ζ EœΒ sup        œΒi ¬Ζ œ¹(Si ; M, Q) + 3              ,        (16)
                                         M,Q N i=1                              2N

        h         PN                    i
where EœΒ supM,Q N1 i=1 œΒi ¬Ζ œ¹(Si ; M, Q) is the empirical Gaussian complexity of
{S 7βÜ£ œ¹(S; M, Q) : M, Q} given S1 , . . . , SN , which we bound in the following.

Let Έ≥ βàà RN Ο½m and œÉ βàà RN Ο½mΟ½K be arrays of independent standard normal random variables,
where œΒ, Έ≥, and œÉ are mutually independent. We have

    βàö         "        N
                                           #
      mN            1 X
    βàö     ¬Ζ EœΒ sup        œΒi ¬Ζ œ¹(Si ; M, Q)
      2L        M,Q N i=1
        οΘ°     οΘΪ                                                                    οΘΕοΘΙ
(a)              N Xm     D                        E XN X
                                                        m X
                                                          K
                              (i) (i)βäΛ    (i) (i)βäΛ                   (i)    (i)
                X
βâΛ EΈ≥,œÉ οΘΑ sup οΘ≠        Έ≥ij xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M +       œÉijk QβäΛ xj,l βà£ xj,r    οΘΗοΘΜ
            M,Q                                                                                   k
                  i=1 j=1                                          i=1 j=1 k=1
        οΘ°                                   οΘΙ      οΘ°                                 οΘΙ
          N X
            m    D                         E            N X
                                                          m X
                                                            K
                   (i) (i)βäΛ    (i) (i)βäΛ                                (i)    (i)
          X                                             X
= EΈ≥ οΘΑsup     Έ≥ij xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M οΘΜ + EœÉ οΘΑsup       œÉijk QβäΛ xj,l βà£ xj,r    οΘΜ
            M i=1 j=1                                                 Q i=1 j=1                       k
                                                                                k=1
                        οΘ°                                                  οΘΙ
(b)q                N X
                      m X
                        K
                                   (i)    (i)
                    X
     2 N m + E οΘΑsup
βâΛ 2 ΈΕM        œÉ           œÉijk QβäΛ xj,l βà£ xj,r    οΘΜ
                            Q i=1 j=1                                  k
                                      k=1
(c)   q                 p
βâΛ2         2 ¬Ζ Nm + 2
          ΈΕM             KΈΕv2 ¬Ζ N mK
(d)q
        2 + K 2 ΈΕ 2 ) mN ,
βâΛ 2 2 (ΈΕM                                                                                      (17)
                 v



where


(a) follows from Lemma C.8;

(b) uses the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, JensenβÄôs inequality, and Lemma C.11:

                                οΘ°                                             οΘΙ
                                      N X
                                        m          D                         E
                                                     (i) (i)βäΛ    (i) (i)βäΛ
                                      X
                         EΈ≥ οΘΑsup                Έ≥ij xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M οΘΜ
                                    M i=1 j=1
                                 v οΘ°                                    οΘΙ
                                 u                                    2
                                 u    N X
                                        m
                                               (i) (i)βäΛ    (i) (i)βäΛ
                                 u οΘ· X
                    βâΛ sup βàΞMβàΞF ¬Ζ u        Έ≥ij xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r
                                                                        οΘΚ
                                 tE οΘΑ                                   οΘΜ
                            M                      i=1 j=1
                                                                                          F
                                 βàö
                    βâΛ 2ΈΕM N m;


                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(c) again uses the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and JensenβÄôs inequality:
                     οΘ°                                           οΘΙ
                           N Xm X K
                                                   (i)    (i)
                          X
                  EœÉ οΘΑsup            œÉijk QβäΛ xj,l βà£ xj,r         οΘΜ
                          Q i=1 j=1                                                      k
                                    k=1
                      οΘ°             *                                                    +οΘΙ
                              K             N X
                                              m
                                                                      (i)      (i)
                              X             X
               = EœÉ οΘΑsup             Qk ,                œÉijk xj,l βà£ xj,r                    οΘΜ
                          Q                 i=1 j=1
                              k=1
                      οΘ°                                 οΘΪ                                                        οΘΕ 12 οΘΙ
                                                 ! 12                                                        2
                               K                            K     N X
                                                                    m
                                                                                     (i)    (i)
                    οΘ·          X             2
                                                            X     X                                              οΘΖ οΘΚ
               βâΛ EœÉ οΘ·
                    οΘΑsup             βàΞQk βàΞ                                     œÉijk xj,l βà£ xj,r
                                                        οΘ§
                                                        οΘ≠                                                        οΘΗ οΘΚ  οΘΜ
                          Q                                          i=1 j=1
                               k=1                        k=1
                                                                                                             2
                        v     οΘ°                          οΘΙ
                        u
                        uK                             2
                                N X
                                  m
                                          (i)    (i)
                p       uX      X
               βâΛ KΈΕv2 ¬Ζ u           œÉijk xj,l βà£ xj,r     οΘΜ,
                              οΘ·                          οΘΚ
                        t  EœÉ οΘΑ
                               k=1               i=1 j=1
                                                                                                 2

    and for any k βàà [K], by the independence of the elements of œÉ,
       οΘ°                                 οΘΙ
                                       2
            N Xm                            N m                           βäΛ
                          (i)    (i)     οΘΚ X X   2   (i)             (i)       (i)    (i)
          X
                  œÉijk xj,l βà£ xj,r       οΘΜ=         E œÉijk ¬Ζ xj,l βà£ xj,r      xj,l βà£ xj,r βâΛ 4N m;
       οΘ·
    EœÉ οΘΑ
           i=1 j=1                                      i=1 j=1
                                            2

                                        βàö           βàö            p
(d) follows from the simple fact that       a+          bβâΛ        2(a + b).

Combining Eq. (16) with Eq. (17) completes the proof.

We now present Lemma C.8 used in the proof of Lemma C.7.
Lemma C.8. Given S1 , . . . , SN ,
     "        N
                                     #
           1 X
  EœΒ sup         œΒi ¬Ζ œ¹(Si ; M, Q)
      M,Q N i=1
   βàö
               οΘ°      οΘΪ                                                                               οΘΕοΘΙ
                         N X   m                                    N X m XK
     2L                 X              D
                                         (i) (i)βäΛ   (i) (i)βäΛ
                                                                E  X
                                                                                      (i)    (i)

βâΛβàö      ¬Ζ EΈ≥,œÉ οΘΑ sup οΘ≠             Έ≥ij xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M +           œÉijk QβäΛ xj,l βà£ xj,r      οΘΗοΘΜ .
    mN           M,Q    i=1 j=1                                    i=1 j=1
                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                       k=1


Proof. We apply the technique used in (Maurer et al., 2016), which utilizes the Sudakov-Fernique
inequality (e.g., Adler, 1990, reproduced as Lemma C.12). To this end, we define two Gaussian
processes, indexed by (M, Q):
                                                   N
                                                   X
                                     YM,Q =                 œΒi ¬Ζ œ¹(Si ; M, Q),
                                                    i=1

where œΒ βàà RN is an array of independent standard normal random variables, and
         βàö
              οΘΪ                                                                                οΘΕ
                  N X m                                     N X m XK
           2L    X           D
                                (i) (i)βäΛ    (i) (i)βäΛ
                                                      E    X
                                                                                (i)   (i)

WM,Q = βàö οΘ≠               Έ≥ij xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M +              œÉijk QβäΛ xj,l βà£ xj,r      οΘΗ,
           m i=1 j=1                                       i=1 j=1
                                                                                             k
                                                                                                 k=1

where Έ≥ βàà RN Ο½m and œÉ βàà RN Ο½mΟ½K are mutually independent arrays of independent standard
normal random variables. By the Sudakov-Fernique inequality (reproduced as Lemma C.12), it
suffices to show that, for any (M, Q) and (MβÄ≤ , QβÄ≤ ),
                        E (YM,Q βà£ YMβÄ≤ ,QβÄ≤ )2 βâΛ E (WM,Q βà£ WMβÄ≤ ,QβÄ≤ )2 .


Then, E supM,Q YM,Q βâΛ E supM,Q WM,Q , which completes the proof.


                                                            31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        1
                                          Pm   (i)         (i)

Recall that œ¹(Si ; M, Q) := minwβààβàÜKβà£1 m     j=1 β³™ yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(x j   ; M,  Q, w)   . Since œΒi βÄôs are inde-
pendent, we have
   E (YM,Q βà£ YMβÄ≤ ,QβÄ≤ )2

        οΘΪ                                                                                      οΘΕ2
    N               m                                    m
   X           1   X
                          (i)    (i)
                                                     1  X
                                                                  (i)      (i)

 =      οΘ≠min           β³™ yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; M, Q, w) βà£ min          β³™ yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; MβÄ≤ , QβÄ≤ , w) οΘΗ .
            w m                                   w m
   i=1             j=1                                  j=1

Now, for any i βàà [N ],
  οΘΪ                                                                             οΘΕ2
              m                                  m
  οΘ≠min 1                                      1

                       (i) (i)                         (i)    (i)
             X                                  X
                 β³™ yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; M, Q, w) βà£ min       β³™ yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; MβÄ≤ , QβÄ≤ , w) οΘΗ
      w m                                  w m
             j=1                                j=1
          οΘΪ                                                         οΘΕ2
(a)        m
        1 X      (i)    (i)

                                          (i)    (i)

βâΛ sup οΘ≠       β³™ yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; M, Q, w) βà£ β³™ yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; MβÄ≤ , QβÄ≤ , w) οΘΗ
   w    m j=1
(b)         m                                                       2
      1     X     (i)    (i)

                                           (i)    (i)
βâΛ       sup    β³™ yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; M, Q, w) βà£ β³™ yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; MβÄ≤ , QβÄ≤ , w)
      m w j=1
(c) L2          m                                           2
                         (i)               (i)
                X
βâΛ         sup         ΈΠ(xj ; M, Q, w) βà£ ΈΠ(xj ; MβÄ≤ , QβÄ≤ , w)
      m   w
                j=1
                 m  D
      L2        X        (i) (i)βäΛ    (i) (i)βäΛ
                                                      E D
                                                                     (i)    (i)
                                                                                  E 2
=        sup            xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M βà£ MβÄ≤ + (Q βà£ QβÄ≤ )βäΛ xj,l βà£ xj,r , w
      m w j=1
        m  D
(d) 2L2 X                                                            m  D
                      (i) (i)βäΛ   (i)   (i)βäΛ
                                                   E 2       2L2     X
                                                                                      (i)    (i)
                                                                                                   E 2
βâΛ                 xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M βà£ MβÄ≤         +       sup      (Q βà£ QβÄ≤ )βäΛ xj,l βà£ xj,r , w
      m j=1                                                   m w j=1
        m  D
(e) 2L2 X                                                        m   K
                      (i) (i)βäΛ   (i)   (i)βäΛ
                                                   E 2       2L2 X X
                                                                                    (i)    (i)
                                                                                                   2
βâΛ                 xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M βà£ MβÄ≤         +              (Q βà£ QβÄ≤ )βäΛ xj,l βà£ xj,r       .
      m j=1                                                   m j=1                              k
                                                                     k=1
                                                                                               (18)
where

(a) follows directly from Lemma C.13;
(b) uses the AM-QM inequality;
                                                         2
(c) follows because β³™ is L-Lipschitz, and (yz βà£ yz βÄ≤ ) = (z βà£ z βÄ≤ )2 for y βàà {¬±1} and z, z βÄ≤ βàà R;
(d) uses the simple fact that (a + b)2 βâΛ 2(a2 + b2 ); and
(e) uses the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and the fact that for any w βàà βàÜKβà£1 , βàΞwβàΞ2 βâΛ 1.

We now turn our attention to (WM,Q ). Since the elements of Έ≥ and œÉ are independent, it follows
that
   E (WM,Q βà£ WMβÄ≤ ,QβÄ≤ )2

          οΘ°οΘΪ                                                                                              οΘΕ2 οΘΙ
       2      N X m                                          N X m XK
   2L οΘ·οΘ≠     X          D
                           (i) (i)βäΛ   (i) (i)βäΛ
                                                       E    X
                                                                                             (i) (i)

=        EοΘΑ          Έ≥ij xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M βà£ MβÄ≤ +              œÉijk (Q βà£ QβÄ≤ )βäΛ xj,l βà£ xj,r        οΘΗ οΘΚ
     m
                                                                                                             οΘΜ
                                                                                                        k
             i=1 j=1                                        i=1 j=1        k=1

      m                                           m X K
  2L2 X  D (i) (i)βäΛ      (i) (i)βäΛ
                                          E 2 2L2 X
                                                                       (i)    (i)
                                                                                      2
=          xj,l xj,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , M βà£ MβÄ≤    +             (Q βà£ QβÄ≤ )βäΛ xj,l βà£ xj,r
   m j=1                                       m j=1                                k
                                                     k=1

βâΞ E (YM,Q βà£ YMβÄ≤ ,QβÄ≤ )2 ,


where the inequality follows from Eq. (18). This completes the proof.


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma C.9. Suppose for any user, when drawing a sample, m pairs of items are independently
drawn from Unif(SDβà£1 ). Then,
                                                                                r
                                                                                  KΈΕv2
  sup Eu ESβàΦPum E(xl ,xr ,y)βàΦPu [β³™ (y ¬Ζ ΈΠ(x; M, Q, wΧÉS;M,Q ))] βà£ œ¹(S; M, Q) βâΛ 3L       .
  M,Q                                                                              Dm

Proof. Let œÉ = (œÉi , . . . , œÉm ) be an array of independent Rademacher random variables. We have
             οΘ° οΘ°                                                                                              οΘΙοΘΙ
                                                                         m
                                                                     1   X
    sup Eu οΘΑES οΘΑE(x,y) [β³™ (y ¬Ζ ΈΠ(x; M, Q, wΧÉS;M,Q ))] βà£                     β³™ (ΈΠ(yj ¬Ζ xj ; M, Q, wΧÉS;M,Q ))οΘΜοΘΜ
    M,Q                                                             m j=1
             " "                                                         m
                                                                                                       !##
                                                                   1 X
 βâΛ sup Eu ES sup E(x,y) [β³™ (y ¬Ζ ΈΠ(x; M, Q, w))] βà£                          β³™ (yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; M, Q, w))
    M,Q             w                                             m i=1
               οΘ°      οΘ°                                                   οΘΙοΘΙ
(a)                                 m
                                1  X
 βâΛ 2 ¬Ζ sup Eu οΘΑES,œÉ οΘΑsup               œÉj ¬Ζ β³™ (yj ¬Ζ ΈΠ(xj ; M, Q, w))οΘΜοΘΜ
       M,Q                 w m
                                   j=1
                     οΘ°                                                                            οΘΙ
(b)                               m
                              1  X
                                      œÉj ¬Ζ βü®xj,l xβäΛ            βäΛ

βâΛ 2L ¬Ζ sup Eu,S,œÉ οΘΑsup                             j,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , Mβü© + βü®xj,l βà£ xj,r , Qwβü©
                                                                                                  οΘΜ
         M,Q            w m
                                 j=1
                     οΘ°                                         οΘΙ               οΘ°                                        οΘΙ
                                  m                                                  m
                              1  X                                               1  X
 = 2L ¬Ζ sup Eu,S,œÉ οΘΑsup               œÉj ¬Ζ βü®xj,l βà£ xj,r , Qwβü©οΘΜ + Eu,S,œÉ οΘΑ               œÉj ¬Ζ βü®xj,l xβäΛ           βäΛ
                                                                                                    j,l βà£ xj,r xj,r , Mβü©
                                                                                                                        οΘΜ
         M,Q            w m                                                      m
                                 j=1                                                j=1
                                                                       |                      {z                         }
                                                                                              =0
                     οΘ°       *m                               + οΘΙ
    2L                         X
                                         βäΛ
 =      ¬Ζ sup Eu,S,œÉ οΘΑsup           œÉi Q (xj,l βà£ xj,r ), w οΘΜ
    m Q                 w
                                j=1
              v         οΘ°                                  οΘΙ
              u                                          2
(c) 2L
              u
              u              Xn
 βâΛ      ¬Ζ sup uEu,S,œÉ οΘΑ           œÉi QβäΛ (xj,l βà£ xj,r ) οΘΜ
                        οΘ·                                  οΘΚ
    m Q t                    j=1
                                                         2
             v
             um
(d) 2L
             uX
βâΛ      ¬Ζ sup t      EœÉ [œÉj2 ] ¬Ζ tr (QQβäΛ Eu,S [(xj,l βà£ xj,r )(xj,l βà£ xj,r )βäΛ ])
    m Q         j=1
             v
             u2 m
             u X
(e) 2L
 =     ¬Ζ sup t         tr (QQβäΛ )
    m Q         D j=1
      r
(f)      KΈΕv2
 βâΛ 3L         ,
          Dm
where

(a) introduces the Rademacher random variables and uses the standard symmetrization technique
    (e.g., Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014, Lemma 26.2);
(b) uses TalagrandβÄôs contraction lemma (e.g., Mohri et al., 2018, Lemma 5.7) along with the fact
    that the loss function β³™ is L-Lipschitz;
(c) uses the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, JensenβÄôs inequality and the fact that any vector w βàà
    βàÜKβà£1 satisfies βàΞwβàΞ2 βâΛ 1.
(d) follows because œÉi βÄôs are independent Rademacher random variables and uses the linearity of
    expectation and the trace operator;


                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(e) uses
        the observation    that    for two independent vectors z, zβÄ≤ from Unif(SDβà£1 ),
    E (z βà£ zβÄ≤ )(z βà£ zβÄ≤ )βäΛ = D
                            2
                              ID ; and
                                                               2
 (f) uses the observation that tr(QQβäΛ ) = βàΞQβàΞF βâΛ KΈΕv2 .

C.3     AUXILIARY L EMMAS

Lemma C.10 (Matrix Bernstein, Tropp et al., 2015). Let X1 , . . . , Xm βàà Rd1 Ο½d2 be independent
random matrices such that E [Xi ] = 0 and βàΞXi βàΞ βâΛ R for each i βàà [m]. Let
                                ( m                   m
                                                                       )
                                   X                 X
                                       E Xi XβäΛ           E XβäΛ

                      ΈΙ = max                  i   ,           i Xi      .
                                                i=1                         i=1

Then,                    "                  #
                             m
                             X                      p                     1
                     E              Xi          βâΛ       2ΈΙ log(d1 + d2 ) + R log(d1 + d2 ).
                             i=1
                                                                          3
Lemma C.11. Let Z = (Z1 , . . . , Zn ) be an array of matrices such that βàΞZi βàΞF βâΛ B  i , and    œÉ =
(œÉ1 , . . . , œÉn ) be an array of independent random variables such that E [œÉi ] = 0 and E œÉi2 = 1 for
all i βàà [n]. Then,                         οΘ°             οΘΙ
                                               n       2      n
                                              X              X
                                        EœÉ οΘΑ     œÉi Zi οΘΜ βâΛ       Bi2
                                                      i=1            F           i=1


Proof. We have
                 οΘ°                      οΘΙ             οΘ° οΘΪ                        !βäΛ             !οΘΕοΘΙ
                     n              2                           n                      n
                     X                                          X                      X
             EœÉ οΘΑ          œÉ i Zi       οΘΜ = EœÉ οΘΑtr οΘ≠                     œÉi Zi               œÉi Zi οΘΗοΘΜ
                     i=1            F                           i=1                    i=1
                                                 οΘ° οΘΪ                                οΘΕοΘΙ
                                                      X                 X
                                            = EœÉ οΘΑtr οΘ≠  œÉ i œÉ j ZβäΛ
                                                                 i Zj +   œÉi2 ZβäΛ
                                                                               i Zi
                                                                                    οΘΗοΘΜ
                                                              iΧΗ=j                       i
                                                 οΘΪ                                         οΘΕ
                                                  X                         X
                                                        EœÉ [œÉi œÉj ] ZβäΛ        EœÉ œÉi2 ZβäΛ

                                            = tr οΘ≠                   i Zj +           i Zi οΘΗ
                                                 οΘ§                                         οΘΖ
                                                   iΧΗ=j
                                                        |  {z    }          i
                                                                              | {z  }
                                                                   =0                           =1
                                                n
                                                X
                                                      tr ZβäΛ

                                            =             i Zi
                                                i=1
                                                n
                                                X
                                            βâΛ         Bi2 .
                                                i=1

Lemma C.12 (Sudakov-Fernique inequality, e.g., Adler, 1990, Theorem 2.9). Let X and Y be two
centered, almost surely bounded Gaussian processes indexed by t βàà T such that, for all t, s βàà T ,
                               E (Xt βà£ Xs )2 βâΛ E (Yt βà£ Ys )2 .


Then,
                                                E sup Xt βâΛ E sup Yt .
                                                    tβààT                    tβààT
Lemma C.13. Let f and g be functions from X to [0, 1] that are parameterized by w βàà W. Given
x1 , . . . , xn βàà X , we have
                     n                    n
                                                      !         n
                                                                                         !2
                 1X                     1X                   1X
             min       f (xi ; w) βà£ min      g(xi ; w) βâΛ sup       f (xi ; w) βà£ g(xi ; w) .
              w n                    w n                  w  n i=1
                   i=1                   i=1


Proof. Let us consider two cases:


                                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



             Pn                          Pn
1. minw n1                           1
               i=1 f (xi ; w) βà£ minw n     i=1 g(xi ; w) βâΞ 0:
                          Pn
  Let wgβà½ βàà argmin n    1
                            i=1 g(xi ; w). It follows that
                         n                   n                 n
                      1X                1    X              1X
                                                                  f (xi ; wgβà½ ) βà£ g(xi ; wgβà½ ) .

         0 βâΛ min            f (xi ; w) βà£ min    g(xi ; w) βâΛ
                  w   n i=1             n w i=1             n i=1

  Therefore,
             n                   n
                                             !2                       n
                                                                                                         !2
           1X               1    X                                 1X
                                                                         f (xi ; wgβà½ ) βà£ g(xi ; wgβà½ )

       min      f (xi ; w) βà£ min    g(xi ; w)   βâΛ
        w n                 n w i=1                                n i=1
            i=1
                                                                          n
                                                                                                     !2
                                                                       1X
                                                             βâΛ sup           (f (xi ; w) βà£ g(xi ; w)) .
                                                               w       n i=1

             Pn                          Pn
2. minw n1                           1
               i=1 f (xi ; w) βà£ minw n     i=1 g(xi ; w) < 0:
                                    Pn
  Similarly, let wfβà½ βàà argmin n   1
                                      i=1 f (xi ; w). Then,
            n                                       n                   n
         1X                                       1X               1    X
               f (xi ; wfβà½ ) βà£ g(xi ; wfβà½ ) < min

                                                       f (xi ; w) βà£ min    g(xi ; w) < 0.
         n i=1                                 w n
                                                   i=1
                                                                   n w i=1

  It follows that
            n                   n
                                                     !2            n
                                                                                                      !2
          1X               1    X                               1X
                                                                      f (xi ; wfβà½ ) βà£ g(xi ; wfβà½ )

      min      f (xi ; w) βà£ min    g(xi ; w)              βâΛ
       w n                 n w i=1                              n i=1
           i=1
                                                                          n
                                                                                                         !2
                                                                      1X
                                                          βâΛ sup             (f (xi ; w) βà£ g(xi ; w))          .
                                                               w      n i=1


                                                    35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

D.1     G ENERAL P ROCEDURE

We initialize our models with random weights for all of our experiments, including the prototypical
weight for each user. We apply the softmax function to each prototypical weight to ensure that it is
a probability vector. For the unseen user, we initialize its prototypical weight randomly. However,
when we update the model using gradient descent, we fix the learned projectors and the prototypical
points and only update the prototypical weight of the unseen users. During the training of the Large
variant of PAL, we sample # batchsize samples from the preference datasets and concurrently update
the shared foundation model, the mapping functions, and the corresponding user-specific weights
for each sample. For the Tiny variant of PAL, we fix the foundation model and keep updating other
components.

D.2     N UMERICAL S IMULATION

Experiment Setup. We introduce the dataset simulation procedure in Section 4.2. We use the
following hyperparameters to generate the synthetic dataset: d = 16, K = 3, N = 100, n =
100, Έ¥ = 1. We generate another 50 comparison pairs per user as the held-out dataset. Note that
here we donβÄôt follow the prompt-guided item generation, i.e. conditioning xc generates xl and
xr . Instead, we directly draw the item {xl , xr } from a normal distribution for simplicity. In the
experimental setup, we apply a toy version of PAL-A, where the distance between the synthetic
item and the userβÄôs ideal point is measured by βàΞf (x) βà£ f (u)βàΞ2 . We use a projection matrix (i.e.
one-layer MLP network without bias term and activation function) as the model architecture. We
randomly initialize the learnable parameters of prototypical user groups and user weights and use
the Adam optimizer. The projector f has learning rate 5e βà£ 4 and weight decay 1e βà£ 3. The
learning rate of the learnable parameters of prototypical user groups and user weights is 5e βà£ 3.
With the aim of good convergence, we train for 1000 epochs per run. We run multiple trials to
explore the influence of each hyperparameter: 1) varying the number of samples of seen users
n = {20, 40, 60, 80, 100, 400, 800, 1000}, d = {2, 16}, K = 5, N = 250, 2) varying the number of
samples of new users nnew = {5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 100}, d = {2, 16}, K = 5, n = 50, 3) varying
the number of groups K = {2, 3, 4, 5, 6}, d = {2, 16}, n = 50, N = 50 βà½ K. We plot the results of
this experiment in Figure 5 and discuss implications in Section 4.2.
We consider two variants of modeling each userβÄôs ideal point through the lens of a shared group
structure of preferences via prototypical ideal points (henceforth referred to as βÄ€prototypesβÄù):

      S1. Mixture Model: a user ideal point is a convex combination of K prototypes, i.e. lies in the
          convex hull of all prototypes.
      S2. Partition Model: a user ideal point is one of K prototypes.

To visualize how well PAL can adjust to the true number of user groups present in data, via learnable
prototypical points to represent each group, we consider a simple setting with d = 2, K βà½ = 3,
K = {1, 2, 3} and N = 100 and plot the results in Figure D.1 for both partition and mixture
settings. We also plot items in the partition setting in Figure D.2.

Partition Model : With only a single allowed assignment for a learnable prototype (Figure D.1a.,
K = 1), the predicted prototype is approximately the centroid of the true prototypes, i.e. the model
tries to predict a good group assignment on average. Also note that since we have a single prototype,
all predicted user ideal points lie on the prototype itself and performance is close to random. As we
increase the degrees of freedom for learnable prototypes to two (Figure D.1b., K = 2), the model
can predict one prototype close to a true prototype (in red), while the other predicted prototype is
approximately an average of the blue and green true prototypes. User ideal points now lie in the
convex hull of these two predicted prototypes, i.e. the line joining these points. It is only when we
increase K = K βà½ , i.e. we match the βÄ€trueβÄù number of groups in the data (Figure D.1c., K = 3), the
model can correctly predict close to all three true prototypes, and user ideal points are concentrated
around the predicted prototypes. These observations extend to Figure D.2, where we additionally
plot normally distributed items. Recall that in our modeling design, the distance between the user


                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        a . Partition, K = 1              b . Partition, K = 2               c . Partition, K = 3


        d . Mixture, K = 1                 e . Mixture, K = 2                f . Mixture, K = 3

Figure D.1: In synthetic dataset experiments (Section 4.2), we model user ideal points in two distinct
ways: the partition model and the mixture model. To visualize how PAL performs in these settings,
we set d = 2, K βà½ = 3, K = {1, 2, 3} and N = 100 where each user ideal point and prototype is
represented as a point in a two-dimensional space. In both scenarios, as the number of prototypes
or user groups in our model (K) approaches the true number in the synthetic dataset (K βà½ ), the PAL
framework effectively learns both the prototypes and the heterogeneous user ideal points.


ideal point and the item reflects the userβÄôs preference; hence the closer the predicted user ideal point
is to the true ideal point, the higher the performance.

Mixture Model : The results for the mixture model are similar to those of the partition model.
With a single allowed assignment for a learnable prototype (Figure D.1(d.), K = 1), the predicted
prototype is approximately the centroid of the true prototypes. As we increase the degrees of free-
dom to two (Figure D.1(e.), K = 2), predicted prototypes are close to two true prototypes, but one
is neglected. When we increase K = K βà½ (Figure D.1(f.), K = 3), matching the true number of
groups in the data, the mixture model successfully predicts prototypes that lie close to all three true
prototypes. This demonstrates that similar to the partition model, the mixture model can also adjust
well to the true number of user groups present in the data.

D.3   R EDDIT TL;DR S UMMARY (T EXT- TO -T EXT )

Detials of seen dataset. We train PAL reward models on a variant of the Reddit TL;DR Summary
dataset from Li et al. (2024). In this variant, only the ten workers who gave the most feedback
were chosen (Each user contains at least 1,000 samples). These ten workers are then divided into
a majority and minority group, where the majority prefers the longer response, and the minority
prefers the shorter response. More details about how the dataset is generated can be found in Section
6.1 of Li et al. (2024). This processed dataset contains 20,969 training samples, 2,330 validation
samples, and 4,921 test samples. Each example consists of one user ID, one prompt, two responses,
and the userβÄôs preference.
Details of unseen dataset. We selected all workers, excluding the ten used in the seen dataset, as
candidates for the unseen dataset. From this pool, we filtered users with at least 100 valid comparison
pairs (i.e., no missing values), resulting in a total of 31 users. We randomly assigned 70% of these
users to prefer longer summaries, while the remaining users were designated as preferring shorter


                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  a . K = 1, Test Acc = 72.2%           b . K = 2, Test Acc = 83.96%       c . K = 3, Test Acc = 91.26%

Figure D.2: Here we plot all items, the predicted user ideal points, and predicted and true prototypes
in two-dimensional feature space. The items are normally distributed with d = 2, K βà½ = 3, N =
100, n = 100. As seen in the figure, when we set the number of prototypes in the model K equal to
the true number of user groups K βà½ = 3, PAL can accurately capture the group structure and predict
each userβÄôs ideal preference point, as well as the prototypes that represent each group (K = 3).


Table D.1: Seen user test accuracy of PAL vs. P-DPO (Li et al. v2) and vanilla DPO on the Reddit
TL;DR Summary dataset. We run 5 trials with K = 2 and K = 1. Our method consistently
performs better than the baseline methods. For the Large version of PAL, we use OPT-350M as
the foundation model.

                    Model                          Params    Seen User Test Accuracy
                    PAL-A-Tiny (K = 2)             1.6M             52.91 ¬± 0.55
                    PAL-B-Tiny (K = 2)             2.4M             79.54 ¬± 0.54
                    PAL-A-Large (K = 2)            352M             90.00 ¬± 1.89
                    PAL-B-Large (K = 2)            352M             92.82 ¬± 0.95
                    P-DPO Individual               6.7B                 91.04
                    P-DPO Cluster (K = 5)          6.7B                 91.12
                    PAL-A-Tiny (K = 1)             1.6M             49.99 ¬± 0.17
                    PAL-B-Tiny (K = 1)             1.6M             51.51 ¬± 0.08
                    PAL-A-Large (K = 1)            352M             61.28 ¬± 2.25
                    PAL-B-Large (K = 1)            352M             59.96 ¬± 3.45
                    Vanilla DPO                    6.7B                 58.91



summaries. Based on these assignments, the usersβÄô preferences were re-labeled. Given the varying
numbers of few-shot samples in the training set, we partitioned each userβÄôs comparison pairs into
training, validation, and test sets, resulting in multiple datasets.
We leverage multiple pretrained LLMs, including OPT-350M, DistillBERT, Bge-m3, and
gte-Qwen2,7 as the base model, combined with two-layer MLPs utilizing GELU activation. In
the Tiny variant of PAL, we fix the pretrained foundation model and only train the two-layer MLP,
whereas in the Large variant, we also train the foundation model. In our PAL reward model, we
set K = 2 and apply different learning rates for various model components: 9.65e-6 for pretrained
LLMs (Large), 1e-4 for the two-layer MLPs, and 5e-3 for user weights. The higher learning rate of
user weights can enhance the exploration of each userβÄôs weight across user groups. As with typical
reward models, we train for only 1 epoch to avoid overfitting. The hyperparameter configurations
are detailed in Table D.2. The training process takes roughly 1 hour on 1Ο½RTX4090 GPU.
The loss design follows the typical loss of the Reward Model, we use the cumulative loss which
weights the per-token reward loss,


   7
       Li et al. (2024) use GPT-J 6.7B. However, the model card for that model on Hugging Face is broken.


                                                     38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table D.2: The training hyperparameter setting of PAL reward modeling on Reddit TL;DR. The
corresponding experiment setup is described in Section 3.1.

                Hyperparameters                            Values
                K                                          2
                Batch size                                 4
                Projectors                                 mlp-2layer-gelu-dropout0
                Epoch                                      1
                Learning rate of LLM                       9.65e-6
                Learning rate of projectors                1e-4
                Learning rate of user weights              5e-3
                Weight decay of LLM                        0.0
                Weight decay of projectors                 0.01
                Weight decay of user weights               0.0
                Loss weighting                             cumulative
                Dimension of preference embedding          512
                End of conversation token                  <|endoftext|>
                Maximum sequence length                    600


                                           PL                      (i)            (i)
                                            i=1 i ¬Ζ log œÉ   r(x, yl    ) βà£ r(x, yw    )
                  LRM (x, yw , yl ; ΈΗ) =
                                                         (L + 1)L/2

where x is the prompt, y (i) represents the LLM backbone prediction at generation timestep i, yw
and yl separately represent the winning response and the losing response. Note that in our imple-
mentation of PAL-A, we concatenate the prompt and the item on the token level. Therefore, the
embedding for an item produced by a foundation model already contains the information of the
prompt. This implementation allows us to use the embedding directly without needing to concate-
nate it with the embedding of the prompt. Table D.1 reports the performance of our models and
the numbers reported in Li et al. (2024). We run our model 5 times and report the mean and stan-
dard deviation. We want to note that even though we did not conduct any hyperparameter tuning,
With heterogeneous modeling (K > 1), PAL-B-Large achieves approximately +1.8% higher
prediction accuracy compared to the state-of-the-art heterogeneous P-DPO (Li et al. (2024)) with 5
clusters. With homogeneous modeling (K = 1), PAL-A-Large is able to outperform vanilla DPO
by +2.4%.

D.3.1   F EW- SHOT GENERALIZATION TO UNSEEN USERS

The procedure for few-shot generalization to unseen users is as follows: We randomly initialize
the user weights, as done during seen user training, and then learn the user weights while keep-
ing the LLM components and MLP projectors fixed. Since only the user weights need to be
learned, the sample efficiency is significantly higher compared to seen user training. Results in-
dicate that with just 20 samples per new user, we can achieve performance comparable to that of
seen user generalization (Figure 3). In Table D.3, we compare the performance of PAL-A-Tiny,
PAL-A-Large, PAL-B-Tiny, and PAL-B-Large trained on OPT-350M embeddings when
K = 2 and N = 10, 20, 50, 100. Our results show that PAL-A-Large, PAL-B-Tiny, and
PAL-B-Large outperform the baselines substantially. We note that while P-DPO was state-of-
the-art on seen users, itβÄôs performance drops off dramatically for unseen users (-36.6%), while
PAL-B-Tiny (91.63%) exceeds P-DPOβÄôs state-of-the-art seen accuracy (91.12%) with only
10 samples on unseen users! This indicates the promising potential of PAL for cheap few-shot
adaptation to new, unseen users in a sample-efficient manner.
We observe that increasing sample complexity N from 10 to 100 is impactful only for
PAL-B-Tiny (+3%), while the other configurations gain only +0.4 to +1%. PAL-B vastly out-
performs PAL-A for the same size and sample complexity (up to +27%). Lastly, Large models
outperform their Tiny counterparts across sample complexities from +14.2 to +23.5%.


                                                  39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure D.3: We evaluate few-shot adaptation capabilities via unseen accuracy on the Reddit TL;DR
dataset comparing to state-of-the-art Li et al. (2024) and simple vanilla DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024).

Table D.3: Unseen user generalization of PAL compared to baselines on the Reddit TL;DR Summary
dataset. Here N refers to the number of samples used to learn the weights for the unseen users, and
seen accuracies are those reported in Table D.1. We note that with just 10 samples for each new
(unseen) user, PAL-B-Large exceeds state-of-the-art performance of P-DPO with K=5 (91.12%),
demonstrating the suitability of PAL for few-shot adaptation and generalization to new users.

                       Model                   Seen Accuracy (%)      Unseen Accuracy (%)
        P-DPO individual                              91.04                   55.34
        P-DPO K=5                                     91.12                   54.55
        Vanilla DPO                                   58.91                   55.37
        PAL-A-Tiny K = 2, N = 10                                           50.12 ¬± 1.20
        PAL-A-Tiny K = 2, N = 20                                           50.55 ¬± 0.43
                                                  52.91 ¬± 0.55
        PAL-A-Tiny K = 2, N = 50                                           50.49 ¬± 0.39
        PAL-A-Tiny K = 2, N = 100                                          50.40 ¬± 0.55
        PAL-B-Tiny K = 2, N = 10                                           74.88 ¬± 0.79
        PAL-B-Tiny K = 2, N = 20                                           77.37 ¬± 0.37
                                                  79.54 ¬± 0.54
        PAL-B-Tiny K = 2, N = 50                                           76.19 ¬± 0.49
        PAL-B-Tiny K = 2, N = 100                                          77.80 ¬± 0.07
        PAL-A-Large K = 2, N = 10                                          73.39 ¬± 1.82
        PAL-A-Large K = 2, N = 20                                          74.04 ¬± 2.50
                                                  90.00 ¬± 1.89
        PAL-A-Large K = 2, N = 50                                          72.33 ¬± 2.36
        PAL-A-Large K = 2, N = 100                                         74.39 ¬± 1.70
        PAL-B-Large K = 2, N = 10                                         91.63 ¬± 1.43
        PAL-B-Large K = 2, N = 20                                         91.72 ¬± 1.40
                                                 92.82 ¬± 0.95
        PAL-B-Large K = 2, N = 50                                         92.02 ¬± 1.10
        PAL-B-Large K = 2, N = 100                                        91.97 ¬± 1.91



D.3.2   C HOICE OF FOUNDATION MODEL

The choice of foundation model is an important factor that impacts the performance of PAL, es-
pecially for PAL-A-Tiny and PAL-A-Large. This is because the foundation model directly
decides the quality of the embeddings we obtain for the items. Table D.4 illustrates that there is a
performance gap between using OPT-350M and DistilBERT as the foundation model, especially
for Tiny variants where we do not train the foundation model. The existence of such a gap is possi-
bly due to the fact that DistilBERT is an encoder-based model, which provides a better sentence
embedding than the decoder-based OPT-350M.


                                                 40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table D.4: Comparison of performance of PAL-A-Tiny and PAL-A-Large with different foun-
dation models on the Summary dataset.

            Model                          Foundation Model        Seen User Test Accuracy
                                           OPT-350M                       52.91 ¬± 0.55
            PAL-A-Tiny (K = 2)
                                           DistilBERT                     72.99 ¬± 1.21
                                           OPT-350M                        90 ¬± 1.89
            PAL-A-Large (K = 2)
                                           DistilBERT                     91.75 ¬± 0.41

Table D.5: Personas used across various βÄ€trueβÄù number of user groups K β΄Ü in our heterogeneous
persona dataset.

  Kβ΄Ü                                               Personas
  2     interest in art, interest in literature
  3     interest in art, interest in literature, interest in math
  4     interest in art, interest in literature, interest in math, interest in music
  5     interest in art, interest in literature, interest in math, interest in music, interest in science
        interest in art, interest in literature, interest in math, interest in music, interest in science,
  6
        interest in sports


D.4    P ERSONA (T EXT- TO -T EXT )

AnthropicβÄôs Persona dataset Perez et al. (2022) consists of a series of personalities (personas), each
corresponding with 500 statements that agree with the persona and 500 statements that do not. We
denote the set of statements that agrees with a persona œ¹ as S(œ¹). We construct a semi-synthetic
dataset using AnthropicβÄôs Persona to evaluate PAL.
Dataset. Let œ¹ = {œ¹1 , . . . , œ¹K β΄Ü } denote the set of personas that exists in our semi-synthetic hetero-
geneous dataset with K β΄Ü βÄ€trueβÄù preference (prototypical) groups i.e. each person (user) has one of
the K β΄Ü personalities. For each œ¹j βàà œ¹, we generate N synthetic seen and unseen users. For each
seen synthetic user, we generate np queries that ask if the user agrees with a given statement from
the persona dataset. For each unseen synthetic user, we generate np,unseen queries. If the statement
aligns with the persona œ¹j of the user, i.e. the statement belongs to S(œ¹j ), then the user answers
yes, otherwise no. Table D.5 lists the personas used for each K β΄Ü , and Figure D.4 shows a sample
question.
Experiment Setup. We evaluate the performance of PAL-A-Tiny with hinge loss and model
PAL-B-Tiny with logistic loss on the heterogeneous persona dataset in various settings. Both
model utitlize a 2-layer MLP as the f function. To examine the impact of various hyperparameters,
we conduct experiments varying the number of true prototypes in the dataset K β΄Ü , the number of
prototypical groups used in the model K, queries per seen user np , and latent dimension d with a
fixed number of users per group N = 10, 000. Details of the values for each hyperparameter used
are listed below:
(a) varying K β΄Ü = {2, . . . , 6} and K = {1, . . . , 8} while fixing np = 1000, d = 16,
(b) varying np = {75, 100, 200, 500, 1000} and K = {1, . . . , 5} while fixing K β΄Ü = 4, and d = 16,
(c) varying d = {4, 8, 16, 32, 64} and K = {1, . . . , 5} while fixing K β΄Ü = 4, and np = 1000,
(d) varying np,unseen = {1, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000} and K = {1, . . . , 5} while fixing K β΄Ü =
    4, np = 1000, and d = 16.
Both PAL-A-Tiny and PAL-B-Tiny used the same value, except for d. This is because PAL-A
utilizes a residual connection. Therefore, the latent dimension is fixed to 768, the dimension of the
input embedding.
Results. We repeat these experiments five times and report the results on PAL-A-Tiny in Fig-
ure D.5 and on PAL-B-Tiny in Figure D.6. Both Figure D.6 and Figure D.5 (a, b) illustrate
the generalization performance of PAL-A-Tiny and PAL-B-Tiny on the heterogeneous persona
dataset. We observe that as K βÜ£ K β΄Ü , the seen accuracy increases to 100% given a sufficient number


                                                    41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure D.4: An example of a pairwise comparison query with a prompt from our heterogeneous
persona dataset generated using AnthropicβÄôs Personas. For example, a synthetic user assigned the
persona interest in art will have ground truth y = βà£1 by answering no, whereas a synthetic user
assigned the persona interest in math will have ground truth y = +1 by answering yes.


Figure D.5: Seen accuracy (a,b) and unseen accuracy (c) evaluated on the heterogeneous persona
dataset across the number of prototypes K used in PAL-A-Tiny. The number of true prototypes
K β΄Ü in (b, c) is 4. We vary (a) the number of true prototypes K β΄Ü , (b) the number of comparisons
per seen user np , (c) the number of comparisons per unseen user np,unseen . Since we used a residual
connection in the PAL-A-Tiny, we could not vary the size of the latent dimension.

of users and number of comparisons per user. Figure D.5 and Figure D.6 (b) shows that as we get
more comparisons per user, we achieve better seen user accuracy, i.e. we can generalize to unseen
pairs for users who are seen (provide training samples) in the dataset. Figure D.6 (c) shows that the
size of latent dimension d does not affect the seen accuracy dramatically. Figure D.5 (c) and Figure
D.6 show the accuracy for unseen users, i.e., users who do not provide training samples. When
K = 1, no further learning is needed to generalize to new users. However, when K > 1, we require
weights over the K prototypes for the new users to be learned. To learn these new user weights, as
discussed in Section 2.2, we fix the K prototypes and the mapping f and use only a few test data
samples to learn the user weights (C4). We use these learned weights to make predictions on the
remaining test data. From Figure D.5 (c) and Figure D.6 (d), we see that for K = 1 the number of
samples used to learn weights makes no difference since there are no weights to learn over a single
prototype. For K = 2, we see that as we use more data for learning the new user weights, the
performance shows diminishing returns until saturation. We also demonstrate that as the number of
prototypes K increases, more comparisons per user are needed to learn the new user weights, since
the dimension of the weight vector increases with K.

D.5   P ICK - A -P IC (T EXT- TO -I MAGE )

Dataset. The Pick-a-Pic dataset is a large, open dataset designed to capture human preferences in
text-to-image generation. It includes over 500,000 examples where users compare two AI-generated
images based on a text prompt and choose their preferred one. This dataset is used to align models
with human preferences.
Experiment Setup. We apply PAL-B-Tiny on the Pick-a-Pic dataset. Since the Pick-a-Pic dataset
collection process requires strict rubrics, the labels collected from workers may not reflect the
workerβÄôs diverse preferences. Thus we set K = 1 for the PAL model. We use two-layer MLP
networks with ReLU activation and residual connections as the mapping functions. To avoid over-
fitting we set the dropout rate to 0.5 and weight decay to 1e βà£ 2. We apply different learning rates
for various model components: 1e βà£ 4 for the two-layer MLPs and 5e βà£ 3 for user weights.


                                                 42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure D.6: Seen accuracy (a,b,c) and unseen accuracy (d) evaluated on the heterogeneous persona
dataset across the number of prototypes K used in the PAL-B-Tiny. The number of true pro-
totypes K β΄Ü in (b, c, d) is 4. We vary (a) the number of true prototypes K β΄Ü , (b) the number of
comparisons per seen user np , (c) the size of latent dimension d, (d) the number of comparisons per
unseen user np,unseen .
     Table D.6: Number of samples in each split of the newly constructed Pick-a-Filter dataset.


                                   Category          Train    Val     Test
                                         Seen       58831     628    1597
                             Group 1     Unseen      9527      79    1886
                                         Total      68358     707    3483
                                         Seen       57200     404    2096
                             Group 2     Unseen      9402      52    1812
                                         Total      66602     456    3908


D.6   P ICK - A -F ILTER (T EXT- TO -I MAGE )

Dataset: due to the high level of βÄ€agreementβÄù among labelers over image preferences on Pick-a-
Pic v1 (Kirstain et al., 2024), we construct a semi-synthetic dataset by applying filters to a subset
of Pick-a-Pic v1, which we call the Pick-a-Filter dataset. To construct the dataset, we consider only
samples that have no ties, i.e. the labeler decides that one image is decisively preferable to the other,
given the text prompt. As Pick-a-Pic provides unique and anonymous user IDs for all preference
pairs, we consider a subset of users who provide samples in both the train and test sets (468 / 4223
users). We further only consider users who provide more than 50 labels (234 / 468 users) and sort
the users by number of samples provided. We split these users into equal groups of 117 each, and we
assume without loss of generality that the first group of users (G1) prefers βÄ€coldβÄù tones (blue filter)
and the second group (G2) prefers βÄ€warmβÄù tones (red filter). Lastly, we arbitrarily consider the first
50 users (who provide the most number of samples) as βÄ€seenβÄù users, i.e. users that provide samples
in both the train and test sets of Pick-a-Filter. We add this seen vs. unseen distinction to evaluate how
well PAL can adapt to unseen (i.e. new) users after training. Currently, our experiments on Pick-
a-Filter (Section 3.3) train on v1-train-seen (116031 samples) and evaluate on v1-test-seen (3693
samples). We show the number of samples in each of these splits in Table D.6. After constructing
splits, we apply the following filtering logic:

      1. Apply βÄ€winningβÄù and βÄ€losingβÄù filters to appropriate images depending on label. For G1 the
         winning filter is blue, and for G2 the winning filter is red.
      2. Randomly shortlist Έ≤% of samples to add filters. The remaining (1 βà£ Έ≤)% of samples will
         remain unaltered (default images from Pick-a-Pic v1).
      3. Randomly select 50% of above-shortlisted samples to apply a filter to only the winning
         image, and the remaining 50% to apply a filter to only losing image

We add these sources of randomness to make learning preferences on Pick-a-Filter less prone to
hacking (e.g. the model could trivially learn to predict an image with a filter as the preferred image).
Experiment Setup. We choose 2-layer MLP networks with ReLU activation and residual connec-
tion as the prompt mapping function gk and the output mapping function f . To avoid overfitting, we
set the dropout rate to 0.5 and weight decay to 1e βà£ 2. We use the Adam optimizer with a learning


                                                   43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure D.7: The construction diagram for the semi-synthetic Pick-a-Filter dataset. It involves ran-
domly selecting approximately 135,000 samples from the Pick-a-Pic v1 dataset and dividing the
user IDs into two disjoint groups. We assume one group prefers images with βÄ€cold toneβÄù (blue)
filters and the other with βÄ€warm toneβÄù (red) filters. To incorporate diverse color filter preferences,
we randomly select Έ≤% of samples per user on which to apply filters.


rate 1e βà£ 4. To evaluate the modelβÄôs performance, we use the checkpoint with the highest accuracy
on the validation set.


                                                 44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E   C OMPUTATIONAL R ESOURCES
We conducted most of our experiments using 4Ο½RTX 4090, each with 24 GB of VRAM. For the
experiments involving a foundation model that has 1.3B parameters or more, we used 2 Ο½ A100,
each with 80GB of VRAM. A typical run of the experimentw finished within 2 hours.


                                               45
