Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EVISITING M ODE C ONNECTIVITY IN N EURAL N ET-
WORKS WITH B EZIER S URFACE

 Jie Ren1,2 , Pin-Yu Chen3 , Ren Wang1∗
 1
   Illinois Institute of Technology, 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison, 3 IBM Research



                                              A BSTRACT

            Understanding the loss landscapes of neural networks (NNs) is critical for op-
            timizing model performance. Previous research has identified the phenomenon
            of mode connectivity on curves, where two well-trained NNs can be connected
            by a continuous path in parameter space where the path maintains nearly con-
            stant loss. In this work, we extend the concept of mode connectivity to explore
            connectivity on surfaces, significantly broadening its applicability and unlock-
            ing new opportunities. While initial attempts to connect models via linear sur-
            faces in parameter space were unsuccessful, we propose a novel optimization
            technique that consistently discovers Bézier surfaces with low-loss and high-
            accuracy connecting multiple NNs in a nonlinear manner. We further demon-
            strate that even without optimization, mode connectivity exists in certain cases of
            Bézier surfaces, where the models are carefully selected and combined linearly.
            This approach provides a deeper and more comprehensive understanding of the
            loss landscape and offers a novel way to identify models with enhanced perfor-
            mance for model averaging and output ensembling. We demonstrate the effec-
            tiveness of our method on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and Tiny-ImageNet datasets
            using VGG16, ResNet18, and ViT architectures. The codes are available at
            https://github.com/TIML-Group/MCSurface.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Understanding the loss landscapes of deep neural networks (DNNs) is crucial for understanding the
training process in deep learning (Keskar et al., 2017). One of the most compelling phenomena
observed within these landscapes is mode connectivity - trained models (modes) in a model’s pa-
rameter space can be connected by paths of low loss (Garipov et al., 2018; Draxler et al., 2018). This
phenomenon reveals that neural networks, even when initialized differently and converging to dis-
tinct optima, may share underlying structural relationships that allow for smooth transitions between
them in parameter space. Understanding how these optima are connected can reveal key information
about a network’s performance across different tasks and datasets (Wortsman et al., 2022), as well
as its stability and susceptibility to adversarial attacks (Zhao et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2024; 2023).
One widely studied form of mode connectivity is linear mode connectivity, which describes a more
specific scenario where the linear interpolation between two trained neural networks maintains a
roughly constant loss (Frankle et al., 2020). Importantly, the discovery of mode connectivity has led
to many applications such as exploring the safety alignment of large language models (Peng et al.,
2024), where visualizing the safety landscape reveals how finetuning can compromise safety, and
improved model robustness by finding paths in flat regions of the loss landscape (Zhao et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2024; Tatro et al., 2020), making models less sensitive to adversarial examples. Addi-
tionally, it enhances optimization efficiency by aiding escape from local minima and supports class
incremental learning by enabling smooth connections between tasks without forgetting (Wortsman
et al., 2022; Wen et al., 2023).
Despite the insights gained from mode connectivity, most existing studies focus on curve-based
approaches that are inherently limited. These methods rely on information derived from just
two endpoints—two neural networks with fixed parameters—restricting the exploration to a one-
dimensional path. This limitation prevents the capture of richer structural information that exists
    ∗
        Corresponding Author (Ren Wang: rwang74@iit.edu)


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


beyond these endpoints and confines the search space to a narrow region within the parameter space.
The core motivation of this work is to extend mode connectivity from curves to surfaces, thereby
enabling a broader and deeper exploration of the parameter space. By constructing surfaces instead
of simple curves, we can integrate information from multiple models simultaneously, allowing for a
more comprehensive search for optimal solutions. Surface connectivity offers a higher-dimensional
perspective on the loss landscape, facilitating the discovery of models that exhibit better gener-
alization and performance. In this paper, we present a novel learning framework that leverages
Bézier surfaces in a nonlinear manner to explore mode connectivity based on Bézier surfaces (See
Figure 1 for the loss landscape of Bézier surfaces before and after applying our method), offering
deeper insights into neural network loss landscapes and opening up new avenues in model opti-
mization. Additionally, We investigate the conditions under which the surface spanned by linear
combinations of models exhibits mode connectivity. Finally, we introduce practical applications of
our Bézier surface-based mode connectivity approach, including model averaging and output en-
sembling, demonstrating its potential to enhance performance in these tasks.


                              (a)                                          (b)
Figure 1: (a) The loss values on the Bézier surface are high before applying our method; (b) The loss values
on the Bézier surface are consistently low after applying our method. Each point on the surface represents the
loss obtained by a model. The Bézier surface is based on two parametric directions.

Contributions This paper makes the following key contributions:

       • Bézier Surface-Based Mode Connectivity Framework and Algorithm: This paper in-
         troduces a novel framework that extends mode connectivity from curves to surfaces using
         nonlinear Bézier surfaces. It also presents an efficient algorithm that constructs these Bézier
         surfaces to connect independently trained models, systematically optimizing the surface to
         maintain low loss and high accuracy across the entire parameter space. This approach
         provides a more comprehensive exploration of the neural network loss landscape.
       • Investigation of Linear Surface Connectivity: The paper examines when surfaces formed
         by linear combinations of neural network models exhibit mode connectivity properties,
         identifying key conditions for this to occur. This provides a foundation for understanding
         the limits of linear surface-based approaches.
       • Applications of Bézier Surface Mode Connectivity: (1) Model Averaging: The Bézier
         surface framework provides a new view for averaging models across the parameter space,
         leading to improved model performance; (2) Output Ensembling: The approach enhances
         model ensembling by connecting multiple models via Bézier surfaces, creating a more
         effective ensemble of models.

2    R ELATED W ORK

Neural Network Loss Landscape and Mode Connectivity. Understanding the loss landscapes
of deep neural networks is critical for analyzing their optimization and generalization behaviors.
Despite the non-convex nature of neural network loss functions, overparameterized networks of-
ten converge to solutions with similar performance across different training runs. This observa-
tion has prompted investigations into the geometry of these loss landscapes, with a particular focus


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


on the sharpness and flatness of minima. Models trained with large batch sizes tend to converge
to sharper minima, associated with poorer generalization compared to flatter minima found using
smaller batches, emphasizing the relationship between the geometry of the minima and generaliza-
tion abilities (Keskar et al., 2017). Mode connectivity explores the pathways in the loss landscape
that connect different minima. Studies have shown that simple, low-loss paths - often through weight
space interpolations - can connect independently trained models, indicating that minima are not iso-
lated but reside within a connected manifold of low-loss regions (Garipov et al., 2018; Draxler et al.,
2018). Techniques like Stochastic Weight Averaging (SWA) build on this concept by averaging
weights along the trajectory of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to find flatter minima that general-
ize better (Izmailov et al., 2018). Furthermore, regularization techniques such as dropout and batch
normalization have been shown to promote smoother landscapes, which facilitate mode connectiv-
ity (Fort & Jastrzebski, 2019). Mode connectivity has also been applied in various tasks, including
transfer learning (Wortsman et al., 2022), robustness (Wang et al., 2024), safety alignment of large
language models (Peng et al., 2024), and class incremental learning (CIL) (Wen et al., 2023). For
instance, it has been explored to study and enhance ℓp robustness and to fine-tune pre-trained mod-
els for improved performance on downstream tasks (Wortsman et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2024; 2023). Additionally, mode connectivity has been utilized as a post-processing step after
each CIL phase to optimize continual learning performance (Wen et al., 2023). Several previous
works explored the extensions of mode connectivity. Some focused on identifying specific patterns
within loss surfaces of multiple neural networks (Skorokhodov & Burtsev, 2019; Czarnecki et al.,
2019). Others explored low-loss spaces using multiple simplices (Benton et al., 2021), which rely on
localized, piecewise-linear approximations, or modeled the loss landscape as a collection of high-
dimensional wedges (Fort et al., 2019), which formulate the problem as a linear interpolation of
manifolds and face challenges in scalability and interpretability. In contrast, our method focuses on
nonlinear, Bézier surface-based mode connectivity, offering a global and smooth mapping, enabling
efficient optimization, and enhancing visualization. While one study examined geometry across
multiple loss subspaces, its focus was on pairwise mode connectivity and did not extend to con-
structing surfaces with provable low-loss properties (Chen & Saidi). Despite these advancements,
most works focus on curve-based approaches, which restrict exploration to narrow regions of the
parameter space. Our method uniquely emphasizes the exploration of mode connectivity through
surfaces, providing insights beyond the scope of these prior works.
Linear Mode Connectivity. While mode connectivity typi-
cally involves non-linear paths between minima, an intriguing
possibility is the existence of linear paths that connect different
minima without encountering high-loss barriers. Linear Mode
Connectivity (LMC) refers to a special case of mode connec-
tivity where the low-loss path between two trained models is
a linear interpolation (Frankle et al., 2020), which exists when
models share initial weights or training data ordering. Fur-
ther theoretical work has demonstrated that overparameteriza-
tion in neural networks makes linear low-loss paths more com-                   (a) Bézier curve
mon (Kuditipudi et al., 2019), and techniques such as weight
permutation alignment allow for LMC between independently
trained models by reordering neurons to match across mod-
els (Entezari et al., 2022). These findings have practical impli-
cations for model merging and model ensembling, where lin-
ear combinations of weights can result in averaging or ensem-
bles that outperform traditional methods (Rame et al., 2022;
Ainsworth et al., 2023). While these works primarily focus on
linear combinations between two models, we extend the explo-
ration to settings involving more than two models, generalizing
the idea of linear mode connectivity.

                                                                              (b) Bézier surface
3    B ÉZIER C URVE AND B ÉZIER S URFACE                            Figure 2: An illustration of Bézier
                                                                      curve and Bézier surface. The Bézier
                                                                      surface is based on two parametric di-
Bézier Curve. A Bézier curve is defined using a parametric          rections u ∈ [0, 1] and v ∈ [0, 1], with
equation where the parameter t varies between 0 and 1. The            control points arranged in a grid.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


general form of a Bézier curve of degree n is given by:
                                n
                               X     n i                   n        n!
                       B(t) =           t (1 − t)n−i Pi ,     =            ,                         (1)
                               i=0
                                     i                     i    i!(n − i)!
where Pi represent the control points. When n = 2, equation (1) reduces to the most commonly
used quadratic Bézier curve with three control points (P0 , P1 , and P2 ):
                             B(t) = (1 − t)2 P0 + 2t(1 − t)P1 + t2 P2 ,                              (2)

which is illustrated in Figure 2 (a). In the context of mode connectivity, Pi are neural networks with
the same architecture, and B(t) denotes a curve in the parameter space.

Bézier Surface. A Bézier surface is an extension of the Bézier curve from t to two parametric
directions, u ∈ [0, 1] and v ∈ [0, 1], with control points arranged in a grid. The surface is defined as:
                                            Xn X m
                               B(u, v) =            Pij Bi,n (u)Bj,m (v),                             (3)
                                           i=0 j=0

where Pi,j are control points, and Bi,n (u) and Bj,m (v) are the Bernstein polynomial:

                              n i                               m j
                  Bi,n (u) =     u (1 − u)n−i , Bj,m (v) =          v (1 − v)m−j                     (4)
                               i                                 j
The Bézier surface can be expanded by first summing over j and then over i, yielding:
                                         m
                                                     " n              #
                                        X             X
                             B(u, v) =      Bj,m (v)      Bi,n (u)Pij                                (5)
                                          j=0            i=0

When u and v equal to 0 or 1, we get the four corner control points that always lie on the Bézier
surface: B(0, 0) = P00 , B(0, 1) = P0m , B(1, 0) = Pn0 , B(1, 1) = Pnm . The Bézier surface is
illustrated in Figure 2 (b). Here, we use 9 control points by setting n = m = 2. Four of them
are placed at the corners. The remaining five points do not lie directly on the surface (see the red
points outside of the surface). Together, these nine models generate the entire parameter surface
by varying u and v. Similar to the Bézier curve case, Pij are neural networks in the context of
mode connectivity (We use θij to represent neural networks in the following sections), with B(u, v)
denoting a low-loss surface in the parameter space. In this paper, our focus is on the surface scenario.

4     M ODE C ONNECTIVITY ON S URFACES
Exploring mode connectivity through curves has already yielded valuable insights into the structure
of the loss landscape. However, examining the landscape using surfaces provides even deeper in-
sights, offering a more comprehensive understanding of how models traverse these spaces. Unlike
curves, surfaces enable the exploration of a broader parameter space and incorporate information
from more models, which can lead to the development of more advanced techniques applicable
across different domains. In this section, we outline our approach to constructing them and discuss
the advantages of using surfaces for mode connectivity. The central question we seek to answer is:
   How can we find a surface that encompasses models with both low training loss and high test
   accuracy?

4.1   A P ILOT E XPLORATION IN L INEAR S ETTINGS

To answer this question, we begin with a pilot exploration in the simplest case, where the surface
in the parameter space is spanned by a linear combination of three models. Consider these three
models, θ1 , θ2 , and θ3 , where the coefficients satisfy α1 + α2 + α3 = 1 and αi can vary. These
coefficients form a surface parameterized by:
                             ϕ(α1 , α2 , α3 ) = α1 · θ1 + α2 · θ2 + α3 · θ3

One can see that given a fixed group of (α1 , α2 , α3 ), ϕ is a fixed model on the surface. Therefore,
there is no optimization or learnable variables involved in the surface generation.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In our experiments, we train these three models indepen-
dently with different initializations. This experiment is con-
ducted on the CIFAR10 dataset using VGG16 architecture.
By varying α1 , α2 , and α3 , we generate a surface through
the linear interpolation of these three model parameters. We
then evaluate the accuracy of the models on this surface and
present the results in Figure 3.
From Figure 3, it is evident that the surface generated by lin-
ear combinations of models does not achieve low loss and
high accuracy. In most cases, linear combinations of dif-
ferent models fail to create a surface with these desirable
properties. This raises the question: if simple linear combi-
nations are inadequate, can we learn such a surface through
nonlinear methods?                                                  Figure 3: Each point on the triangu-
                                                                    lar surface represents the accuracy of a
4.2   M ODE C ONNECTIVITY ON A B ÉZIER S URFACE                    model obtained through a linear combi-
                                                                    nation of the three corner models in pa-
Here, we propose a novel optimization method that ad-               rameter space. The accuracies are low on
                                                                    the parameter surface, which is defined
dresses the surface construction question in a nonlinear man-       by the simple linear combination of three
ner. Our approach leverages Bézier surfaces in equation (3)        distinct models trained with different ini-
to connect multiple models, consistently yielding a smooth          tializations in the parameter space.
surface with low loss and high accuracy.

Connecting Procedure. We begin by explaining how the models are connected on the given sur-
face1 . We redefine equation (3) from the perspective of model combinations:
                                             n X
                                             X m
                               ϕθ (u, v) =             Bi,n (u)Bj,m (v)θij ,                               (6)
                                             i=0 j=0

where θ = {θij }, i ∈ {0, 1, 2, · · · , n − 1}, j ∈ {0, 1, 2, · · · , m − 1} are the learnable control
points, except for θ00 , θ0m , θn0 , and θnm , which are weights of four independently trained neural
networks. These four control points have fixed parameters and will always be on the surface. We
will use the four control points as anchors of the surface, and the remaining control points are free
to be optimized.

Learning Objective. Next, we define the objective of the proposed surface optimization problem.
The core idea is to learn a Bézier surface where all points exhibit low-loss and high-accuracy prop-
erties. Notice that the Bézier surface is defined by control points, with the four corner control points
fixed, as they already demonstrate acceptable performance. By optimizing the remaining trainable
control points θ, we can enhance the performance across the surface. We introduce our loss ˆl(θ) on
the entire surface ϕθ (u, v) over uniform distribution below:
                   Z 1Z 1
           ℓ̂(θ) =          L(ϕθ (u, v))quv (u, v) du dv = E(u,v)∼quv (u,v) [L(ϕθ (u, v))] ,          (7)
                    0   0

Here, we specify the loss function L as task specific loss on the surface, we use cross-entropy loss
to calculate different between the output of the network and the target classes for our following
description. And distribution quv (u, v) on (u, v) ∈ [0, 1]2 is defined as:
                                                 Z 1 Z 1                           −1
                               ∂ϕθ     ∂ϕθ                  ∂ϕθ      ∂ϕθ
                 quv (u, v) =       ×         ·                   ×         du dv     ,          (8)
                               ∂u       ∂v         0   0     ∂u       ∂v

where quv represents the normalized density of points on the Bézier surface, weighted by the gradi-
ent of the parameterized surface. This density accounts for the varying distribution of points across
the surface, ensuring the loss integral reflects the true geometric properties of the surface. Direct
    1
      We remark that our method can be easily generalized to more types of nonlinear surfaces. We choose
Bézier surface because of its simplicity.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


computation of quv is intractable for stochastic gradient-based optimization because it relies on the
gradients of the parameterization ϕθ (u, v), where ϕθ (u, v) depends on learned parameters θ.
Then the numerator of ℓ̂(θ) is the surface integral of the loss L(ϕθ ) on the surface, and the denomi-
nator is the normalizing constant of the uniform distribution on the surface defined by ϕθ (·, ·).
We aim to minimize this loss with respect to θ. However, due to the computational intractability of
directly optimizing this loss, we propose a more computationally feasible loss below:
                         Z 1Z 1
                 ℓ(θ) =          L(ϕθ (u, v))du dv = E(u,v)∼U ([0,1]2 ) [L(ϕθ (u, v))]          (9)
                          0    0
where U ([0, 1]2 ) represents the uniform distribution over [0, 1]2 . This yields an expectation of
L(ϕθ (u, v)) with respect to a uniform distribution on (u, v) ∈ [0, 1]2 , while ℓ̂(θ) is an expecta-
tion with respect to a uniform distribution on the surface. The two losses align, for instance, when
ϕθ (·, ·) defines a bilinear surface with four corner control points and linear parametrization in u and
v. To minimize ℓ(θ), the intuitive way is to sample ũ, ṽ from the uniform distribution U ([0, 1]2 )
and make a gradient step for θ with respect to the loss L(ϕθ (ũ, ṽ)). This way, we obtain unbiased
estimates of the gradients of ℓ(θ), as
                                   def
                  ∇θ L(ϕθ (ũ, ṽ)) = E(u,v)∼U ([0,1]2 ) [∇θ L(ϕθ (u, v))] = ∇θ ℓ(θ).               (10)
We repeat these updates until convergence. To achieve this in a more efficient way, we employ a
three-phase optimization process in the Learning Algorithm below.

Learning Algorithm. Minimizing equation (9) necessitates updating all control models simulta-
neously, which complicates the training process and is inefficient if done from scratch. Therefore,
we found that ensuring the edge curves formed by control points achieve low loss and high accuracy
can help shape the surface, resulting in the entire surface that also exhibits low loss and high accuracy
properties. To improve efficiency, we adopt an “outer-to-inner” optimization strategy, progressing
from curves to the surface. The idea is that optimizing the surface becomes significantly easier once
the key curves achieve acceptable performance. Therefore, we first focus on optimizing the two par-
allel curves at the surface edges when u = 0 and 1 while v changes. (Phase 1), and then update the
entire surface by refining all the trainable control points (Phase 2). The explanation of each phase
is provided below, with the algorithm outlined in Algorithm 1. We also provide a detailed algorithm
in the Appendix.
Phase 1: In this phase, we focus on optimizing the control points along the horizontal curves at the
surface edges, parameterized by v when u = 0 and u = 1. This optimization is performed iteratively
over E1 epochs. As seen in equation (5), only the control points θ0j and θnj (j ∈ {1, . . . , m − 1})
contribute to the updates when u = 0 and u = 1, while the corner points remain fixed. Phase 1
corresponds to lines 2-4 in Algorithm 1.
Phase 2: In this phase, we optimize all control points for E2 epochs, except the fixed corner control
points, by uniformly sampling over u and v and minimizing the expected loss across the entire
surface. This process is repeated until convergence, producing a smooth Bézier surface that connects
the corner points while minimizing the loss. Phase 2 corresponds to lines 5-7 in Algorithm 1.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, we present results using the VGG16 architecture
on the CIFAR-10 dataset when n = m = 2 (with 9 control points for the surface). Figures 4 and
5 illustrate the loss and accuracy surfaces before and after training, respectively. Unlike Figure 1,
here we show loss and accuracy values on the surface in 2D. Once the optimization is complete, all
θ values are fixed, spanning the surface along u and v. Each point in the figures represents a loss
or accuracy value obtained by a model on the surface, evaluated on the test data. As shown, our
method successfully optimizes the surfaces, transforming them from high loss (Figure 4 (a)) to low
loss (Figure 4 (b)) and from low accuracy (Figure 5 (a)) to high accuracy (Figure 5 (b)). These re-
sults confirm that our method can effectively identify surfaces with low loss and high accuracy. One
can also see from these two figures that the valleys in the training loss surface correspond closely to
the peaks in test accuracy, enabling the efficient selection of optimal models without extensive test
set evaluations. Further discussions and additional results across various datasets and model archi-
tectures are provided in the Experimental Section. We further propose a more efficient method by
updating only specific layers of the model, significantly reducing computational overhead. Details
of this layer-specific optimization approach can be found in the Appendix.


                                                   6
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            (a) Loss surface before training                             (b) Loss surface after training

    Figure 4: The losses on the Bézier surface decrease significantly after training. Each point represents
    a loss value evaluated on the test data. There are nine control points (n = m = 2). Loss values at
    (u, v) = (0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1) correspond to four corner control points θ00 , θ20 , θ02 , and θ22 .


    Algorithm 1: Bezier Surface Mode Connectivity Algorithm (Summary)
    Input: Initial weights of the four corner control points θ00 , θn0 , θ0m , and θnm , number of
           total epochs E = E1 + E2 , number of random samples k, batch size B
    Output: Optimized Bezier surface control points
1   Initialize control points θ
2 for epoch f rom 0 to E1 do
3     Sample B training data in each batch and sample u ∼ U (0, 1) for k times
4     Update curves ϕθ (0, v) and ϕθ (1, v) from sampled points by minimizing equation (9);
5 for epoch f rom 0 to E2 do
6     Sample B training data in each batch and sample u, v ∼ U (0, 1) for k times
7     Update full Bézier surface ϕθ (u, v) from sampled points by minimizing equation (9).


    Existence of Linear Sur-
    face Mode Connectivity.
    While we have shown
    that linear combinations
    of models often fail to
    produce a desirable sur-
    face, we have identified
    special cases where they
    can succeed. Specifically, (a) Accuracy surface before training       (b) Accuracy surface after training
    when n = 4 and any two
    pairs of these four mod- Figure 5: The accuracies on the Bézier surface increase significantly
    els satisfy the linear mode after training. Each point in the figures represents an accuracy value
    connectivity property, it obtained by a model on the surface, evaluated on the test data. There
    is possible to construct a are nine control points (n = m = 2). Accuracy values at (u, v) =
    Bézier surface where ev- (0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1) are the values obtained by four corner control
    ery model exhibits low points θ00 , θ20 , θ02 , and θ22 .
    loss and high accuracy. By selecting θ00 , θn0 , θ0m , and θnm from a training trajectory, we en-
    sure that the pairs of these models meet the linear mode connectivity condition. The interior control
    points θij are then obtained via linear interpolation of the four corner points, with θij calculated
    as a weighted combination - θij = (1 − t)(1 − s)θ00 + t(1 − s)θn0 + (1 − t)sθ0m + tsθnm ,
                              j
    where t = ni and s = m      . The models on the surface are thus pure linear combinations of the four
    initial models. We demonstrate that this surface exhibits low loss and high accuracy using VGG16
    on the CIFAR-10 dataset, as shown in Figure 6. We select the four corner points from epochs 220,


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


200, 180, and 160, then combine them using the process outlined above. As a result, the surface
demonstrates similarly low loss and high accuracy, comparable to that of the four corner points.

4.3   A PPLICATIONS OF M ODE C ONNECTIVITY WITH B ÉZIER S URFACE

While this paper primar-
ily focuses on introduc-
ing a surface mode con-
nectivity method to ex-
plore the neural network
loss landscape, we also
aim to demonstrate its
potential for various ap-
plications. In this sec-
tion, we explore two            (a) Loss values on the surface    (b) Accuracy values on the surface
key applications of our
proposed Bézier surface- Figure 6: The Bézier surface linearly spanned by the four corner points
based mode connectivity shows similarly low loss and high accuracy, matching the performance
framework: model aver- of the corner points. The four corner points are VGG16 models selected
aging and output ensem- from epochs 220, 200, 180, and 160 during the training on CIFAR-10
bling. By extending mode dataset.
connectivity from curves to surfaces, we enable more effective methods for model optimization and
generalization.

Model Merging. The concept of model soups, first introduced by Wortsman et al. (Wortsman
et al., 2022), involves averaging the weights of multiple fine-tuned models to improve accuracy with-
out increasing inference time. Unlike traditional ensemble methods, which aggregate the outputs of
multiple models, model soups merge the weights of independently fine-tuned models, leveraging the
observation that models trained on the same dataset or task often reside in similar low-loss basins
of the error landscape. This principle aligns with findings in linear mode connectivity, which sug-
gests that multiple neural networks can be connected by paths of non-increasing loss between them
(Garipov et al., 2018; Draxler et al., 2018).
Building on these ideas, our proposed Bézier surface connectivity framework acts as a model merg-
ing method that enables a more thorough exploration of the model parameter space by averaging
across surfaces rather than linear paths. Unlike conventional model merging methods such as Lion
et al. (2024), which operate under the constraint that models lie within a single basin, our method
allows for connecting and merging models across basins. This enables a wider utilization of di-
verse models. Since each control point lies in the parameter space and represents a model, surface-
based averaging allows us to connect more than two models, leading to the discovery of new, high-
performing models that outperform those created by traditional weight averaging techniques. As
seen in equation (6), each point on the surface represents a model merged with different weights.
In our implementation, we select the point on the surface that yields the best performance (Model
Merging Accuracy), and compare it with the average accuracy of the four corner control models
(Avg Initial Model Accuracy). As shown in Table 1, we report the accuracy of the best-performing
model on the surface. Our experimental results show that model merging through Bézier surfaces
consistently outperforms the component models, achieving better generalization and accuracy. Ad-
ditionally, in Figure 5 (b), you can see a highland on the accuracy surface, indicating regions with
higher accuracy than the four initial corner models. We remark that model merging can also be
conducted in our linear surface mode connectivity setting.

Output Ensembling. Ensembling techniques traditionally combine the predictions of multiple
models to improve generalization. However, the use of simple linear averaging in these methods
limits the potential to fully explore the parameter space. Recent advancements in mode connectivity
research (Wortsman et al., 2021; Rame et al., 2022) have demonstrated that models can be con-
nected by paths of constant or non-increasing loss in parameter space, which leads to more robust
ensembling strategies. Our Bézier surface-based method expands upon these findings by connect-
ing up to four independent models, allowing for a broader and more nuanced exploration of the
parameter space. Unlike linear mode connectivity, which only considers paths between two models,


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


surface-based connectivity explores multidimensional relationships, resulting in models that gener-
alize better on different tasks and datasets.
In our approach, we perform model ensembling by combining the output probabilities of different
models positioned on the Bézier surface. To do this, we uniformly sample values of u and v at regular
intervals (defaulting to 0.1 in our experiments) across the surface, creating a diverse set of models.
By averaging the outputs of these sampled models, we generate ensemble predictions. We found
that this ensembling strategy consistently led to improved accuracy, surpassing the performance of
the best individual model on the Bézier surface.

5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1    E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

The main goal of this section is to further demonstrate that the methods proposed in Section 4
successfully identify low-loss, high-accuracy surfaces connecting given modes across various ar-
chitectures and datasets. In particular, we evaluate our method on three different datasets includ-
ing CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009), CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009), and Tiny-
Imagenet (Le & Yang, 2015) using ResNet18 (He et al., 2016), VGG16 (Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015), and ViT model architectures. In this paper, we primarily use CIFAR-10 and VGG16 as the
default dataset and architecture for presenting loss and accuracy surface plots. By default, we set
n = m = 2 unless otherwise specified.

5.2    M ODE C ONNECTIVITY ON B ÉZIER S URFACE


    (a) CIFAR-100 on ResNet18         (b) CIFAR-100 on VGG16           (c) Tiny-ImageNet on VGG16

Figure 7: Our Bézier surface approach can effectively identify low-loss surfaces after training on
various datasets and architectures. The loss values are similarly small across the surfaces.


Results on More Datasets & Architectures. We first evaluate the effectiveness of our Bézier
surface-based mode connectivity method by examining the loss and accuracy surfaces after training
on a variety of datasets and architectures. The surfaces depicted in Figure 7 illustrate our method’s
ability to identify low-loss landscapes, enhancing optimization in diverse settings. In Table 1, we
present results on more diverse datasets and architectures, and show comparisons of Model Merging
Accuracy, Average Surface Accuracy, and Average Corner Accuracy achieved by our method. The
Avg Corner Accuracy refers to the average accuracy of the four corner control models, while the
Avg Surface Accuracy represents the average accuracy of the sampled models on the surfaces. The
Model Merging Accuracy denotes the highest accuracy found on the Bézier surface. The results
demonstrate that our method consistently identifies low-loss surfaces (surface mode connectivity)
across different settings. In the Appendix, we conducted additional experiments on surfaces with
more control points. The results show that even with increased complexity, Bézier surfaces consis-
tently maintain low training loss and high test accuracy properties across all configurations.

Linear Surface Mode Connectivity. We have shown the result of applying this approach to the
VGG16 architecture on CIFAR-10 in Figure 6. Here, we repeat the experiment using ResNet18 on
CIFAR-100. We select four corner points from epochs 220, 200, 180, and 160 during the training.
Similarly, we found that the linear combinations of models create a surface with desirable properties,


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparisons of Model Merging Accuracy, Average Surface Accuracy, and Average Corner
Accuracy obtained by our method across different datasets and architectures. The Avg Corner Accu-
racy represents the average accuracy of the four corner control models. The Avg Surface Accuracy
is the average accuracy of the models on the surfaces (by sampling). The Model Merging Accuracy
is the highest accuracy obtained on the Bézier surface. The results show that (1) our method can
always find low-loss surfaces in different settings; (2) model merging through the Bézier surface can
discover models with improved performance.
      DATASET      MODEL      Model Merging Accuracy    Avg Surface Accuracy    Avg Corner Accuracy
    CIFAR-10      ResNet18           90.9%                    89.3%                   90.1%
    CIFAR-10       VGG16             90.7%                    89.8%                   89.6%
    CIFAR-10        ViT              70.2%                    65.4%                   70.0%
    CIFAR-100      VGG16             70.8%                    69.3%                   70.7%
    Tiny-ImageNet VGG16              51.1%                    47.4%                   50.7%



demonstrating high accuracy throughout, as shown in Figure 8(b). The loss surface is shown in the
Appendix. Across both experiments, we observed that the central region of the surface typically
exhibited slightly lower loss and higher accuracy compared to the corner models, further supporting
the utility of linear surface mode connectivity in certain settings.


5.3    M ODEL M ERGING AND E NSEMBLING BASED ON S URFACE M ODE C ONNECTIVITY

We further explore model merging and output ensembling to highlight the potential applications of
surface mode connectivity.


Model Merging. For model Merging, we obtain the optimal model on the surface to evaluate
model merging. Table 1 demonstrates the boost in validation accuracy for models obtained from the
surface using our Bezier surface as a model merging method compared to the four corner control
points. We obtained the model with high accuracy. You may also check the validation accuracy
surface after training shown in Figure 5, showing that there’s a plateau with higher accuracy than
four models on the surface. The central high accuracy region in Figure 8(b) also illustrates that linear
surface mode connectivity can be utilized for model merging without the need for optimization.


Output Ensembling. For model ensembling, we sampled values of u and v uniformly between
0 and 1 at intervals of 0.1, generating diverse models along the Bézier surface. By averaging the
output probabilities from these sampled models, we created an ensemble that consistently improved
accuracy. In our experiments, we apply the Bézier surface-based model ensembling method on the
CIFAR-10 dataset using VGG16 models, which results in notable accuracy improvements. Specif-
ically, the average accuracy of the four independently trained models (corner points) was 89.96%,
while the best-performing model on the Bézier surface achieved 90.70%. After applying our ensem-
bling technique, the accuracy further increased to 92%, demonstrating the effectiveness of surface-
based model ensembling in enhancing generalization and outperforming both individual models and
traditional linear interpolation methods.


6     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we extend the concept of mode connectivity from curves to surfaces, offering a broader
exploration of neural network loss landscapes. By leveraging Bézier surfaces, we demonstrate the
ability to connect multiple models with low-loss and high-accuracy regions, enhancing both model
merging and optimization. Our approach not only uncovers deeper insights into the structure of the
parameter space but also improves model averaging and ensembling performance. We validate the
effectiveness of this method across various datasets and architectures, including CIFAR-10, CIFAR-
100, and Tiny-ImageNet.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by the NSF under Grants 2246157 and 2319243. We are thankful for the
computational resources made available through NSF ACCESS and Argonne Leadership Computing
Facility.

R EFERENCES
Samuel Ainsworth, Jonathan Hayase, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. Git re-basin: Merging models mod-
  ulo permutation symmetries. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Gregory Benton, Wesley Maddox, Sanae Lotfi, and Andrew Gordon Gordon Wilson. Loss surface
  simplexes for mode connecting volumes and fast ensembling. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 769–779. PMLR, 2021.
Ting Chen and Tristan Luca Saidi. Examining the geometry of neural mode connecting loss sub-
  spaces.
Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Simon Osindero, Razvan Pascanu, and Max Jaderberg. A deep neural
 network’s loss surface contains every low-dimensional pattern. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.07559,
 2019.
Felix Draxler, Kambis Veschgini, Manfred Salmhofer, and Fred Hamprecht. Essentially no barriers
  in neural network energy landscape. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1309–
  1318. PMLR, 2018.
Rahim Entezari, Hanie Sedghi, Olga Saukh, and Behnam Neyshabur. The role of permutation in-
  variance in linear mode connectivity of neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Stanislav Fort and Stanislaw Jastrzebski. Large scale structure of neural network loss landscapes.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Stanislav Fort, Huiyi Hu, and Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Large-scale model ensembling through
  low-rank connections. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Jonathan Frankle, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Daniel M Roy, and Michael Carbin. Linear mode
  connectivity and the lottery ticket hypothesis. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 3259–3269, 2020.
Timur Garipov, Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Dmitry Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson.
  Loss surfaces, mode connectivity, and fast ensembling of dnns. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pp. 8803–8812, 2018.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
P Izmailov, AG Wilson, D Podoprikhin, D Vetrov, and T Garipov. Averaging weights leads to wider
   optima and better generalization. In 34th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence
   2018, UAI 2018, pp. 876–885, 2018.
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Pe-
  ter Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Master’s
  thesis, Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, 2009.
Rohith Kuditipudi, Xiang Wang, Holden Lee, Yi Zhang, Zhiyuan Li, Wei Hu, Rong Ge, and Sanjeev
  Arora. Explaining landscape connectivity of low-cost solutions for multilayer nets. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. CS 231N, 7(7):3, 2015.
Kai Lion, Lorenzo Noci, Thomas Hofmann, and Gregor Bachmann. How good is a single basin? In
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 4015–4023. PMLR, 2024.
ShengYun Peng, Pin-Yu Chen, Matthew Hull, and Duen Horng Chau. Navigating the safety land-
  scape: Measuring risks in finetuning large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17374,
  2024.
Alexandre Rame, Matthieu Kirchmeyer, Thibaud Rahier, Alain Rakotomamonjy, Patrick Gallinari,
  and Matthieu Cord. Diverse weight averaging for out-of-distribution generalization. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:10821–10836, 2022.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.
Ivan Skorokhodov and Mikhail Burtsev. Loss landscape sightseeing with multi-point optimization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03867, 2019.
Norman Tatro, Pin-Yu Chen, Payel Das, Igor Melnyk, Prasanna Sattigeri, and Rongjie Lai. Op-
  timizing mode connectivity via neuron alignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:15300–15311, 2020.
Ren Wang, Yuxuan Li, and Sijia Liu. Exploring diversified adversarial robustness in neural networks
  via robust mode connectivity. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Ren Wang, Yuxuan Li, and Alfred Hero. Deep adversarial defense against multilevel-lp attacks.
  IEEE International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing (MLSP), 2024.
Haitao Wen, Haoyang Cheng, Heqian Qiu, Lanxiao Wang, Lili Pan, and Hongliang Li. Optimiz-
  ing mode connectivity for class incremental learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 36940–36957. PMLR, 2023.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Rebecca Roelofs, Ari S Morcos, Ali
 Farhadi, Yair Carmon, and Simon Kornblith. Learning model ensembles with lower variance
 predictions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Samir Ya Gadre, Rebecca Roelofs, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes,
 Ari S Morcos, Hongseok Namkoong, Ali Farhadi, Yair Carmon, Simon Kornblith, et al. Model
 soups: averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models improves accuracy without increasing
 inference time. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 23965–23998. PMLR, 2022.
Pu Zhao, Pin-Yu Chen, Payel Das, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, and Xue Lin. Bridging
  mode connectivity in loss landscapes and adversarial robustness. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2020.


                                                12
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     A     A PPENDIX

     A.1   A LGORITHM D ETAILS

     We enclose the full algorithm below

     Algorithm 2: Bezier Surface Mode Connectivity Algorithm
     Input: Initial weights θ00 , θnm , θ0m , and θn0 (fixed four end control points), number of
            epochs E1 , E2 , with epoch E = E1 + E2 , learning rate η, number of random samples
            k, training dataset D0 , batch size B
     Output: Optimized Bezier surface control points
 1 Initialize control points θij with linear interpolation
 2 for i, j ∈ {0, . . . , n} do
 3      if (i, j) ̸= (0, 0), (0, m), (n, 0), (n, m) then
                                   j
 4           Let t = ni and s = m
 5           Initialize θij using linear interpolation as:
 6           θij = (1 − t)(1 − s)θ00 + t(1 − s)θn0 + (1 − t)sθ0m + tsθnm
 7 Define θ00 , θ0m , θn0 , and θnm as fixed endpoints
 8 for epoch e in 1 to E1 do
 9     for each data batch Db ∈ D0 do
10         for v in sampled vi ∼ U (0, 1) do
11             B1 (0, v) = θ00 B0,m (v) + θ01 B1,m (v) + · · · + θ0m Bm,m (v)
12             B2 (1, v) = θn0 B0,m (v) + θn1 B1,m (v) + · · · + θnm Bm,m (v)
13             for each x ∈ Db do
                   compute loss l(θ) = k1 vi (Ltask (B1 (0, vi ); x) + Ltask (B2 (1, vi ); x))
                                           P
14

15                 Compute gradients ∇θij = ∂θ∂lij for each learnable θij , i ∈ {0, n}
16                 Update θij ← θij − η∇θij

17 for epoch e in E1 + 1 to E1 + E2 do
18     for each data batch Db ∈ D0 do
19
                          Pvni ∼P
           for v in sampled     U (0, 1) and u in sampled ui ∼ Uniform(0, 1) do
                                  m
20             B(u, v) = i=0 j=0 θij Bi,n (u)Bj,m (v)
21          for each x ∈ Db do
                compute loss L = k1 ui ,vi Ltask (B(ui , vi ))
                                   P
22
                                           ∂L
23              Compute gradients ∇θij = ∂θ  ij
                                                for each learnable θij
24              Update θij ← θij − η∇θij
25       empty sampled points


     A.2   L INEAR S URFACE M ODE C ONNECTIVITY

     We construct a Bézier surface where the control points are the learnable parameters, denoted as θij .
     The intermediate control points on the surface are calculated as linear combinations of four corner
     models θ00 , θn0 , θ0m , and θnm , as follows:


                     θij = (1 − t)(1 − s)θ00 + t(1 − s)θn0 + (1 − t)sθ0m + tsθnm

                          j
     where t = ni and s = m . This results in a surface composed of linear combinations of the four
     initial models.
     We first applied this approach with the ResNet18 architecture on the CIFAR-100 dataset, selecting
     corner points from epochs 220, 200, 180, and 160. As shown in Figure 8, the surface generated
     through these linear combinations exhibited low loss and high accuracy, comparable to the perfor-


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


mance of the corner models. This success occurs because the corner models happen to be linearly
connectable for every pair of them.


(a) Loss values on the Bézier surface. The sur-          (b) Accuracy values on the Bézier surface. This
face linearly spans the four corner points, show-         surface also spans the four corner points, show-
ing similarly low loss, matching the performance          ing high accuracy across epochs, matching the
of the corner points. The corner points are               performance of the individual models.
ResNet18 models from epochs 220, 200, 180,
and 160 during training on CIFAR-100.

Figure 8: Comparison of loss and accuracy surfaces on the Bézier surface spanned by four ResNet18
models, selected from epochs 220, 200, 180, and 160 during training on CIFAR-100. Both surfaces
show consistency, with low loss and high accuracy distributed evenly across the surface, indicating
that the corner models generalize well across the parameter space.

A.3    E XISTENCE OF L INEAR S URFACE M ODE C ONNECTIVITY

While linear combinations of models often fail to produce a desirable surface, we have identified
special cases where success is possible. Specifically, when n = 4 and each pair among these four
models satisfies the linear mode connectivity property, a Bézier surface can be constructed in a linear
manner where every model exhibits low loss and high accuracy. By selecting θ00 , θn0 , θ0m , and θnm
from a training trajectory, the pairs meet the linear mode connectivity condition. The interior control
points θij are obtained through linear interpolation of the four corner points:

                   θij = (1 − t)(1 − s)θ00 + t(1 − s)θn0 + (1 − t)sθ0m + tsθnm ,
                     j
where t = ni and s = m . The models on the surface are thus linear combinations of the initial
models.
The Bézier surface S(u, v) can be expressed as:

              S(u, v) = C00 (u, v)P00 + C02 (u, v)P02 + C20 (u, v)P20 + C22 (u, v)P22 ,
where the coefficients Cij (u, v) are combinations of the basis polynomials and the relationships
between control points.

Computational Definition of the Basis Polynomials: The Bernstein polynomials Bi,n (u) are
defined as:

                                          n i
                            Bi,n (u) =       u (1 − u)n−i ,   i = 0, 1, . . . , n.
                                          i
Similarly, the polynomials Bj,m (v) are defined as:

                                      m j
                          Bj,m (v) =     v (1 − v)m−j ,       j = 0, 1, . . . , m.
                                      j

                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In our case, we have n = m = 2, so:

                B0,2 (u) = (1 − u)2 ,      B1,2 (u) = 2u(1 − u),      B2,2 (u) = u2 ,
                B0,2 (v) = (1 − v)2 ,      B1,2 (v) = 2v(1 − v),         B2,2 (v) = v 2 .

Coefficients for Each Corner Control Point: The coefficients Cij (u, v) are expressed in terms
of the Bernstein polynomials:


                                  1                  1                  1
   C00 (u, v) = B0,2 (u)B0,2 (v) + B0,2 (u)B1,2 (v) + B1,2 (u)B0,2 (v) + B1,2 (u)B1,2 (v),
                                  2                  2                  4


                                  1                  1                  1
   C02 (u, v) = B0,2 (u)B2,2 (v) + B0,2 (u)B1,2 (v) + B1,2 (u)B1,2 (v) + B1,2 (u)B2,2 (v),
                                  2                  4                  2


                                  1                  1                  1
   C20 (u, v) = B2,2 (u)B0,2 (v) + B1,2 (u)B0,2 (v) + B1,2 (u)B1,2 (v) + B2,2 (u)B1,2 (v),
                                  2                  4                  2


                                  1                  1                  1
   C22 (u, v) = B2,2 (u)B2,2 (v) + B1,2 (u)B2,2 (v) + B1,2 (u)B1,2 (v) + B2,2 (u)B1,2 (v).
                                  2                  4                  2

One can verify that C00 (u, v) + C02 (u, v) + C20 (u, v) + C22 (u, v) = 1.
These coefficients sum to one, ensuring that S(u, v) remains a convex combination of the corner
points. We demonstrate this surface’s effectiveness using VGG16 on the CIFAR-10 dataset, achiev-
ing low loss and high accuracy, comparable to that of the four corner points, as shown in Figure
6.

Relationships Among the Coefficients Although the coefficients C00 (u, v), C02 (u, v), C20 (u, v),
and C22 (u, v) are functions of the parameters u and v, they exhibit inherent relationships due to the
properties of the Bernstein polynomials and the construction of the Bézier surface.

       • Sum-to-One Property: For all u, v ∈ [0, 1], the coefficients satisfy:

                            C00 (u, v) + C02 (u, v) + C20 (u, v) + C22 (u, v) = 1.
         This ensures that S(u, v) is a convex combination of the corner control points, and the
         surface lies within their convex hull.
       • Symmetry Relations: The coefficients exhibit symmetry properties due to the symmetrical
         nature of the Bernstein polynomials:

                                        C00 (u, v) = C22 (1 − u, 1 − v),
                                        C02 (u, v) = C20 (u, 1 − v),
                                        C20 (u, v) = C02 (1 − u, v),
                                        C22 (u, v) = C00 (1 − u, 1 − v).
         These relationships reflect the inherent symmetry in the Bézier surface construction.
       • Interdependence of Coefficients: Any coefficient can be expressed in terms of the others
         using the sum-to-one property:
                                                       X
                                     Cij (u, v) = 1 −          Ckl (u, v).
                                                          (k,l)
                                                       (k,l)̸=(i,j)

         This highlights the interconnectivity among the coefficients.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        • Proportional Relationships: The ratios of certain coefficients are related through the pa-
          rameters u and v. For example:
                                                                              2
                                      C00 (u, v)         (1 − u)(1 − v)
                                                 =                                .
                                      C22 (u, v)               uv
          Similarly, the ratio between C02 and C20 is:
                                                                         2
                                         C02 (u, v)          (1 − u)v
                                                    =                        .
                                         C20 (u, v)          u(1 − v)
          These proportional relationships demonstrate how changes in u and v affect the relative
          influence of each corner control point on the surface.

A.4     E XPERIMENTS ON S URFACES WITH M ORE C ONTROL P OINTS

To further evaluate the scalability of our method, we conducted additional experiments on Bézier
surfaces using 3×3, 4×4, and 5×5 control points on the CIFAR-10 dataset. These experiments were
performed using a simple convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture, consisting of three con-
volutional layers with kernel size 3 and padding 1, followed by max-pooling layers for downsam-
pling. The fully connected layers include a 256-dimensional hidden layer and a final output layer
that matches the number of classes. Dropout is applied after the convolutional layers to mitigate
overfitting.
These configurations allow us to test our method’s ability to construct low-loss surfaces in increas-
ingly complex parameter spaces. Table 2 summarizes the results of these experiments.

      Table 2: Accuracy achieved with Bézier surfaces of different configurations on CIFAR-10.

  Control Points      Avg Acc of Corners (%)         Highest Acc (%)             Avg Acc for Surface (%)
      3×3                      80.2                       82.0                             79.7
      4×4                      80.2                       82.4                             80.0
      5×5                      80.2                       82.9                             80.3

The results in Table 2 indicate that increasing the number of control points leads to better flexibility
of the Bézier surface, resulting in better performance. Specifically, the highest accuracy achieved on
the sampled points progressively increases as the number of control points grows from 3×3 to 5×5.
These findings demonstrate the robustness and scalability of our approach, showing its ability to
capture low-training loss and high-test-accuracy regions in the parameter space, even under more
complex configurations. This strengthens the potential for our method to extend to larger models
and datasets in future work.

A.5     M ODEL E NSEMBLING C OMPARISONS

To illustrate the advantages of our method for model ensembling, we conducted additional experi-
ments comparing surface-based ensembling with traditional four-corner ensembling.
Table 3 summarizes the results of our experiments on CIFAR-10 with two architectures, VGG16 and
ResNet18. The results highlight the advantage of surface-based ensembling in capturing additional
diversity and achieving superior accuracy compared to four-corner ensembling.

   Table 3: Comparison of four-corner ensembling and surface-based ensembling on CIFAR-10.

                 Model       Four-Corner Ensemble (%)            Surface Ensemble (%)
                 VGG16                 90.4                               92.0
                ResNet18               90.1                               92.7

The results demonstrate that surface-based ensembling consistently outperforms four-corner ensem-
bling. By exploring the parameter space more comprehensively, Bézier surfaces capture diverse


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


model predictions, leading to improved accuracy during model ensembling. This advantage is par-
ticularly significant in scenarios where corner models reside in different basins, as traditional meth-
ods fail to navigate the non-linear loss landscape effectively.
These findings reinforce the applicability and robustness of our method for model ensembling, show-
casing its potential in diverse configurations and datasets.

A.6    L AYER -S PECIFIC O PTIMIZATION FOR E FFICIENCY

To improve computational efficiency, we conducted experiments where only a subset of the model’s
layers were optimized instead of the entire network. Specifically, we updated only the last convo-
lutional layer and the fully connected layers in the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) module. This
approach significantly reduced computational overhead while maintaining competitive accuracy.
Due to time constraints, these experiments were validated on a simple convolutional neural network
(CNN) architecture. The network consisted of three convolutional layers (kernel size 3, padding
1), max-pooling for downsampling, and a 256-dimensional fully connected hidden layer. The final
layer matched the number of classes. The experiments were performed on a single NVIDIA 4090
GPU sampling 80 points per batch on the surface. The results are summarized in Table 4.

    Table 4: Comparison of accuracy and efficiency for layer-specific optimization on CIFAR-10.

 Updated Layers    Avg Acc of Corners (%)    Highest Acc (%)    Avg Surface Acc (%)    Time (26 Epochs)
    All layers              80.2                  82.0                 79.7                 47 min
 Last conv + MLP            80.2                  80.3                 70.3                 15 min


R ESULTS AND T RADE -O FFS

The results demonstrate that optimizing only the last convolutional and MLP layers yields significant
efficiency gains, reducing runtime by over 68% with a single NVIDIA 4090 GPU, while incurring a
moderate drop in surface accuracy. These findings highlight the potential of layer-specific optimiza-
tion as a scalable approach for larger models and datasets.

B     E FFICIENT E VALUATION OF L OSS AND ACCURACY S URFACES
B.1    U SING BATCH -L EVEL A PPROXIMATION FOR T RAINING L OSS S URFACE

During training, 80 points are sampled per batch, covering most of the regions on the surface. Evalu-
ating the losses for just the last few batches provides a reliable approximation of the full training loss
on the surface. This observation suggests that a smaller subset of batches can effectively represent
the overall surface, significantly reducing computation costs without sacrificing accuracy.
In our experiment on CIFAR-10 with the VGG16 architecture, we evaluated the training loss surface
using a subset of data equivalent to four epochs. The results indicate strong consistency with evalua-
tions conducted on the full training dataset. Specifically, when evaluated on the full training dataset,
the valley of the loss surface was located at the (u, v) = (0.9, 0.2). On the subset evaluation, this
shifted slightly to (0.9, 0.1). Both points, however, lie within the same low-loss region, underscoring
the robustness of this approximation. Similarly, the peak of the loss surface consistently remained
at (u, v) = (0.4, 1.0) for both evaluations, as shown in Figure 9.

B.2    T EST ACCURACY AND ITS A PPROXIMATION

The grid search for the accuracy surface occurs during the inference phase and is thus far less
computationally intensive than training. To further optimize efficiency, a subset of the test dataset
can be used for evaluation. In our experiment, using CIFAR-10 with the VGG16 architecture, the
accuracy surface evaluated on a subset of the test dataset showed a valley consistently located at
(u, v) = (0.4, 0), matching the results obtained from the full test dataset evaluation. The peak
shifted slightly, from (u, v) = (0.9, 0.2) to (u, v) = (0.9, 0.1), but both points fall within the same
high-accuracy region, demonstrating the surface’s structural robustness.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) Accuracy surface evaluated on a subset of the         (b) Accuracy surface evaluated on the full test
test dataset. The valley is at (0.4, 0), and the          dataset. The valley is at (0.4, 0), and the val-
peak shifts slightly compared to the full dataset.        ley remains same for both subset and full test
                                                          datasets.

Figure 9: Comparison of accuracy surfaces evaluated on a subset (left) and the full test dataset
(right) using CIFAR-10 with the VGG16 architecture. Both surfaces show consistent regions of
high accuracy, demonstrating the reliability of subset evaluation.


                                                     18
