Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T OWARDS P RINCIPLED E VALUATIONS OF S PARSE AU -
TOENCODERS FOR I NTERPRETABILITY AND C ONTROL

    Aleksandar Makelov∗                      Georg Lange∗                  Neel Nanda
 aleksandar.makelov@gmail.com                mail@georglange.com           neelnanda27@gmail.com


                                               A BSTRACT

            Disentangling model activations into human-interpretable features is a central
            problem in interpretability. Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) have recently attracted
            much attention as a scalable unsupervised approach to this problem. However,
            our limited understanding of ground-truth features in realistic scenarios makes it
            difficult to measure the success of SAEs. To address this challenge, we propose to
            evaluate SAEs on specific tasks by comparing them to supervised feature dictio-
            naries computed with knowledge of the concepts relevant to the task.
            Specifically, we suggest that it is possible to (1) compute supervised sparse feature
            dictionaries that disentangle model computations for a specific task; (2) use them
            to evaluate and contextualize the degree of disentanglement and control offered by
            SAE latents on this task. Importantly, we can do this in a way that is agnostic to
            whether the SAEs have learned the exact ground-truth features or a different but
            similarly useful representation.
            As a case study, we apply this framework to the indirect object identification (IOI)
            task using GPT-2 Small, with SAEs trained on either the IOI or OpenWebText
            datasets. We find that SAEs capture interpretable features for the IOI task, and that
            more recent SAE variants such as Gated SAEs and Top-K SAEs are competitive
            with supervised features in terms of disentanglement and control over the model.
            We also exhibit, through this setup and toy models, some qualitative phenomena
            in SAE training illustrating feature splitting and the role of feature magnitudes in
            solutions preferred by SAEs.


1       I NTRODUCTION
While large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin
et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023) results, the mechanisms be-
hind their successes and failures largely remain a mystery (Olah, 2023). A prominent bottom-up
approach to this problem is taken by mechanistic interpretability (MI), which aims to disentangle
model activations into units with faithful, human-interpretable roles in an LLM’s computation (Olah,
2022). Recently, the MI community has focused on sparse autoencoders (SAEs) as a promising
approach to this problem (Olshausen & Field, 1997; Faruqui et al., 2015; Goh, 2016; Arora et al.,
2018; Yun et al., 2021; Cunningham et al., 2023; Bricken et al., 2023). If successful at scale, this re-
search could provide significant scientific and practical value, enabling enhanced model robustness,
controllability, interpretability, and debugging (Gandelsman et al., 2023; Nanda et al., 2023; Marks
et al., 2024; Conmy & Nanda, 2024).
However, realistic ground-truth evaluations of the SAE paradigm have been lacking, which hinders
progress in this area. While recent works have proposed various metrics to evaluate SAE quality
(detailed in Section 2), they all rely on indirect metrics only conjecturally correlated with recovering
the ‘true’ features used by LLMs.
To address this challenge, we propose the first principled method for evaluating SAEs on realistic
linguistic tasks. Our method directly compares SAEs to supervised feature dictionaries computed
using knowledge of task-relevant concepts. By comparing SAEs to objects of the same ‘type signa-
ture’, we provide a fair comparison where the supervised dictionaries serve as a canonical skyline
    ∗
        Joint contribution. Correspondence to aleksandar.makelov@gmail.com


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Select Prompts with Known Attributes                                                          Test 1: Approximation                                                                                     Test 2: Sparse Controllability


                                                                                                                                                    Necessity Sufficiency

                                                                                                                                                                            John and Mary …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mary


                                                                                   Prompts
                                                                                                                                       Mary
           John and Mary went to the store, Mary gave a drink to
                                                                                                                                       John                                                                                                                   John
              John and Mike went to the store, Mike gave a drink to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mike
                 Alex and John went to the store, Alex gave a drink to


                                                                                                                                                                            John and Mike …
                                                                         Attribute
          IO = John, S = Mary, Pos=1st                                                                                                 Mary                                                                                     Activation patch


                                                                          Values
                                                                                                                     -                                                                                                          highest contributing
              IO = John, S = Mike, Pos=1st                                                                                             John
                 IO = John, S = Alex, Pos=2nd                                                                                                                                                                                   features


    Compute Supervised Feature Dictionaries                                                       Test 3: Causal Faithfulness of Feature Interpretations


                                                                                                                                                                                          John and Mary …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mary
                                                                                             John and Mary …                           IO = John                                                                                                       John
                                                                                                John and Mike …                           IO = John
                                                                                                   Alex and John …                 ?          IO = John
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mike



𝐯𝐈𝐎=John = 𝔼𝑝~𝒟 𝐚𝐜𝐭𝐢𝐯𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐨𝐧 𝑝 𝐈𝐎 𝑝 = John − 𝔼𝑝~𝒟 [𝐚𝐜𝐭𝐢𝐯𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐨𝐧 𝑝 ]                                                                                                                                                             IO = Mike
                                                                                                                         Score feature descriptions
                                                                                                                         using known attributes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IO = Mary
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Edit features with relevant descriptions



Figure 1: Overview of our evaluation pipeline. We begin by selecting a specific model capability
(IOI task, Section 3) and then disentangling model activations into capability-relevant features using
supervision (Section 4.2). Then, we evaluate a given feature dictionary w.r.t. this capability, using
the supervised features as a benchmark (Section 4.3). We test the extent to which (1) the feature
dictionary’s reconstructions of the activations are necessary and sufficient for the capability (Section
5.3), (2) the features can be used to edit capability-relevant information in internal model represen-
tations agnostic of feature interpretations (Section 5.4), and (3) the features can be interpreted w.r.t.
the capability in a manner consistent with their causal role (Section 5.5).


for SAE performance. The IOI task (Wang et al., 2022) – a non-trivial natural language task that has
been extensively studied in the mechanistic interpretability literature – serves as a natural case study
on which we base this paper. However, we stress that our framework is applicable to other tasks, as
we illustrate in Appendix 7.1. Our contributions are outlined as follows:
            • We propose a principled method to compute supervised sparse feature dictionaries w.r.t. a
              specific task an LLM can do, using supervision via task-relevant prompt attributes.
            • We apply this method to the IOI task, demonstrating that these dictionaries exhibit three
              desirable properties: (1) dictionaries’ activation reconstructions are both sufficient and nec-
              essary for the task; (2) attributes relevant to the task are disentangled in a way that allows
              precise control over model behavior; and (3) the features are interpretable in a way consis-
              tent with their causal role in the model’s computation.
            • We use these feature dictionaries to design and contextualize evaluations of any feature
              dictionaries along the same three axes, in a way agnostic to whether they use the same
              latent directions.
            • We apply this methodology to SAEs trained on either the IOI dataset (task-specific SAEs)
              or the LLM’s pre-training dataset (full-distribution SAEs), finding that both types contain
              interpretable latents for the task, and that some task-specific SAE variants allow us to edit
              attributes about as effectively as supervised dictionaries
            • We also briefly remark on two qualitative phenomena we observed in SAE training and
              reproduced in toy models: a tendency for SAEs to learn higher-magnitude features, and
              a tendency to ‘over-split’ an intuitively single concept into many features. Due to space
              constraints, we defer a full discussion to Appendix 7.2.
Our results suggest that more detailed and controlled SAE evaluations are possible and informative,
and that SAEs may hold promise for disentangling model computations in realistic scenarios. A
limitation of our approach is that it requires potentially substantial per-task effort to independently
identify the relevant attributes, which is proportional to the complexity of the task and the number
of attributes we want to consider. However, as we show in Appendix 7.1, our framework allows for
the targeted evaluation of a few attributes in a few locations of the model, which can substantially
reduce this effort.

2      R ELATED W ORK
Most related to this paper. Several recent works propose controlled SAE evaluations related to
our approach. Karvonen et al. used a board game model as a testbed, comparing SAE latents to


                                                                                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                      Legend
        When
      IO Mary                                                                                        Key / Value
          and
      S1 John                                                                                      Class of Heads
                                                                                       Query                                Output
                                                                                                       Layer.Head
                            Previous Token Heads
     S1+1 went
                                        2.2 4.11
            to
           the
         store
              ,                                                                            Negative Name Mover Heads
                  Duplicate Token Heads            Induction Heads                                        10.7 11.10
      S2 John
                       0.1 3.0 (0.10)               5.5 6.9 (5.8 5.9)
          gave                                                                                   Name Mover Heads
             a
                                                                                                        9.9 9.6 10.0
         drink
                                                                 S-Inhibition Heads
       END to                                                                               Backup Name Mover Heads
                                                                    7.3 7.9 8.6 8.10
                                                                                            9.0 9.7 10.1 10.2 10.6 10.10 11.2 11.9



Figure 2: A reproduction of Figure 2 from Wang et al. (2022), showing the internal structure of
the IOI circuit. Original caption: The input tokens on the left are passed into the residual stream.
Attention heads move information between residual streams: the query and output arrows show
which residual streams they write to, and the key/value arrows show which residual streams they
read from.


supervised features based on atomic board state components and simple strategic configurations.
Huang et al. (2024); Chaudhary & Geiger (2024) evaluated SAEs for disentanglement of factual
attributes in a templated dataset, while Gao et al. (2024) proposed evaluating SAE latents as binary
classifiers over human-defined tasks (e.g., sentiment classification). A concern with the choice of
‘ground-truth’ concepts in these works is that, while meaningful from a human perspective, they
may not align with internal model computations. We also differ from these works in that we focus
on linguistic tasks in pre-trained LLMs.
Other SAE evaluations. Prior works have also proposed various indirect metrics as proxies for
assessing recovery of ’ground-truth’ features. These include automated interpretability methods
based on highly activating examples (Bills et al., 2023; Choi et al., 2024; Juang et al., 2024), though
using maximum activating examples has been criticized as potentially misleading (Bolukbasi et al.,
2021). Other approaches use the trade-off between reconstruction error and sparsity (Bricken et al.,
2023; Cunningham et al., 2023; Rajamanoharan et al., 2024), toy models (Elhage et al., 2022b),
computational proxies (Bricken et al., 2023; Templeton et al., 2024), or geometric measures like
mean maximum cosine similarity between different SAEs’ features (Sharkey et al., 2023).

3   P RELIMINARIES
The linear representation hypothesis and sparse autoencoders. A central hypothesis in inter-
pretability is the linear representation hypothesis. A strong variant of this hypothesis posits that
model activations can be approximately decomposed into meaningful features using a sparse fea-
ture dictionary: given a location in the model (e.g., an attention head output), there exists a set of
vectors {ui }mi=1 such that each activation a at this location can be approximated as a sparse linear
combination of the uj with non-negative coefficients. In particular, recent work suggests that n-
dimensional activations a ∈ Rn may be best described by m ≫ n such features in superposition
(Elhage et al., 2022a; Gurnee et al., 2023). Recently, SAEs have been proposed as a way to disen-
tangle these features. Following the setup of Bricken et al. (2023) here and in the rest of this work, a
sparse autoencoder (SAE) is an unsupervised model which learns to reconstruct activations a ∈ Rn
as a weighted sum of m features with non-negative weights. Specifically, the autoencoder computes
a hidden representation f = ReLU (Wenc (a − bdec ) + benc ) and a reconstruction
                                                                        m
                                                                        X
                                 a
                                 b = Wdec f + bdec =                          fj (Wdec ):,j + bdec                                   (1)
                                                                        j=1

where Wenc ∈ Rm×n , Wdec ∈ Rn×m , bdec ∈ Rn , benc ∈ Rm are learned parameters. The
rows of Wenc are the encoder directions, and the columns of Wdec are the decoder directions.
Similarly, benc is the encoder bias and bdec is the decoder bias. The decoder directions determine


                                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the features we decompose the activations into, while the encoder directions compute the coefficients
of these features for a given activation. The decoder directions are constrained to have unit norm:
∥(Wdec ):,i ∥2 = 1. In the simplest setup (Bricken et al., 2023), the training objective over examples
{a(k) }N
       k=1 is the sum of theP MSE between the activations a(k) and their reconstructions a    b(k) , and
                               N
the ℓ1 regularization term λ k=1 f (k) 1 , where λ is the ℓ1 regularization coefficient.
The IOI task. In Wang et al. (2022), the authors analyze how the decoder-only transformer language
model GPT-2 Small (Radford et al., 2019) performs the Indirect Object Identification (IOI) task. In
this task, the model is given sentences of the form ‘When Mary and John went to the store, John gave
a book to’ (with the intended completion in this case being ‘ Mary’). We refer to the repeated name
(John) as S (the subject) and the non-repeated name (Mary) as IO (the indirect object). For each
choice of the IO and S names, there are two patterns the sentence can have: one where the IO name
comes first (we call these ‘ABB examples’), and one where it comes second (we call these ‘BAB
examples’). We refer to this binary attribute as the Pos attribute (short for position). Additional
details on the data distribution, model and task performance are given in Appendix 7.6.
Wang et al. (2022) discover several classes of attention heads in GPT2-Small that collectively form
the IOI circuit solving the IOI task (Figure 2; see Appendix 7.3 for more details on the circuit
structure). Specifically, Wang et al. (2022) provide multiple lines of evidence that the circuit ap-
proximately implements the algorithm:

      1. detect the (i) position in the sentence and (ii) identity of the repeated name in the sentence
         (i.e., the S name). This information is computed and moved by duplicate token/induction
         and S-Inhibition heads;
      2. based on the two signals (i) and (ii), exclude this name from the attention of the name
         mover heads, so that they copy the remaining name (i.e., the IO name) to the output.

The logit difference metric. To discover the IOI circuit, Wang et al. (2022) used the logit difference:
the difference in log-probabilities assigned by the model to the IO and S names. This metric is
more sensitive than accuracy, which makes possible the detection of individual model components
(or interventions thereof) with a consistent but non-pivotal role in the task. Accordingly, we also
use the logit difference throughout this work to evaluate the causal effect of fine-grained model
interventions.
Measuring interpretability with the F1 score. Following prior work (Bricken et al., 2023), we
assign interpretability scores for SAE latents using precision and recall, which we combine in the
F1 score. Specifically, given a set of examples S used for evaluation, an SAE latent f active on a
subset F ⊂ S of examples, and a potential interpretation in the form of a subset A ⊂ S (e.g., the
IO name being ‘Mary’), we can evaluate the interpretation’s precision and recall with respect to f :
recall(F, A) = |A ∩ F | / |A| and precision(F, A) = |A ∩ F | / |F | We combine them into a single
number using the F1 score (see Appendix 7.4 for some discussion of this metric):
                                          2 precision(F, A) recall(F, A)
                            F1 (F, A) =                                  .
                                          precision(F, A) + recall(F, A)

4     C OMPUTING AND E VALUATING S UPERVISED F EATURE D ICTIONARIES
This section is a self-contained presentation of our supervised feature dictionary methods and results.
In the next section 5, we will extend these methods to SAEs.

4.1   PARAMETRIZING THE IOI TASK VIA ATTRIBUTES

Given a distribution over IOI prompts p ∼ D, we can form the sets NamesIO , NamesS of names
that appear as, respectively, the IO and S name in the prompts from supp(D). In a slight abuse of
notation, we define functions
                 IO : p 7→ NamesIO , S : p 7→ NamesS , Pos : p 7→ {ABB, BAB}
that assign the values of IO, S and Pos to each prompt (‘ABB’ means the IO name appears first,
‘BAB’ means it appears second). Together, these three attributes define a parametrization of IOI
prompts.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Why use these attributes? Not every set of attributes will result in a good approximation of the
model’s internal activations; in fact, we find that the choice of attributes is a crucial modeling de-
cision. We chose the IO, S and Pos attributes because they are the ones found to be key to the IOI
circuit in Wang et al. (2022). We experimented with other choices of attributes, but did not find
them to be more successful in our tests (see Appendix 7.10 for details1 ). We emphasize that there
are many other imaginable choices of attributes; see Appendix 7.12 for further discussion.

4.2    C OMPUTING S UPERVISED F EATURE D ICTIONARIES

Motivated by the linear representation hypothesis, we conjecture that model activations can be lin-
early decomposed as sums of features corresponding to the attributes. Specifically, given activations
a (p) := aC (p) ∈ Rd of a given model component C (e.g., outputs of an attention head) for IOI
prompts p ∼ D, there exist vectors (specific to the component C, which we omit from the notation
for brevity) uIO=x , uS=y , uPos=z ∈ Rd for each possible value x, y, z of the respective attributes,
such that
                a(p) ≈ Ep∼D [a(p)] + uIO=IO(p) + uS=S(p) + uPos=Pos(p) := a    b(p)               (2)
where ab(p) is the reconstruction of a(p). Note that Equation 2 is quite similar, but less expressive,
than SAE reconstructions (Equation 1), as it effectively requires a given feature to always appear
with the same coefficient in reconstructions. This is a reasonable assumption in settings like IOI,
where we expect the relevant features to behave as binary, on/off switches, as opposed to having
continuous degrees of activation2 . The expectation of a(p) is analogous to the decoder bias in an
SAE.
To compute optimal values for the attribute vectors uIO=x , . . ., we considered several approaches3 .
Our most effective method for the IOI task is straightforward: to compute e.g. uIO=x , we take the
conditional expectation over the event IO (p) = x and subtract the overall expectation. Formally,
                          uIO=x = Ep∼D [a (p) | IO(p) = x] − Ep∼D [a (p)] .

We refer to this method as mean feature dictionaries. One can prove that, in the limit of infinite
data, the mean features for an attribute not linearly detectable in the activations will converge to zero
(Appendix 7.7).

4.3    E VALUATING S UPERVISED F EATURE D ICTIONARIES

Intervention notation and locations. As above, we denote by a(p) := aC (p) the activation of
a single model component C (e.g., output of a single attention head) that we omit for brevity. We
denote an intervention that runs the model on a prompt p but replaces the activation a (p) with v as
a(p) ← v and continues the forward pass (often called activation patching (Vig et al., 2020)). Note
that such interventions can be applied simultaneously to multiple model components, but upstream
interventions may be ‘overwritten’ by downstream ones. In what follows, given an intervention intv,
we denote the logit difference of the model after the intervention as logitdiff (intv).
In all evaluations, we focus on cross-sections of the IOI circuit as identified by Wang et al. (2022).
These cross-sections are groups of attention heads that serve a shared computational role, such as
detecting name repetitions or moving information between positions. They represent key informa-
tion bottlenecks in the model’s computation where variables are passed between different parts of
the circuit (described in more detail in Appendix 7.3; also see Figure 2). We intervene on entire
cross-sections instead of just single heads in order to observe a stronger causal effect.
Sufficiency and necessity of reconstructions. The first set of evaluations measures the faithfulness
of activation reconstructions a
                              b(p). It is closely related to prior work (e.g., the ‘cross-entropy loss
recovered’ metric used in many SAE works (Bricken et al., 2023; Rajamanoharan et al., 2024)).
Here, we consider natural IOI-specific versions of this metric, and complement it with a measure of
how much information is lost when reconstructions are removed.
   1
     In particular, we found that another set of attributes, though more expressive in principle, learns to approx-
imate the features we get using the S, IO and Pos attributes through a change-of-variables-like transformation.
   2
     See also the discussion of ‘features as directions’ vs ‘features as points’ in Tamkin et al. (2023).
   3
     See Appendix 7.8 for more details on other approaches we considered.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     1.0
1.0

0.8                                                                  0.8

0.6                                                                  0.6

0.4                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                      Intervention
0.2                                                                  0.2                                             Supervised
                                                                                                                     Task SAE
                                                                                                                     Full distribution SAE
0.0 Ind+DT out    S-I v   S-I out   (B)NM q (B)NM qk (B)NM out       0.0 Ind+DT out   S-I v        S-I out   (B)NM q (B)NM qk (B)NM out

Figure 3: Sufficiency (left) and necessity (right) evaluations of reconstructions of cross-sections
of the IOI circuit computed using supervised feature dictionaries, task- and full-distribution SAEs.
Left: average logit difference when replacing activations in cross-sections of the IOI circuit with
their reconstructions, normalized by the average logit difference over the data distribution in the
absence of intervention (a y-axis value of 1 is best). Right: drop in logit difference when deleting
reconstructions, normalized by the respective drop when performing mean-ablation, and linearly
rescaled so that values close to 1 are best. See Appendix 7.5 for details.


Sufficiency. We check if reconstructions are sufficient to do the task using the intervention a(p) ←
a
b (p), i.e., replacing activations a(p) with their reconstructions a
                                                                   b(p) at circuit cross-sections. To
normalize values, we report the metric
                                                          Ep∼D [logitdiff (a(p) ← a
                                                                                  b(p))]
                               sufficiencyscore :=
                                                              Ep∼D [logitdiff (id)]
where logitdiff (id) is the logit difference of the model in the absence of intervention, with expec-
tation ≈ 3.3 over our dataset. Results are shown in Figure 3 (left, orange bars)4 .
Necessity. We check if the reconstructions are necessary for the model to do the task. To do this, we
intervene by replacing activations a(p) with their average plus the SAE error term:
                            necessity-intv := a(p) ← Ep∼D [a(p)] + (a(p) − ab(p))
                                                                   |     {z     }
                                                                                              error term

We measure the drop in logit difference that results from this intervention compared to no interven-
tion, and compare to the corresponding drop when using the mean-ablation intervention to normal-
ize5 :
                                     |Ep∼D [logitdiff (necessity-intv) − logitdiff (a ← Ep∼D [a(p)])]|
          necessity score = 1 −
                                          |Ep∼D [logitdiff (id) − logitdiff (a ← Ep∼D [a(p)])]|
Results are shown in Figure 3 (right, orange bars), rescaled linearly versus the logit difference in the
absence of intervention.
Control. This evaluation measures the degree to which the supervised feature dictionaries disentan-
gle the different attributes 6 . Specifically, supervised dictionaries suggest a straightforward way to
edit the model’s internal representation of the IO, S and Pos attributes via feature arithmetic. For
      4
      We note that we report fractions of average logit differences; this ignores the distribution of logit dif-
ferences across prompts, and raises the possibility that a few examples with very high logit differences may
dominate the final score. However, in practice we observe that logit differences are concentrated close to their
means.
    5
      The intuition for this is that mean-ablation over the IOI distribution keeps shared information like grammar,
syntax and non-IOI-specific semantics intact, which keeps the model somewhat on-distribution, but erases IOI-
specific data. If the error term has useful information for the task, we expect the logit difference to drop less
when we intervene with the error term than when we intervene with the mean-ablation.
    6
      Note that, to meaningfully conclude disentanglement of attributes, they must be ‘entangled’ in the first
place. This is true in the IOI task, where many circuit locations represent the S and Pos information simultane-
ously. We also find that one particular location, the queries of the L10H0 name mover head, represent all three
attributes IO, S and Pos.


                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


example, to change the value of the IO attribute in some activation a (p), we can define the edited
activation

                          aIO←x (p) := a(p) + uIO=x − uIO=IO(p) .                               (3)
We want to check the extent to which this edit changes the IO attribute and only the IO attribute.
We measure this in two ways:

       • probing accuracy (correlational effect): we train linear probes to predict the IO, S and
         Pos attributes from the activations a(p) of a single circuit location, and then we check
         whether their predictions are consistent with the edits. We find these probes have high
         accuracy overall w.r.t. both the attribute being edited-in, as well as the attributes that should
         be fixed (see Appendix Figure 16 for the results).
       • edit accuracy (causal effect): we measure the fraction of edits where an intervention
         such as a(p) ← aIO←x (p) results in the same next-token prediction as the ‘ground truth’
         intervention a(p) ← a(pIO←x ). Here pIO←x is the prompt p where the IO attribute is set to
         x, but all other data is kept the same. This is ‘ground truth’ because it directly patches the
         ‘correct’ activation our edit attempts to approximate. Results are shown in Figure 4 (red
         shapes, x-axis); some additional results are given in Appendix Figure 28 (orange bars).

Sparsity of supervised feature interactions. Supervised feature dictionaries are in a way emph-
tautologically interpretable: they were defined to have a single feature activating for each possible
value of each of the 3 attributes. In particular, the F1 score of a supervised feature with respect to
its ground-truth interpretation (e.g., IO=‘John’) will be 1 by definition. Accordingly, we performed
a more demanding test of interpretability: decomposing internal model computations in terms of
interactions between individual features. We find that pre-softmax attention scores and composition
between heads can be decomposed in terms of feature-level interactions, such that many interactions
are close to zero, and the few non-zeros correspond to those expected based on the high-level IOI
circuit description from Wang et al. (2022); see Appendix 7.9 for details, and especially Figures 8
and 9.
Having established our supervised feature dictionary framework and demonstrated its effectiveness
on the IOI task, we now turn to the challenge of evaluating SAEs using this methodology.


5     E VALUATING S PARSE AUTOENCODERS

5.1   SAE T RAINING M ETHODOLOGY

We trained SAEs using a range of architectures and datasets. A central distinction in our experiments
is between task SAEs trained on IOI dataset activations, and full-distribution SAEs trained on
activations from the LLM’s pre-training dataset OpenWebText (Gokaslan & Cohen, 2019).
For most experiments reported in this paper, we used the ‘vanilla’ SAE architecture following
Bricken et al. (2023) with task SAEs. On the whole, we found vanilla task SAEs good at suffi-
ciency/necessity, but struggling to control the model effectively.
This prompted us to experiment with more recent SAE architectures such as gated (Rajamanoharan
et al., 2024) and topK (Gao et al., 2024) SAEs, as well as to better optimize how we choose SAEs
for control. The specific details of these architectures are not relevant for this paper, and we refer
the reader to the original papers for more details. For our purposes, all SAE architectures used come
with a notion of reconstruction as a bias term plus a linear combination of a subset of SAE latents.
For the training methodology of these newer variants, we adopted standard practices from recent
works (Bricken et al., 2023; Rajamanoharan et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2024). Exhaustive details on
SAE training algorithms and hyperparameters are given in Appendix 7.13. We found that these new
architectures significantly increased performance in the sparse control evaluation.

5.2   C HALLENGES IN SAE E VALUATION

Our goal now is to extend the methodologies used to evaluate supervised feature dictionaries from
Subsection 4.3 to deal with SAE latents. This involves two main challenges:


                                                    7
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  1.0      Interpretation-agnostic edits               Interpretation-aware edits
                                                                                                                          SAE Variant & Edit Method
Edit Magnitude (Weight Removed)   0.8                                                                                     Vanilla (Interpretation-aware)
                                                                                                                          Gated (Interpretation-aware)
                                                                                                                          Topk (Interpretation-aware)
                                  0.6                                                                                     Supervised
                                                                                                                          Edit Attribute and Location
                                                                                                                          IO in (B)NM out
                                  0.4                                                                                     Pos in (B)NM qk
                                                                                                                          Pos in (B)NM q
                                                                                                                          Pos in S-I out
                                  0.2                                                                                     Pos in S-I v
                                                                                                                          Pos in Ind+DT out
                                  0.0
                                     0.0    0.2     0.4    0.6     0.8     1.0   0.0   0.2       0.4   0.6   0.8    1.0
                                                  Edit Accuracy                              Edit Accuracy


     Figure 4: Activation editing results, showing the trade-offs between edit accuracy and edit mag-
     nitude (better is down and to the right). Left: results in the interpretation-agnostic editing regime,
     where we edit using the SAE latents best for each individual edit. Right: results in the interpretation-
     aware editing regime, where we edit using SAE latents with high F1 score for the attribute values
     being edited. Each color represents an SAE variant, and each shape a cross-section of the IOI circuit.
     See subsection 5.4 for more details on the two editing regimes.


     No built-in interpretations: unlike our supervised features, which by definition correspond to val-
     ues of the IOI attributes, SAE latents do not come with a built-in interpretation. This means that
     we must perform some kind of labeling/search over SAE latents when interested in e.g. using SAE
     latents to control the model;
     Multiple good solutions may exist: even if the SAE latents do not correspond in a 1-to-1 manner
     to the supervised features, they may still be useful for approximating and controlling the IOI circuit
     w.r.t. the attributes IO, S and Pos we have chosen. A qualitative discussion of some concrete ways
     in which this might occur is given in Appendix 7.12. This means that we should not compare SAE
     latents to supervised features in a head-to-head manner, but rather allow for some flexibility in how
     SAE latents can be leveraged to achieve the outcomes we want.
     With these challenges in mind, we now generalize the evaluations from Subsection 4.3 in the next
     sections.

      5.3                               S UFFICIENCY /N ECESSITY

     We note that the sufficiency/necessity evaluation applies as-is to SAE latents, as it only depends on
     the unambiguous notion of reconstruction. Results are shown in Figure 3 (green and red bars) for
     vanilla SAEs. We find that vanilla task SAEs are good at sufficiency/necessity, but full-distribution
     SAEs are not. We hypothesize this is because the task SAEs’ training dataset (i.e., the IOI dataset)
     is a much better fit for the IOI task than the full pre-training dataset; this is consistent with our other
     observations that full-distribution SAEs do worse on the control evaluations.

      5.4                               S PARSE C ONTROL VIA SAE L ATENTS

     Expressing activation editing as an optimization problem over SAE latents. To generalize the
     supervised edit from Equation (3) to the SAE setting, we need a way to pick SAE latents to re-
     move/add to the clean activation a(p). In the supervised setting, we always have a single feature for
     e.g. IO=‘John’ which we always add to the activation to change the IO attribute.
     However, in the SAE setting, it may be too demanding to expect a single feature with this property
     to exist. For example, multiple SAE latents might be relevant to representing IO=‘John’, but each
     might activate only in specific contexts.
     Thus, to remain agnostic to the exact decomposition of the SAE latents, we propose to allow more
     flexibility to the SAE latents in the control evaluation. Suppose we have two prompts ps , pt where


                                                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ps is the ‘source’ prompt that we want to intervene on, and pt is the ‘target’ prompt which expresses
the edit we want to make; for example, we could have pt = (ps )IO←x if we want to change the
IO attribute to x. Let the SAE have a dictionary of decoder vectors {uj }m            j=1 , andPthe original
and counterfactual
                P   activations a(ps ), a(p t ) have reconstructions   respectively a
                                                                                    b (ps ) =    i∈S αi ui +
bdec , a
       b(pt ) =    i∈T β i ui + bdec  for S,   T  ⊂  {1, . . . , m} and α i , βi > 0.  We   frame activation
editing as the optimization problem
                                                       X               X
                              min           a(ps ) −         αi ui +         βi ui − a(pt )                  (4)
                      R⊂S,A⊂T,|R∪A|≤k
                                                       i∈R             i∈A                    2
In words, this problem asks for at most k features to remove (R) from and/or add (A) to the original
activation to bring it as close as possible to the counterfactual activation, where the features to add
are taken directly from the counterfactual one (we also experimented with using the reconstructions
instead of the actual activations in this algorithm, but results were worse). In general, this problem
has no polynomial-time (in k, |S| , |T |) solution, as the NP-hard problem S UBSET S UM reduces to
it; instead, we use a greedy algorithm to find a solution.
We stress that this formulation is heuristic, but can be readily replaced with a more principled one;
we chose it because it is intuitive and cheap to optimize. Another natural choice would be to optimize
the logit difference downstream of the intervention to match that of patching the true counterfactual
activation directly.
Preventing complete activation overwrites by measuring edit magnitude. When editing acti-
vations, we must ensure our edits are minimal and targeted. A concerning failure mode would be
to completely overwrite the original activation’s features with those from the target, which would
demonstrate no true disentanglement of attributes. Furthermore, depending on the SAE’s structure,
this situation can arise even if we remove 1 latent and add 1 latent back 7 .
To measure the magnitude of the edit, we compare the contribution of the changed features to the
reconstruction against the analogous quantity for our ‘ideal’ supervised feature dictionary. Namely,
for each summand fi ui in a reconstruction a
                                           b, we assign a measure of its contribution
                                                                                      2
                             weight(i) := (fi ui )⊤ (b
                                                     a − bdec ) / ∥b
                                                                   a − bdec ∥2                               (5)
        Pk
so that i=1 weight(i) = 18 . Note that weights are additive in the features, so that the sum of
weights of some subset of features is the weight for these features’ total contribution to the recon-
struction. We then measure the magnitude of an edit by the total weight of the features removed
during the edit.
Results. We instantiate the optimization objective from Equation (4) in two main ways:
Interpretation-agnostic: here, we optimize the objective over all SAE latents active in the source
and target activations. This is the most flexible regime.
Interpretation-aware: here, we pick SAE latents in the order of F1 score w.r.t. the relevant attribute
value. For instance, if we want to change activation a (ps ) with IO=‘John’ to activation a (pt )
with IO=‘Mary’, we first order the SAE latents active in a(ps ) (resp. a (pt )) by their F1 score for
IO=‘John’ (resp. IO=‘Mary’), and then remove the top k/2 features from a(ps ) and add the top
k/2 features from a(pt ).
Results on the trade-off between edit accuracy and edit magnitude for k = 2 are shown in Figure
4 for task SAE variants. Note that k = 2 is the smallest meaningful value we can use, and it has
the same expressive power as our supervised edits, leading to a more fair comparison. Furthermore,
topK SAEs allow us to directly set the sparsity level of the latents, and we chose 3 active latents per
activation for this evaluation. This further matches the supervised feature dictionaries, which also
have 3 ‘active’ features per activation. Results for probing accuracy with topK SAEs (k = 3) are
shown in Appendix Figure 16.
   7
      As a simple but extreme example, consider an SAE which has a dedicated latent for each possible combi-
nation of values of the IO, S and Pos attributes (this can be achieved with ∼ 105 features in our setup, far more
than any SAE we train). Such an SAE can represent every IOI example perfectly (modulo random variation
beyond the attributes) with just 1 active feature.
    8
      While weights can in general take any real value, we find that in practice they are almost always approxi-
mately in [0, 1]; see Appendix 7.18 for empirical details.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We find that vanilla SAEs are markedly worse at this evaluation than supervised dictionaries, but
gated and especially topK SAEs are competitive with supervised dictionaries, especially in the
interpretation-agnostic regime. Further results for vanilla task SAEs with higher k are shown in
Appendix Figure 28 (for task SAEs). We find that higher k values lead to only marginally better
performance. Full-distribution vanilla SAEs do even worse on this task (Appendix Figure 27). As
a control condition, we also consider running the same experiment with an SAE where the decoder
vectors were frozen at initialization; this leads to significantly worse performance (Appendix Figure
26), indicating that the SAE latents are indeed learning useful information for the task.

5.5   I NTERPRETABILITY

To evaluate SAE latent interpretability, we frame an ’interpretation’ as a subset A of the IOI dis-
tribution’s support, assigning interpretability scores via the F1 score between a latent’s active set
F and A. To avoid trivial interpretations where each latent simply matches its own active set, we
restrict A to meaningful human-defined subsets, including our primary attributes (IO, S, Pos), their
intersections, and unions of attribute values. Given a latent, we pick the interpretation among these
with the highest F1 score. Details on the interpretation methodology are given in Appendix 7.14.
Our analysis reveals that many SAE latents have clear interpretations (F1 > 0.8) consistent with
their circuit locations, as shown in Appendix Figure 15 for full-distribution SAEs and in 29 (among
others) for task SAEs. We note that these experiments are of a rather exploratory and qualitative
nature; the main conclusion we draw is that there is a wide variety of interpretations for the SAE
latents.

6     D ISCUSSION , L IMITATIONS AND C ONCLUSION
Discussion. We have taken steps towards more principled and objective evaluations of the usefulness
of sparse feature dictionaries for disentangling LLM activations. In particular, we have demonstrated
that simple supervised methods can be used as a principled way to compute high-quality feature
dictionaries in a task-specific context, and that these supervised dictionaries can be used as ‘skylines’
to evaluate and contextualize the performance of unsupervised methods, such as SAEs. Moreover,
while we have focused on the IOI task because of how well-studied it is, we have shown a proof of
concept that our methods can be generalized straightforwardly to new tasks and models, as well as
new distributions (Appendix 7.1).
Limitations and Future Work. A central limitation of our approach is that we impose the set of
attributes we want to evaluate SAEs against. This influences many of our evaluations, in particular
the ‘sparse control evaluation’ from Section 5.4, which relies on these attributes to compute the
counterfactual activations used to evaluate edit accuracy.9 This is somewhat mitigated by the fact
that we use attributes shown to be consistent with the computation of the IOI circuit, and that we aim
to be agnostic to the precise SAE representation of the task. We believe this assumption (conditioned
on the supervised dictionaries successfully passing our tests) is a reasonable middle ground between
assessing the usefulness of SAEs for model behaviors humans understand and wish to control, and
evaluating SAEs fairly.
Another major limitation of our framework is that it deals with quite templatic tasks. We hope that
future work can bridge this gap. For example, we find the approach of Gao et al. (2024) for evalu-
ating SAE latents as probes for binary classification tasks to be a promising direction for building
more fine-grained supervised feature dictionaries.
Finally, a third limitation is that it takes work to identify in a way independent of SAEs what good
attributes for a given task are. We show through two case studies in Appendix 7.1 that, by targeting
only key attributes in a single activation location, we can reduce this effort substantially. This comes
at the cost of analyzing a more limited, but still potentially interesting slice of the task. However, we
admit that these tasks are still somewhat contrived/templatic. For truly open-ended tasks, we believe
that methods to generate ‘concept vectors’ at scale, such as the ones given in Luo et al. (2024); Zou
et al. (2023), may be a promising direction for obtaining a starting point for ‘ground-truth’ feature
dictionaries.
   9
     However, note that the sufficiency and necessity evaluations are independent of the choice of attributes, as
they evaluate SAE reconstructions as a whole.


                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Sonia Joseph and Can Rager for feedback on earlier versions of this manuscript. We
thank the SERI MATS program for making this research possible. A.M. and G.L. were supported
by grants from AI Safety Support and Effective Ventures.


AUTHOR C ONTRIBUTIONS

AM designed and ran the algorithms for computing supervised feature dictionaries and observed
their theoretical properties; trained task-specific SAEs; designed the tests for sufficiency/necessity
of reconstructions, sparse controllability and causal faithfulness of feature descriptions; ran these
tests on full-distribution and task-specific SAEs; observed the occlusion/oversplitting phenomena in
task-specific SAEs and developed the toy models for them; wrote all sections of the paper unless
otherwise specified.
GL trained full-distribution SAEs; designed and ran the automatic feature scoring algorithms for
them, and ran most of the interpretability evaluations for full-distribution SAEs; contributed to the
sections on interpretability of full-distribution SAE features, created Figures 1 and 15.
NN provided guidance on research goals and prioritization, as well as writing, throughout the entire
project; proposed the initial idea of finding supervised feature dictionaries for the IOI task, and using
them to evaluate (unsupervised) feature dictionaries; refined the search for algorithms to compute
the supervised dictionaries.


R EFERENCES
Sanjeev Arora, Yuanzhi Li, Yingyu Liang, Tengyu Ma, and Andrej Risteski. Linear algebraic struc-
  ture of word senses, with applications to polysemy. Transactions of the Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics, 6:483–495, 2018.

Jimmy Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Layer normalization. ArXiv, abs/1607.06450,
  2016. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8236317.

Nora Belrose, David Schneider-Joseph, Shauli Ravfogel, Ryan Cotterell, Edward Raff, and Stella
  Biderman. Leace: Perfect linear concept erasure in closed form. ArXiv, abs/2306.03819, 2023.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259088549.

Steven Bills, Nick Cammarata, Dan Mossing, Henk Tillman, Leo Gao, Gabriel Goh, Ilya
  Sutskever, Jan Leike, Jeff Wu, and William Saunders.  Language models can explain
  neurons in language models. https://openaipublic.blob.core.windows.net/
  neuron-explainer/paper/index.html, 2023.

Tolga Bolukbasi, Adam Pearce, Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, Emily Reif, Fernanda Viégas, and Martin
  Wattenberg. An interpretability illusion for bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07143, 2021.

Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Con-
  erly, Nick Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan Wu,
  Shauna Kravec, Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Alex
  Tamkin, Karina Nguyen, Brayden McLean, Josiah E Burke, Tristan Hume, Shan Carter,
  Tom Henighan, and Christopher Olah. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language
  models with dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. https://transformer-
  circuits.pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Maheep Chaudhary and Atticus Geiger. Evaluating open-source sparse autoencoders on disentan-
 gling factual knowledge in gpt-2 small. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.04478, 2024.


                                                   11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dami Choi, Vincent Huang, Kevin Meng, Daniel D Johnson, Jacob Steinhardt, and Sarah
  Schwettmann.   Scaling automatic neuron description. https://transluce.org/
  neuron-descriptions, October 2024.
Tom Conerly, Adly Templeton, Trenton Bricken, Jonathan Marcus, and Tom Henighan.
  Update on how we train saes.   Transformer Circuits Thread, 2024. URL https:
  //transformer-circuits.pub/2024/april-update/index.html#
  training-saes.
Arthur Conmy and Neel Nanda.   Activation steering with SAEs.     Alignment Forum,
  2024. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/C5KAZQib3bzzpeyrg/
  progress-update-1. Progress Update #1 from the GDM Mech Interp Team.
Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse autoen-
  coders find highly interpretable features in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08600,
  2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
  guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Min-
  nesota, 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
Ronen Eldan and Yuanzhi Li. Tinystories: How small can language models be and still speak
  coherent english? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07759, 2023.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Gan-
  guli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal
  Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris
  Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2021.
  URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCandlish,
  Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. Toy models of super-
  position. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022a. URL https://transformer-circuits.
  pub/2022/toy_model/index.html.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, et al. Toy models of superposi-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652, 2022b.
Manaal Faruqui, Yulia Tsvetkov, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Noah A. Smith. Sparse over-
 complete word vector representations. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics, 2015. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:9397697.
Yossi Gandelsman, Alexei A Efros, and Jacob Steinhardt. Interpreting clip’s image representation
  via text-based decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05916, 2023.
Leo Gao, Tom Dupré la Tour, Henk Tillman, Gabriel Goh, Rajan Troll, Alec Radford, Ilya
  Sutskever, Jan Leike, and Jeffrey Wu. Scaling and evaluating sparse autoencoders. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.04093, 2024.
Gabriel Goh. Decoding the representation of code in the brain: an fmri study of code review and
  expertise. 2016. URL https://gabgoh.github.io/ThoughtVectors/.
Aaron Gokaslan and Vanya Cohen. Openwebtext corpus. http://Skylion007.github.io/
  OpenWebTextCorpus, 2019.
Wes Gurnee, Neel Nanda, Matthew Pauly, Katherine Harvey, Dmitrii Troitskii, and Dimitris Bert-
 simas. Finding neurons in a haystack: Case studies with sparse probing. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2305.01610, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. How does gpt-2 compute greater-than?: Inter-
 preting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Shlomo Hoory, Nathan Linial, and Avi Wigderson. Expander graphs and their applications. Bulletin
  of the American Mathematical Society, 43(4):439–561, 2006.
Jing Huang, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Potts, Mor Geva, and Atticus Geiger. Ravel: Evaluat-
   ing interpretability methods on disentangling language model representations. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2402.17700, 2024.
Caden Juang, Gonçalo Paulo, Jacob Drori, and Nora Belrose. Open source automated interpretability
  for sparse autoencoder features. EleutherAI Blog, July 30 2024.
Adam Karvonen, Benjamin Wright, Can Rager, Rico Angell, Jannik Brinkmann, Logan Riggs
  Smith, Claudio Mayrink Verdun, David Bau, and Samuel Marks. Measuring progress in dic-
  tionary learning for language model interpretability with board game models. In ICML 2024
  Workshop on Mechanistic Interpretability.
Connor Kissane, Robert Krzyzanowski, Arthur Conmy, and Neel Nanda. Attention saes scale to gpt-
  2 small. Alignment Forum, 2024. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/
  FSTRedtjuHa4Gfdbr.
Robert Krzyzanowski, Connor Kissane, Arthur Conmy, and Neel Nanda.   We inspected
  every head in gpt-2 small using saes so you don’t have to.    Alignment Forum,
  2024. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/xmegeW5mqiBsvoaim/
  we-inspected-every-head-in-gpt-2-small-using-saes-so-you-don.
Tom Lieberum, Matthew Rahtz, János Kramár, Geoffrey Irving, Rohin Shah, and Vladimir Miku-
  lik. Does circuit analysis interpretability scale? evidence from multiple choice capabilities in
  chinchilla. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09458, 2023.
Jinqi Luo, Tianjiao Ding, Kwan Ho Ryan Chan, Darshan Thaker, Aditya Chattopadhyay, Chris
   Callison-Burch, and René Vidal. Pace: Parsimonious concept engineering for large language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04331, 2024.
Samuel Marks, Can Rager, Eric J Michaud, Yonatan Belinkov, David Bau, and Aaron Mueller.
  Sparse feature circuits: Discovering and editing interpretable causal graphs in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19647, 2024.
Thomas McGrath, Matthew Rahtz, Janos Kramar, Vladimir Mikulik, and Shane Legg. The hydra
  effect: Emergent self-repair in language model computations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15771,
  2023.
Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent linear representations in world models
  of self-supervised sequence models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00941, 2023.
Chris Olah.       Mechanistic interpretability, variables, and the importance of inter-
  pretable bases.    https://www.transformer-circuits.pub, 2022.  URL https://www.
  transformer-circuits.pub/2022/mech-interp-essay.
Christopher Olah. Interpretability dreams. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. https://transformer-
  circuits.pub/2023/interpretability-dreams/index.html.
Bruno A. Olshausen and David J. Field. Sparse coding with an overcomplete basis set: A
  strategy employed by v1? Vision Research, 37:3311–3325, 1997. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14208692.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep
  Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jackson
  Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Ka-
  plan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. In-context learning and induction heads. Trans-
  former Circuits Thread, 2022. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/
  in-context-learning-and-induction-heads/index.html.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Senthooran Rajamanoharan, Arthur Conmy, Lewis Smith, Tom Lieberum, Vikrant Varma, János
  Kramár, Rohin Shah, and Neel Nanda. Improving dictionary learning with gated sparse autoen-
  coders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16014, 2024.

Lee Sharkey,     Dan Braun,   and Beren Millidge.       Taking features out
  of superposition with sparse autoencoders.      2023.       URL https:
  //www.alignmentforum.org/posts/z6QQJbtpkEAX3Aojj/
  interim-research-report-taking-features-out-of-superposition.

Alex Tamkin, Mohammad Taufeeque, and Noah D Goodman. Codebook features: Sparse and
  discrete interpretability for neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17230, 2023.

Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian Chen,
  Adam Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, Hoagy Cunningham, Nicholas L
  Turner, Callum McDougall, Monte MacDiarmid, C. Daniel Freeman, Theodore R. Sumers,
  Edward Rees, Joshua Batson, Adam Jermyn, Shan Carter, Chris Olah, and Tom Henighan.
  Scaling monosemanticity: Extracting interpretable features from claude 3 sonnet. Trans-
  former Circuits Thread, 2024. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/
  scaling-monosemanticity/index.html.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von
  Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman
  Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp.
  5998–6008, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/
  3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html.

Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Simas Sakenis, Jason
  Huang, Yaron Singer, and Stuart Shieber. Causal mediation analysis for interpreting neural nlp:
  The case of gender bias. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12265, 2020.

Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt.
  Interpretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in GPT-2 small. In
  The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=NpsVSN6o4ul.

Zeyu Yun, Yubei Chen, Bruno A. Olshausen, and Yann LeCun. Transformer visualization via
  dictionary learning: contextualized embedding as a linear superposition of transformer factors.
  In Workshop on Knowledge Extraction and Integration for Deep Learning Architectures; Deep
  Learning Inside Out, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  232417301.

Andy Zou, Long Phan, Sarah Chen, James Campbell, Phillip Guo, Richard Ren, Alexander Pan,
  Xuwang Yin, Mantas Mazeika, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, et al. Representation engineering: A
  top-down approach to ai transparency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01405, 2023.


7     A PPENDIX

7.1   G ENERALIZING OUR METHODS TO OTHER MODELS , DISTRIBUTIONS , AND TASKS

In this section, we detail two new tasks and datasets we used to showcase the generalization of our
methods.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7.1.1    T HE GREATER - THAN TASK
First, we ran a proof-of-concept for the ”greater-than” task (Hanna et al., 2024) to edit the attribute
denoted “YY” in the outputs of 7 attn heads in the greater-than circuit.
Task, dataset, and model. We use the greater-than task as-is, with the template

          ‘The $NOUN lasted from the year 17$YY to the year 17’

where YY is a two-digit number that concatenates with 17 to form a year, and we restrict years to
be between 1701 and 1720. We intervene on the outputs of the attention heads L5H1, L5H5, L6H1,
L6H9, L7H10, L8H8, and L8H11 in order to change the attribute YY. The LLM used is the same
as in the main paper, the GPT-2 Small model. We sample several thousand prompts for training and
testing.
SAE training. We train vanilla task SAEs with an ℓ1 regularization coefficient of 5.0; we follow the
methodology of Bricken et al. (2023); Conerly et al. (2024) for training the SAEs.
Sparse control results. Exchanging as few as 2 SAE latents matched next-token predictions 90%
of the time when patching attention heads with counterfactual activations (compared to 38% for no
intervention; this is a binary classification task). Results are in Figure 5.


Figure 5: Results for sparse control on the greater-than task. We show the accuracy of next-token
predictions (against counterfactual labels) after patching attention heads with SAE latents, compared
to patching with ground-truth counterfactual activations.

7.1.2    T HE ‘ BOTH ’ TASK
To showcase the flexibility of our methods, we have evaluated them in a setup that departs in several
major ways from the main results reported in the paper:

        • We evaluate on a new task in-context learning task we created for this paper. The task is
          based on setting up a prompt where the model can apply induction (i.e., predict that the next
          token is the same as some earlier token in the context) in one of two ways; our experiments
          are centered on disentangling the two different ways the model can apply induction.
        • We evaluate on a new model and pre-training dataset, the 4-layer 33M-parameter model
          trained on the Tiny Stories dataset (Eldan & Li, 2023).
        • Whereas for most of the paper we have focused on task-specific SAEs, here we evaluate
          topK SAEs trained on the same pre-training dataset as the model (Tiny Stories).

This section is a proof of concept that our methods can be straightforwardly generalized to new
models and datasets.
Task. The task uses a template of the form

          Once upon a time, there live a kid named $NAME. $NAME really loved $ANI-
          MALS. $NAME also really loved $SPORT. So $NAME really loved both


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where a correct next-token prediction is either ‘$ANIMALS’ or ‘$SPORT’; we refer to these as the
two attributes for the task.
In our experiments, we sample a set of 1000 prompts where we randomly and independently sample
from a set of 25 names, 6 animal species, and 9 sports. We observe the following key properties of
the task:
        • While at temperature 0 the model will always prefer to start its completion with one of the
          two attributes (e.g., generate ‘cats and football’), we can still measure that at the ‘both’
          token the model places higher probability on the correct attribute values compared to in-
          correct ones.
        • Specifically, we define the restricted logit accuracy with respect to an attribute, which
          is the fraction of examples where the correct attribute value has the highest logit among
          all values for this attribute. For example, for the ‘animal’ attribute, an example where
          $ANIMALS=‘cats’ will be considered accurate if the logit for ‘cats’ is higher than the logit
          for each of the other 5 animal species in our dataset.
        • We find that in our dataset, the restricted logit accuracy for sport is 85.5%, and for animal
          is 75.9%. Moreover, we find that the residual stream representation of the ‘both’ token at
          the last (4th) layer of the model is causal w.r.t. this metric. Specifically, we can activation-
          patch this location from a prompt where we keep one attribute fixed but change the other.
          We observe that the accuracy w.r.t. the attribute value being patched-in is 77.1% for animal
          and 85.6% for sport, while the accuracy w.r.t. the attribute that is fixed remains mostly
          unchanged (at most 1 − 2% difference from clean).
Supervised feature dictionaries. We create supervised features for the two attributes like in the
main paper by using conditional expectation over examples in the dataset having a given value of
the attribute.
We observe that the supervised features are able to recover the causal effect of the attribute value
being patched-in on the restricted logit accuracy, suggesting that we have found meaningful features
for the task. Specifically, when we edit the animal attribute, the restricted logit accuracy w.r.t. the
animal being edited-in is 73%, while the accuracy w.r.t. the (fixed) sport attribute remains high at
82.8%. Similar results are found when editing the sport attribute.
Sparse control with TopK SAEs. We train topK SAEs with k ∈ {32, 64} and number of latents in
{8192, 16384}. We find that these SAEs achieve a good value of variance explained in the activa-
tions.
We perform a variant of the sparse control evaluation from Section 5.4 where we edit each attribute
in isolation, using counterfactual prompts where only this attribute has changed. This is analogous
to the intervention we use to evaluate our supervised feature dictionaries.
We explore changing a number of SAE latents in {2, 4, 6, 8}, and observe that this intervention is not
sufficient to recover the full causal effect of our supervised feature dictionaries. Results are shown
in Figure 6.

7.2     Q UALITATIVE P HENOMENA IN SAE L EARNING

7.2.1    F EATURE O CCLUSION
Our experiments suggest that when two (causally relevant) attributes are represented in the same
activation, but one attribute’s (supervised) features have overall higher magnitude, SAEs have a
tendency to robustly learn more interpretable features for the attribute with higher magnitude. We
observe this in the queries of the L10H0 name mover head at the END token in the IOI circuit,
where the IO and S attributes are both represented and causally relevant (ablating either leads to a
change of ≈ 0.5 in logit difference). We find that our task SAEs consistently find features with high
F1 score for individual IO names, but fail to find a significant number of features for individual S
names. In Figure 7 (left), we show interpretability results from training SAEs over a wide grid of
hyperparameters that confirm this observation; more details in Appendix 7.16.
Hypothesis: feature magnitude is a driver of occlusion. We noticed that the supervised features for
IO and S names in the L10H0 queries have a small but significant difference in norm (see Appendix


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Sparse control results for the new task. We plot how the restricted logit accuracy w.r.t. the
original (blue) and counterfactual (orange) attribute values changes as we edit more SAE latents.
The accuracy w.r.t. the other attribute is not shown as it remains high and nearly unchanged.


Figure 13 (left)). We then hypothesized that feature magnitude is a factor in this phenomenon. To
check this, we surgically reduce the magnitude of IO features in the activations using our supervised
feature dictionaries, and observe that the number of S features discovered in these modified activa-
tions monotonically increases as we remove larger fractions of the IO features (Figure 7 (right); see
Appendix 7.16 for methodology). We furthermore constructed a simple toy model based on i.i.d.
isotropic random features that mimic the norms of supervised features in the L10H0 queries, and
find that a similar phenomenon occurs for the distribution of features with high F1 score (e.g. higher
than 0.9; see Appendix 7.16).

7.2.2   F EATURE OVER - SPLITTING
We also found in our experiments that task SAEs have a tendency to split a single binary attribute
into multiple features, even when the number of features available could in principle be spent on
other attributes. Note that, while this behavior may be counter-intuitive from a human standpoint, it
does not necessarily mean that the SAE failed; it may be that the binary attribute is not part of an
optimal sparse description of the model’s internal states. We observe this phenomenon with the Pos


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.4

0.04 0.2 1.0 4.0
                   0.81   0.82   0.84   0.85   0.05   0.05   0.09   0.10    0.3
                   0.38   0.57   0.63   0.63   0.01   0.01   0.06   0.06    0.2                             Attribute
                                                                            0.1                                   IO
                   0.04   0.13   0.44   0.54   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00                                          S
                                                                            0.0
                   1024   2048   4096   8192   1024   2048   4096   8192          0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8     1.0


Figure 7: Left: Fraction of IO (left subplot) and S (right subplot) names in our dataset for which
a feature with F1 score ≥ 0.5 is found, as a function of dictionary size (x-axis) and effective ℓ1
regularization coefficient (y-axis), over a wide hyperparameter sweep for the queries of L10H0.
Right: fraction of IO and S names in our dataset for which a feature with F1 score ≥ 0.5 is found,
as a function of α (x-axis), the fraction of supervised IO features we subtract from the activations.


attribute in the IOI task (again in the queries of the L10H0 name mover), which is robustly split into
many (e.g. ≥ 10) features by our SAEs that activate for small, mostly non-overlapping subsets of
examples sharing the same Pos value that have no clear semantic interpretation.
Is over-splitting a form of over-fitting? To investigate whether this is due to overfitting, we com-
pared Pos features between (1) different random seeds for the same training dataset and (2) different
training datasets. In both cases, we found that the Pos features discovered are similar above chance
levels, suggesting that the over-splitting is not due solely to overfitting to randomness in the training
algorithm and/or dataset.
Reproducing the over-splitting phenomenon in a simple toy model. On the other hand, we show
empirical evidence that in a toy model where activations are a uniform mixture of two isotropic
Gaussian random variables, an appropriately randomly initialized SAE with enough hidden features
will achieve lower total loss than an ideal SAE with just two features corresponding to the two com-
ponents of the mixture. Such randomized constructions exist for any ℓ1 regularization coefficient,
even in the limit of infinite training data. Details are given in Appendix 7.17.

7.3                 A DDITIONAL DETAILS ON THE IOI CIRCUIT

Circuit structure. To refer to individual token positions within the sentence, we use the notation
of Wang et al. (2022): IO denotes the position of the IO name, S1 and S2 denote respectively the
positions of the first and second occurrences of the S name (with S1+1 being the token position after
S1), and END denotes the last token in the sentence (at the word ‘to’).
Wang et al. (2022) suggest the model uses the algorithm ‘Find the two names in the sentence, detect
the repeated name, and predict the non-repeated name’ to do this task. Specifically, they discover
several classes of heads in the model, each of which performs a specific subtask of this overall
algorithm. A simplified version of the circuit involves the following three classes of heads and
proceeds as follows:

                     • Duplicate token heads: these heads detect the repeated name in the sentence (the S name)
                       and output information about both its position and identity to the residual stream10
                     • S-Inhibition heads: these heads read the identity and position of the S name from the
                       residual stream, and output a signal to the effect of ‘do not attend to this position / this
                       token identity’ to the residual stream
                     • Name Mover heads: these are heads that attend to names in the sentence. Because the
                       signal from the S-Inhibition heads effectively removes the S name from the attention of
                       these heads, they read the identity of the IO name from the input prompt, and copy it to the
                       last token position in the residual stream.

   10
      We follow the conventions of Elhage et al. (2021) when describing internals of transformer models. The
residual stream at layer k is the sum of the output of all layers up to k − 1, and is the input into layer k.


                                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In reality, the circuit is more nuanced, with several other classes of heads participating: previous
token heads, induction heads (Olsson et al., 2022), backup name mover heads, and negative name
mover heads. In particular, the circuit exhibits backup behavior (McGrath et al., 2023) which poses
challenges for interpretability methods that intervene only on single model components at a time.
We refer the reader to Figure 2 for a schematic of the full circuit, and to Wang et al. (2022) for a
more complete discussion.

7.4   F1 SCORE NOTES
                                                                             α
An F1 -score of α guarantees that both precision and recall are at least 2−α    . For example, when
α = 0.8 (the value we use in most evaluations), both precision and recall are at least 0.8/1.2 ≈ 0.67.
Requiring a sufficiently high F1 value is important in order to avoid labeling a trivial feature as
meaningful for attributes where |A| is large, because then a feature active for all examples can have
a high F1 -score.
The F1 score has some limitations in the context of our work:

       • it does not take into account the magnitude of the feature activations; for instance, a feature
         that is active for all examples in S but only has high activation values on the examples in
         A may have a low F1 score, even though it is in some sense highly informative for the
         attribute A.
       • it is a very conservative metric, in that it requires both high precision and high recall to be
         high. For example, a feature with precision 0.5 but recall 0.02 will have an F1 score of
         ∼ 0.04, heavily skewed towards the lower of the two metrics, even though it is in some
         sense informative for the attribute A.

We hope to address these limitations in future work.

7.5   A DDITIONAL DETAILS FOR S ECTION 4.3

Computing and evaluating supervised feature dictionaries. For each parametrization and each
method to compute feature dictionaries, we use 20,000 prompts sampled from our IOI distribution
(see Appendix 7.6) to compute feature dictionaries for the query, key, value, and attention output
(i.e., attention-weighted values) of the relevant token positions of all 26 heads identified in Wang
et al. (2022) (recall Figure 2). We use another sample of 5,000 prompts to validate the quality of the
feature dictionaries.
Cross-sections of the circuit. Based on the understanding of the IOI circuit from Wang et al. (2022),
we identify several cross-sections of the computational graph of the IOI circuit where feature editing
is expected to have effects meaningful for the task:

       • outputs of (backup) name mover heads at END ((B)NM out): these activations encode the
         IO name and write it to the END token of the residual stream. We expect that editing the
         IO name in these activations will directly affect the model’s prediction, while editing other
         attributes will not have a significant effect.
       • queries+keys of (backup) name movers at END ((B)NM qk): the queries represent the S
         name and Pos information, but they are mainly used as inhibitory signals for the model,
         decreasing the attention to the S token11 . The keys represent information about the IO and
         S names: in particular, the S information combines with the query to inhibit attention to the
         S token.
         We expect that editing the S and Pos attributes in both the keys and queries will not signif-
         icantly hurt model performance, because as a result attention to the S token will again be
         inhibited. By contrast, it is unclear what editing the IO name is expected to do, since its
         role in the attention computation is not fully described in Wang et al. (2022).
       • outputs of S-Inhibition heads at END (S-I out), values of S-Inhibition heads at S2 (S-I v),
         and outputs of duplicate token and induction heads at S2 (Ind+DT out): these activations
  11
     In addition, we later find that the queries of the L10H0 name mover head also represent the IO attribute,
and serve an inhibitory role for it as well, decreasing the attention to the IO token.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         transmit the inhibitory signal to the name mover heads through the residual stream. We
         expect that editing S and Pos in these activations will lower the model’s logit difference by
         disrupting the inhibitory signal, while editing IO will have no effect.

Evaluating necessity of feature reconstructions: When we intervene on the model by removing
reconstructions from activations in cross-sections of the circuit, model performance on the IOI task
(as measured by the logit difference) goes down from the clean value logitdiff clean to a lower value
logitdiff intervention . As we describe in the main text, the ground-truth intervention for removing
the features from the activations is mean ablation of the corresponding cross-section, which also re-
sults in a lower value of the logit difference, logitdiff mean ablation . We want to measure the degree
to which logitdiff intervention approximates logitdiff mean ablation , in a way that normalizes for
different values of logitdiff mean ablation across cross-sections of the circuit. We use the following
metric to do this:


                                       |logitdiff mean ablation − logitdiff intervention |
              necessity score = 1 −                                                        .
                                           |logitdiff mean ablation − logitdiff clean |

7.6   DATASET, M ODEL AND E VALUATION D ETAILS FOR THE IOI TASK

We use GPT2-Small for the IOI task, with a dataset that spans 216 single-token names, 144 single-
token objects and 75 single-token places, which are split 1 : 1 across a training and test set. Every
example in the data distribution includes (i) an initial clause introducing the indirect object (IO, here
‘Mary’) and the subject (S, here ‘John’), and (ii) a main clause that refers to the subject a second
time. Beyond that, the dataset varies in the two names, the initial clause content, and the main clause
content. Specifically, use three templates as shown below:

           Then, [ ] and [ ] had a long and really crazy argument. Afterwards, [ ] said to
          Then, [ ] and [ ] had lots of fun at the [place]. Afterwards, [ ] gave a [object] to
           Then, [ ] and [ ] were working at the [place]. [ ] decided to give a [object] to

and we use the first two in training and the last in the test set. Thus, the test set relies on unseen
templates, names, objects and places. We used fewer templates than the IOI paper Wang et al.
(2022) in order to simplify tokenization (so that the token positions of our names always align), but
our results also hold with shifted templates like in the IOI paper.
On the test partition of this dataset, GPT2-Small achieves an accuracy of ≈ 91%. The average
difference of logits between the correct and incorrect name is ≈ 3.3, and the logit of the correct
name is greater than that of the incorrect name in ≈ 99% of examples. Note that, while the logit
difference is closely related to the model’s correctness, it being > 0 does not imply that the model
makes the correct prediction, because there could be a third token with a greater logit than both
names.

7.7   P ROPERTIES OF MEAN FEATURE DICTIONARIES

Mean feature dictionaries enjoy several convenient properties:

       • The vectors uiv for an attribute ai do not depend on which other attributes al ̸= ai we have
         chosen to describe the prompt p with.
       • If an attribute i is not linearly represented in the activations, the mean code features viv → 0
         in the limit of infinite data (see below). In particular, this also holds if the attribute is not
         represented at all in the activations.

This suggests that mean feature dictionaries are robust to the inclusion of irrelevant or non(-linearly)-
represented attributes, which is a desirable property in real settings where we may not know the
exact attributes present in each activation. However, mean feature dictionaries are not robust to
the inclusion of redundant attributes, as the lack of interaction between the attributes means that
redundant attributes cannot ‘coordinate’ to reduce the reconstruction error ∥a − a   b∥22 .


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7.7.1    M EAN FEATURES ARE ZERO FOR NON - LINEARLY- REPRESENTED ATTRIBUTES .
Suppose we have a random vector x for a k-way classification task with one-hot labels z ∈ Z =
{z ∈ {0, 1}k s.t. ∥z∥1 = 1}. In Section 3 of Belrose et al. (2023), it is shown that the following are
equivalent:
        • the expected cross-entropy loss of a linear predictor b  z = w⊤ x + b for z is minimized at
          a constant linear predictor. In other words, the optimal logistic regression classifier (in the
          limit of infinite data) is no better than the optimal constant predictor (which, at best, always
          predicts the majority class).
        • the class-conditional mean vectors E [x|z = ei ] are all equal to the overall mean E [x] of
          the data.
If we translate this to the context of mean feature dictionaries, we have that logistic regression for
the value of an attribute ai will degenerate to the majority class predictor if and only if the mean
feature dictionaries for all values of this attribute are zero. In the finite data regime, this gives us
some theoretical grounds to expect that the mean feature dictionaries will be significantly away from
zero if and only if the attribute’s values can be non-trivially recovered by a (logistic) linear probe.
As a special case, if an attribute is not represented in the data at all, we expect the mean feature
dictionaries for this attribute to be zero.

7.8     D EFINITION AND P ROPERTIES OF MSE F EATURE D ICTIONARIES

The main alternative method we considered to compute supervised feature dictionaries from at-
tributes was MSE feature dictionaries, which use a least-squares linear regression to predict the
activations from the attribute values. We note that mean feature dictionaries work well in our set-
ting because the attributes we choose in the IOI task are probabilistically independent w.r.t. the IOI
distribution we work with. We recommend using MSE dictionaries when attributes are not proba-
bilistically independent.
MSE feature dictionaries compute uai (·)=v by directly minimizing the ℓ2 reconstruction error over
the centered activations:
                                                N                                      2
                                              1 X                 X
             {uai (·)=v }i∈I,v∈Si = arg min        (a(pk ) − a) −     uai (·)=ai (pk )         (6)
                                    uai (·)=v N
                                                  k=1                   i∈I                2
This objective is convex, and is equivalent to a least-squares regression problem; in fact, the optimal
solutions take a form very similar to the mean feature dictionaries (see below). Furthermore, this
objective closely mimics the SAE objective: here, the sparsity is hard-coded, leaving only the ℓ2
objective.
We next discuss some properties of the MSE feature dictionaries. For brevity, in the remainder of
this section we write uiv instead of uai (·)=v .

7.8.1   MSE FEATURE DICTIONARIES AS A MULTIVARIATE LEAST- SQUARES REGRESSION
        PROBLEM .
          PNA
Let S = i=1     |Si | be the total number of possible values for all attributes. For each attribute i,
consider the characteristic matrix Ci ∈ RN ×Si of the dataset for this attribute, where
                                             1 if ai (p(k) ) = vj

                                     Ckj =
                                             0 otherwise
for some ordering (v1 , . . . , v|Si | ) of the values in Si , and let C = [C1 C2 · · · CNA ] ∈ RN ×S
be the concatenation of all characteristic matrices. Also, let A ∈ RN ×d be the matrix of activations
with rows a(k) . Then the objective function for the MSE feature dictionaries can be written as the
multivariate least-squares regression problem
                                                      1               2
                                               min       ∥A − CU ∥F
                                             U ∈RS×d N
where the rows of U are the vectors uiv across all i and v ∈ Si , with the optimal solution given by
                                                             +
                                              U ∗ = C ⊤C C ⊤A                                      (7)


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7.8.2    MSE FEATURE DICTIONARIES AS AVERAGING OVER EXAMPLES .
Using the special structure of the objective, we can also derive some information about the optimal
solutions u∗iv . Namely, at optimality we should not be able to decrease the value of the objective by
changing a given u∗iv away from its optimal value. The terms containing u∗iv in the objective are
                                               2                                          2
          1 X                X                     1   X               X
                    a(k) −       u∗lv(k) − u∗iv =             a(k) −      u∗lv(k)  − u∗iv
          N                          l             N                           l
             k∈Piv           l̸=i                                k∈Piv                   l̸=i
                                                     2                                                            2
                                                           1 X                                2
                                                         =               a    (k)
                                                                                    − u∗iv
                                                           N                                  2
                                                                 k∈Piv

where recall that Piv = {k | ai (p(k) ) = v}, and a(k) is the residual of a(k) after subtracting the
reconstruction using all other attributes l ̸= i. Since this value cannot be decreased by changing u∗iv ,
we have that it equals the minimizer of this term (holding a(k) fixed). In other words, if we define
                                               1 X                   2
                                     f (u) =              a(k) − u
                                               N                     2
                                                         k∈Piv

we have that u∗iv = arg minu f (u). Since f is a sum of convex functions, it is itself convex, and so
the first-order optimality condition is also sufficient for optimality. We have
                                     X                        1 X (k)
                         ∇f (u) ∝           a(k) − u ∝                  a −u
                                                            |Piv |
                                     k∈Piv                                    k∈Piv

and so
                                                       1 X (k)
                                            u∗iv =          a                                                              (8)
                                                     |Piv |
                                                               k∈Piv
Note that this is very similar to the definition of mean feature dictionaries, but also importantly
different, because the optimal u∗iv depends on the optimal values of the feature dictionaries for the
other attributes.

7.8.3    MSE FEATURE DICTIONARIES WITH INDEPENDENT ATTRIBUTES .
Finally, we can prove that, under certain conditions, attributes for which E [a|ai (p) = vi ] = E [a],
i.e. the conditional mean of activations over values of the attribute is the same as the overall mean
(assuming both means exist), will have (approximately) constant MSE feature dictionaries uiv =
ui ∀v. This is a counterpart to the result from Appendix 7.7 for MSE feature dictionaries:
Lemma 7.1. Suppose that all conditional means Ep∼D [a|ai (p) = v] exist for all i, v ∈ Si . Let ai
be an attribute such its values appear independently from the values of all other attributes, i.e.
 Pp∼D [ai (p) = vi , al (p) = vl ] = Pp∼D [ai (p) = vi ] Pp∼D [al (p) = vl ]                      ∀vi ∈ Si , vl ∈ Sl , l ̸= i
Then, in the limit of infinite training data, the conditional means E [a|ai (p) = v] are all equal to
the overall mean E [a] if and only if the optimal MSE feature dictionaries u∗iv for this attribute are
constant with respect to the value v of the attribute, i.e. u∗iv = ui for all v ∈ Si .

Proof. From Equation 8, we have
                                                                      
                              1    X          1    X         X
                     u∗iv =          a(k) =          a(k) −   u∗lv(k) 
                            |Piv |          |Piv |                 l
                                    k∈Piv                        k∈Piv                 l̸=i

                             1 X (k)    1 X X ∗
                         =        a −        ulv(k)
                           |Piv |     |Piv |    l
                                    k∈Piv                        k∈Piv l̸=i

The first term converges to E [a|ai (p) = v]. The second term is a sum of terms of the form
                 1 X ∗                 1 X ∗
                           ulv(k) =             ulvl |{k s.t. ai (pk ) = v, al (pk ) = vl }|                               (9)
               |Piv |         l      |Piv |
                     k∈Piv                    vl ∈Sl


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for l ̸= i. Since we are assuming ai is uncorrelated with al , in the limit of the size N of
the dataset a(1) , a(2) , . . . , a(N ) going to infinity, |{k s.t. ai (pk ) = v, al (pk ) = vl }| will approach
                                                                                                      +
|Piv | Ep∼D 1al (p)=vl . Moreover, note that in the closed-form solution U ∗ = C ⊤ C C ⊤ A =

  ⊤  + ⊤
  C C      C                                             1   T                                           S×S
   N       N A from Equation 7, the matrix N C C converges to some limit Σ ∈ R                                as
N → ∞, and the matrix N1 C ⊤ A similarly converges to some limit M ∈ RS×d by the assump-
tion that all conditional means for all attributes exist. Thus, the optimal feature dictionaries u∗iv will
also converge as N → ∞. So we see that the sum in Equation 9 will converge to a value that is
independent of the value v for the attribute ai .
Thus, if the conditional means E [a|ai (p) = v] are all equal to the overall mean E [a], we get that
u∗iv is independent of v; conversely, if u∗iv is independent of v, we get that the conditional means are
all equal to the overall mean. This completes the proof.



7.9   F EATURE - LEVEL MECHANISTIC ANALYSES FOR S ECTION 4.3

Since each activation is approximated as the sum of several vectors from a finite set, it becomes
possible to decompose the model’s internal operations in terms of elementary interactions between
the learned vectors themselves. In the current paper, we are particularly interested in attention heads,
as they are the building blocks of the IOI circuit. We consider the following subspace-level analyses:

       • Attention scores: The attention mechanism is considered to be a crucial reason for the
         success of LLMs (Vaswani et al., 2017), but a subspace-level understanding of it is mostly
         lacking (but see Lieberum et al. (2023)). How do the features in the keys and queries of
         attention heads combine to produce the attention scores? Which feature pairs are most
         important for the head’s behavior?
       • Head composition: If we are to understand a circuit on the subspace level, we need to
         develop a subspace-level account of how the outputs of one attention head compose with
         the queries, keys and values of a downstream head in the circuit. Each head adds its out-
         put to the residual stream, and downstream heads’ query/key/value matrices read from the
         residual stream. We can thus examine the contribution, or direct effect, of a head’s output
         to another head’s queries/keys/values. We can decompose this direct effect in terms of the
         features of the source head to calculate contributions of each feature to the direct effect.

Implementation details for these analyses follow.
Attention scores. Given feature dictionary reconstructions for the keys and queries of an attention
head at certain positions
                               X                        X
                          k≈       uai (·)=ai (p) , q ≈    vai (·)=ai (p)
                                    i∈I                        i∈I

we can decompose the attention scores as a sum of pairwise dot products between the dictionary
features
                         p           X                                    p
                   qT k/ dhead ≈          vaTi (·)=ai (p) uaj (·)=aj (p) / dhead
                                            i,j∈I

where dhead is the dimension of the attention head. This allows us to examine which feature com-
binations are most important for the head’s attention according to the learned dictionaries. Variants
of this decomposition can also be applied to e.g. the difference in attention scores at two different
token positions.
Head composition. Following the terminology and results from Elhage et al. (2021), the residual
stream rl,t of a transformer at a given layer l and token position t is the sum of the input embedding
and the outputs of all earlier MLP and attention layers at this position. The residual stream is in turn
the input to the next attention layer; so, for example, we can write the query vector for the h-th head
at layer l and token t as
                          Q                          Q
                                                        LayerNorm rl,t + WlO′ ,h′ zl′ ,t,h′

              ql,t,h = Wl,h  LayerNorm (rl,t ) = Wl,h


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where zl′ ,t,h′ is the attention-weighted sum of values of the h′ -th head at layer l′ < l and token t, rl,t
is the remainder of the residual stream after removing the contribution of this head, and LayerNorm
is the model’s layer normalization operation (Ba et al., 2016) before the attention block in layer l.
By treating the layer normalization as an approximately linear operation (taking the scale from an
average over the dataset12 ), we can derive an approximation of the (counterfactual) direct effect of
the output of the h′ -th head at layer l′ and token t on the query vector of the h-th head at layer l and
token t:
                                                                         !
                                             Q         rl,t − µl,t
                                  ql,t,h ≈ Wl,h γl ⊙ p 2            + βl
                                                           σ
                                                           bl + ϵ
where γl , βl are the learned scale and shift parameters of the LN operation, µl,t is the average of
the vector rl,t over its coordinates, and σ
                                          bl is an average over the dataset of the standard deviation
of the residual stream at this position. Alternatively, we can use the exact layernorm scale from the
forward pass over a large sample to compute the statistics of the exact direct effect over observed
data.
With either approach, we obtain a decomposition
                                        X
                               ql,t,h ≈      ut,(l′ ,h′ )→(l,h) + rl,t
                                              l′ <l,h′

of direct contributions from the outputs of earlier heads at this position, plus some residual terms
rl,t (which are the contributions of all previous MLP layers and the input embedding to the query
vector). We can then further decompose ut,(l′ ,h′ )→(l,h) by replacing it with its reconstruction from
our feature dictionary.
For either way to treat the layer normalization, we can use the learned feature dictionaries for the
outputs, keys, queries and values of attention heads in a number of ways to decompose the direct
effect further. Here, we consider head-and-feature attribution: fixing the head (l, h), we can vary
the head (l′ , h′ ) and break down the direct effects (projected on the query vector) by feature.
Results. An interesting location to examine is the attention of the name mover heads from END to
the IO and S1 positions, where (according to the analysis in Wang et al. (2022)) the signal from the
S-Inhibition heads effectively removes the S name from the attention of these heads.
We show the results for the head L10H0 in Figure 8. Crucially, we observe that most interactions
are tightly clustered around zero, which suggests that these feature dictionaries provide a sparse and
interpretable account of the attention mechanism. The only significantly nonzero interactions are (1)
between the S features in the query and the key at the S1 position; (2) between the Pos features in the
query and the key at both positions; and (3) between the IO features in the query and the key at the
IO position. The first two interactions are expected given the findings of Wang et al. (2022). More
interesting is the third interaction, which is negative, suggesting that the L10H0 head inhibits both
the S and IO name tokens, and effectively relies only on the Pos attribute to distinguish between
the two names. Notably, this is in contrast with the other two name movers L9H6 and L9H9 (for
which analogous plots are shown in Figure 18 and 19), where the inhibition of the IO attribute is
absent. We found that using other methods to compute feature dictionaries results in less sparse and
interpretable patterns.
We further investigated the queries of the L10H0 head, by looking at which features from upstream
head outputs at the END token have a large direct effect on these queries. Following the methodol-
ogy detailed in Appendix 7.9, we plot the direct effect from the outputs of the S-Inhibition heads,
as well as the two name mover heads L9H6 and L9H9 in layer 9 in Figure 9. We find that the
S-Inhibition heads’ IO features have no significant contribution to the queries, but the IO features
from the two name mover heads in layer 9 have a significant direct effect (aligned with the overall
centered query vector). This suggests that, having already computed a representation of the IO at-
tribute, these heads transmit it to the next layer, where it gets picked up by the L10H0 head’s query.
Conversely, the S-Inhibition heads contribute significantly with their Pos and S features, whereas
the name mover heads in layer 9 do not.
  12
     This is justified by the empirical observation that the layer normalization scales across the dataset are well
concentrated around their mean.


                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Attention to S1                    Attention to IO
        Bias X Bias
          Bias X IO
         Bias X Pos
           Bias X S
          IO X Bias
            IO X IO
           IO X Pos
             IO X S
         Pos X Bias
           Pos X IO
          Pos X Pos
            Pos X S
           S X Bias
             S X IO
            S X Pos
              SXS
                        2         0             2          2         0             2

Figure 8: Decomposing the attention scores of the name mover head L10H0 from END to the S1
(left) and IO (right) positions. The y-axis ranges over the combinations of features from the query
(first element) and the key (second element). The boxplots show the distribution of dot products
between the corresponding feature vectors. The interaction between the bias terms (i.e., the means
of the respective queries/keys) provides a sense of the scale of the effects.

                             Direct effect on query of L10H0 at END
                                                                                   Source Feature
  L7H3 (S-I)                                                                               IO
                                                                                           S
                                                                                           Pos
  L7H9 (S-I)
L8H10 (S-I)
  L8H6 (S-I)
 L9H6 (NM)
 L9H9 (NM)
                      0.01     0.00        0.01          0.02      0.03        0.04           0.05
Figure 9: Direct effect of supervised features in the output of S-Inhibition heads, and Name Mover
heads in layer 9, on the queries of the L10H0 name mover head at the END token.


7.10   A LTERNATIVE PARAMETRIZATIONS FOR THE IOI TASK

We mostly experimented with two possible parametrizations of prompts via attributes:

       • independent parametrization: we use the three independently varying attributes – S, IO
         and Pos – to describe each prompt. This is the parametrization used in the main text.
       • coupled parametrization: we couple position with name, and use the two attributes (S,
         Pos) and (IO, Pos) to describe each prompt. This parametrization is more expressive than


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          the independent one, as it allows for different features for the same name depending on
          whether it comes first or second in the sentence. At the same time, the coupled parametriza-
          tion can express the independent one as a special case (Appendix 7.11).

We find that these parametrizations arrive at highly similar activation reconstructions a
                                                                                        b. In fact, we
find an even stronger property: the coupled parametrization essentially simulates the features in the
independent one; details are given in Appendix 7.11.1.
Finally, we note that the fact that we find parametrizations that result in good approximation is not
trivial. Not every ‘natural-seeming’ parametrization will lead to a good approximation of model
behavior; we show an example of this with a ‘names’ parametrization in Appendix Figure 17, where
we instead use an attribute for the 1st, 2nd and 3rd name in the sentence.

What about other parametrizations? Note that there are combinatorially many possible ways to
pick attributes to disentangle the activations into, and a priori any specific choice is arbitrary. We
justify our choice of parametrizations in several ways: (1) they pass our tests for model approxi-
mation, control and interpretability given later in this section; (2) they correspond to the internal
states of the IOI circuit identified in Wang et al. (2022); (3) we experimented and/or considered
other parametrizations, but found they either perform the same or worse on our tests. In Appendix
7.12, we provide a more detailed discussion of different possible parametrizations in the IOI task
and their relative strengths and weaknesses.

7.11     C OMPARING THE COUPLED AND INDEPENDENT PARAMETRIZATIONS

7.11.1    T HE COUPLED PARAMETRIZATION CAPTURES THE INDEPENDENT ONE
Idealized model. We first note that the coupled parametrization can express all reconstructions
expressible by the independent parametrization. Suppose we have an IOI distribution using a set
of available names Snames , and let posABB , posBAB , {ioa }a∈Snames , {sa }a∈Snames be feature
dictionaries for the independent parametrization at some model activation. Then, we can define the
following feature dictionaries for the coupled parametrization:
                                 1                                 1
                 ioa,ABB = ioa + posABB , ioa,BAB = ioa + posBAB ,
                                 2                                 2
                                1                              1
                  sa,ABB = sa + posABB , sa,BAB = sa + posBAB
                                2                              2
Then for a prompt p of the form ABB (the BAB case is analogous), with the IO name being a
and the S name being b, we have that the reconstruction of an activation a using the independent
parametrization is
                                 a
                                 bindependent = ioa + sb + posABB
and the reconstruction using our coupled parametrization is
                                                         1      1
               bcoupled = ioa,ABB + sb,ABB = ioa + sb + posABB + posABB
               a
                                                         2      2
                        = ioa + sb + posABB = abindependent

Empirical evaluation. We evaluated whether this occurs empirically with the MSE features for the
two parametrizations. First, we plot the fraction of variance explained by the reconstructions using
the independent parametrization in the reconstructions using the coupled parametrization. We find
very high agreement (Figure 10); results in the other direction are almost identical and are not shown
here for brevity. Next, we check if the coupled parametrization essentially simulates the independent
one as described analytically above. We do this by measuring the cosine similarity between the vec-
tor posABB − posBAB from the independent parametrization and vectors ioa,ABB − ioa,BAB and
sa,ABB − sa,BAB from the coupled parametrization. In our idealized simulation of the independent
parametrization using the coupled one, these values would be exactly 1 for all names. We find that
in all circuit locations that represent both IO and Pos, the similarities w.r.t the IO differences are
significant; similarly, in all circuit locations that represent both S and Pos, the similarities w.r.t the
S differences are significant (Figure 11). For reference, in a space of this dimensionality (64), the
expected magnitude of the cosine similarity between two random vectors is 1/8.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Backup Name Mover                 0.96             1.00                    0.95            1.00

                  Duplicate Token               0.99             1.00                    1.00            1.00

                          Induction             0.91             1.00                    1.00            1.00

                      Name Mover                0.98             1.00                    0.96            1.00

             Negative Name Mover                0.98             1.00                    0.98            1.00

                   Previous Token               1.00             1.00                    1.00            1.00

                        S-Inhibition            0.97             0.97                                    0.99

                                           Attn Output               Key                Query            Value

Figure 10: Variance explained by the reconstructions using the independent parametrization, with
respect to the reconstructions using the coupled parametrization, averaged over combinations of
class of heads in the circuit and activation types.


                  Duplicate Token Attn Output (S)

                        Induction Attn Output (S)

                            S-Inhibition Value (S)

                      S-Inhibition Attn Output (S)

                          Name Mover Query (S)

                         Name Mover Query (IO)

                  Backup Name Mover Query (IO)

                  Backup Name Mover Query (S)

                                                 0.0      0.2              0.4          0.6        0.8
                                                                           Cosine Similarity

Figure 11: Cosine similarity between the vector posABB − posBAB from the independent
parametrization and vectors ioa,ABB − ioa,BAB and sa,ABB − sa,BAB from the coupled
parametrization, averaged over several classes of circuit locations. When evaluating similarity for
the ioa,ABB − ioBAB vectors, we only include locations where both the IO and Pos attributes are
represented; and similarly for the s-vectors.


7.11.2   OTHER PARAMETRIZATIONS EXPRESSIBLE BY THE COUPLED PARAMETRIZATION .

Consider the parametrization with attributes (S, Pos) and IO. Again, let {ioa }a∈Snames ,
{sa,ABB }a∈Snames , {sa,BAB }a∈Snames be feature dictionaries for this parametrization at some
model activation. Then, we can define the following feature dictionaries for the coupled parametriza-
tion:
             io′a,ABB = io′a,BAB = ioa ,                 s′a,ABB = sa,ABB ,                    s′a,BAB = sa,BAB


                                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then for a prompt p of the form ABB (the BAB case is analogous), with the IO name being a
and the S name being b, we have that the reconstruction of an activation a using the (S, Pos) + IO
parametrization is
                    b(S,Pos)+IO = ioa + sb,ABB = io′a,ABB + s′b,ABB = a
                    a                                                 bcoupled
and so the coupled parametrization can express all reconstructions expressible by the (S, Pos) + IO
parametrization. Analogously, it can express all reconstructions expressible by the (IO, Pos) + S
parametrization.

7.11.3    E DITING METHODOLOGY WITH THE COUPLED PARAMETRIZATION .
For each activation, we may choose to edit one or several of the IO, S and Pos properties of the
prompt. With the independent parametrization, this is straightforward, since the attributes match
these properties. With the coupled parametrization, suppose we are given a prompt of the form ABB
(the BAB case is analogous) with the IO name being a and the S name being b. Given an activation
a with corresponding reconstruction under the coupled parametrization
                                         a
                                         b = ioa,ABB + sb,BAB
we can perform edits as follows:

       • to change the IO name from a to a′ : aedit = a − ioa,ABB + ioa′ ,ABB
       • to change the S name from b to b′ : aedit = a − sb,ABB + sb′ ,ABB
       • to change the Pos property from ABB to BAB: aedit = a−ioa,ABB −sb,ABB +ioa,BAB +
         sb,BAB

7.12     O N P OSSIBLE F EATURE D ICTIONARIES FOR THE IOI TASK

In this section, we compare the properties of several a priori possible ways in which the activations
of the IOI circuit could be disentangled via sparse feature dictionaries. The main goal is to illustrate
that different feature dictionaries can have similar usefulness in terms of model control and inter-
pretability, even if they fail natural tests that directly look for similar features in the two dictionaries.
This motivates evaluations that are agnostic to the specific features in a dictionary, as long as the
features can parsimoniously disentangle the model’s internal computations.
The independent parametrization from the main text. It is worth explicitly describing the prop-
erties of the supervised feature decomposition we constructed in Section 4.2, which uses the IO, S
and Pos attributes to describe the prompts; it serves as an idealized example against which to com-
pare other possible decompositions. In this decomposition, we can approximate an activation a for a
prompt p where the IO name is a and the S name is b, with the IO name appearing first, as follows:
                                        a ≈ ioa + sb + posABB
where the vector ioa is the feature for the IO name a, the vector sb is the feature for the S name
b, and the vector posABB is the feature for the Pos attribute when the IO name appears first in the
sentence (and analogously for posBAB ).
Imagine now that we are given an ‘unlabeled’ feature dictionary that corresponds to this decom-
position (i.e., we don’t know which attribute each feature corresponds to). We want to evaluate
the usefulness of this decomposition for model control and interpretability relative to the ‘human-
legible’ attributes IO, S and Pos. This will be tautologically successful:

       • the reconstructions are a faithful and complete representation of the model’s internal com-
         putations;
       • the dictionary can (by definition) express edits to the IO, S and Pos attributes very ef-
         ficiently, as we only need to change a single feature vector to change the corresponding
         attribute’s value.
       • the features are fairly interpretable: we can understand the meaning of each feature in terms
         of the attribute it represents.


                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • moreover, using metrics such as recall and precision (following the evaluation methodology
         of Bricken et al. (2023)) will readily surface the features that are most important for each
         attribute.
Using per-gender vectors to describe names. Another possible decomposition is
                 a ≈ ioa + io genderg(a) + sb + s genderg(b) + posABB
where g : Names → {M, F } is some labeling function that roughly classifies names according to
how they are typically gendered13 . Here, we hypothesize that the model may use features of high
norm that sort names into genders (which may be useful to the model for various reasons), and then
add a small-norm per-name correction to obtain a name-specific representation. In particular we
imagine that ioa + io genderg(a) in this representation would correspond to ioa in the supervised
decomposition, and similarly for the S name.
       • This decomposition is also fairly sparse and interpretable, and it can express edits almost
         as parsimoniously as the supervised decomposition (we only need to change two feature
         vectors to edit a name, and one to edit Pos).
       • Moreover, metrics such as recall and precision will pick up on the per-name features;
       • If we compare the prompts for which a feature activates for this dictionary and our ‘inde-
         pendent parametrization’ feature dictionary (discussed above), we will easily discover the
         per-name features that correspond to the IO and S names.
       • However, if we instead directly use cosine similarity to the supervised features ioa , sb as a
         metric, we may be misled, because if the per-gender features have sufficiently higher norm
         than the per-name corrections, the cosine similarity may be low.
Features for small, overlapping subsets of names. Going further, we can imagine a decomposition
where we have features that correspond to pairs of names, such that each name is in exactly two
pairs (this can be achieved by partitioning all names into pairs along a cycle). We can express a
name as a sum of the features for the two pairs it is in, with some superposition. Note that more
sophisticated constructions with more features per name / more names per feature are possible by
e.g. picking subsets at random or using expander graphs (Hoory et al., 2006), as they will ‘spread
out’ the superposition more evenly.
       • This decomposition is somewhat sparse and interpretable, and can likely be used for feature
         editing in a reasonable way, as long as the sets of features associated with each name are
         not too large. Even though we would need to change several feature vectors to edit a name,
         there should also be a fair amount of disentanglement so that we don’t also need to throw
         away all the features active in an example to change a single attribute.
       • However, comparing our supervised decomposition against this one using geometric met-
         rics such as cosine similarity may be misleading, because while a sum of a few feature
         vectors associated with the same name may point in the same direction as our supervised
         feature, any individual feature may not.
       • Furthermore, it also has significantly reduced precision for the features, because each of
         the few features associated with a name will also activate for several other names. This
         can make directly looking for features whose activation patterns resemble the ones in our
         supervised decomposition misleading.
Our experiments suggest that both task-specific and full-distribution SAEs trained on IOI circuit
activations learn a decomposition resembling this abstract construction more than any other decom-
position discussed here.
Overfitting dictionaries. Finally, a worst-case decomposition would be to have a single feature for
each possible set of values of the S, IO and Pos attributes.

       • This decomposition is not interpretable, and it is not editable in any non-trivial way: to
         change a single attribute, the entire decomposition must be replaced;
       • Features of this form will have maximum precision, but very low recall for the attributes.
   13
      We experimented with this decomposition in our supervised framework, but did not find it to confer addi-
tional benefits for the purposes of our tests.


                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7.13     D ETAILS FOR TRAINING S PARSE AUTOENCODERS

7.13.1    VANILLA TASK SAE S
We followed the methodology of Bricken et al. (2023), with the exception that our neuron re-
initialization method is not as sophisticated as theirs: we simply re-initialize the encoder bias, en-
coder weights and decoder weights for the dead neurons every 500 training epochs.
Training SAEs on the IOI distribution alone allows us to do a more extensive hyperparameter search.
Importantly, we normalized SAE inputs across attention heads so that activations have an ℓ2 norm
of 1 on average in order to make it easier for the same set of hyperparameters to work well across
different heads. In our main experiments, we use SAEs that were trained with a 16× hidden expan-
sion factor, (effective) ℓ1 regularization coefficient in (0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.3), batch size of 1024, and
learning rate of 0.001.
We evaluated two key test-set metrics across training epochs: the average number of active fea-
tures per example (i.e. the average ℓ0 norm of activations), and the fraction of the logit difference
recovered when using the SAE reconstructions at the given model location instead of the original
activations, scaled against a mean-ablation baseline (which is more stringent than the zero-ablation
baseline employed in most other work). We chose the regularization coefficient and training check-
point for each node that provided a good trade-off between these two metrics; in particular, for
almost all nodes, we recover logit difference to within 20% with respect to the mean-ablation base-
line, and there are < 25 active features per example. We provide the results of this sweep in Figure
20. While most SAEs seemed adequate, some still have poor approximation as measured by the
reconstructed logit difference.
We use a training set of 20,000 examples and an evaluation set of 8,000 examples (for the purposes
of automatic interpretability scoring, we need a large enough evaluation sample so that each property
in the distribution appears a significant number of times). Since our training regime is significantly
distinct from that of Bricken et al. (2023) (we use a much smaller dataset), we first experimented
extensively with different hyperparameters, focusing on training SAEs on the queries of the name
mover heads. We observed that the most important hyperparameters are the dictionary size and the
effective ℓ1 regularization coefficient. We found that the batch size did not influence the eventual
quality of the learned features, only the speed of convergence, and that a learning rate of 10−3 (as in
Bricken et al. (2023)) was a good choice throughout. The runs reported here used a dictionary size
of 1024 (a 16× increase over the dimensionality of attention head activations in GPT-2 Small), an
effective ℓ1 regularization between 0.05 and 0.3, and a batch size of 1024.
We normalized activations across the circuit to make it easier for the same range of hyperparameters
to give good results, and ran a sweep over ℓ1 regularization coefficients in (0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.3).
Results. While performance varied strongly across circuit locations, most full-distribution SAEs
had an ℓ0 -loss between 2 and 12 and a recovered loss fraction (against a mean ablation baseline)
between 0.4 and 0.9 (both measured on O PEN W EB T EXT). Similarly, most task-SAEs had an ℓ0 -
loss below 25 and a recovered logit difference fraction against mean ablation > 0.8 (both measured
on the IOI dataset) 14 .

7.13.2    A DDITIONAL TASK SAE VARIANTS : G ATED AND TOP K
Training schedule. We incorporate several training tactics from recent literature. For all SAE
variants considered, we used the same (small) learning rate of 3 × 10−4 , trained for 2000 epochs
in total, and applied resampling followed by a learning rate warmup over 100 epochs (roughly
following Rajamanoharan et al. (2024)) at epochs 501 and 1001. Our resampling methodology
closely follows that of Bricken et al. (2023). In addition, we decay the learning rate linearly to zero
over the last 25% of training (following Conerly et al. (2024)). For topK SAEs, we initialize the
encoder to the transpose of the decoder, as suggested by Gao et al. (2024); however, we do not use
   14
      Importantly, we did not perform exhaustive hyperparameter tuning to train these SAEs, as our main goal
was to evaluate the methodology and how it can distinguish between different classes of feature dictionaries,
rather than to achieve state-of-the-art performance. Thus it is possible that significantly better performance
could be achieved with more tuning. Indeed, it is our hope that the methods we present here will be useful for
tuning SAEs in the future.


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the auxiliary loss term suggested in section 2.4 (‘Preventing dead latents’) from that work (which is
the only difference of this paper from the implementation of Gao et al. (2024)).
We checkpoint all models at 14 epochs: (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 500, 750, 1000, 1250, 1500, 2000).
This checkpoint schedule is chosen to ensure that we have a dense enough sampling of the early
stages of training, while also capturing the state of the model right before resampling, and after the
learning rate warmup that is done post-resampling is sufficiently in the past.
Preprocessing. We normalize all IOI circuit activations prior to passing them through our SAEs,
following
   √      the scaling methodology in Conerly et al. (2024), so that they on average have ℓ2 norm
of dhead . This helps us share hyperparameters across sites of the circuit, and reduces the range of
hyperparameters to search over.
Hyperparameters. We sweep over values λ ∈ (0.5, 1.0, 2.5, 5.0) for the ℓ1 regularization penalty
for vanilla and gated SAEs, and over values k ∈ (3, 6, 12, 24) for topK SAEs. This is a reasonable
range: we found that the highest value of λ leads to about 3-4 active features per example on average;
the supervised dictionaries have 3. Conversely, the lowest value of λ lead to very good ℓ2 loss and
recover close to 100% of the logit difference, but have too many (about 20-30) active features per
example on average. The range for k is chosen to include values equal and close to our expectation
for the ‘true’ number of necessary features (3), while still allowing significantly more features to be
active.

7.13.3    F ULL - DISTRIBUTION SAE S
We trained full-distribution SAEs on every IOI component using O PEN W EB T EXT as training data.
We mostly followed the method outlined in Bricken et al. (2023). We added a standardization
procedure to be able to train SAEs on components with different activation scales using the same
l1-coefficient. Before training, we calculated the mean and the mean l2-norm over 10 million ac-
tivations. These values were then frozen and used to standardize all activations as a preprocessing
step and to rescale the SAE reconstructions to match the original scale as a post-processing step. We
generated the training dataset by extracting a buffer of 10 million activation vectors from the shuffled
O PEN W EB T EXT dataset at a time with a maximal context window of 512 tokens. We then trained
the SAEs for 250 million activation vectors and resampled dead neurons after 50000 steps (around
100 million activations) as outlined in Bricken et al. (2023). We used a batch size of 2048 and 8192
features per SAE. Post-training, we excluded dead and ultra-low frequency neurons that we define
as neurons who activate less than once per million activations. The amount of dead neurons varies
across SAEs between 20 and 90%. We plot the fraction of dead neurons versus ℓ0 loss in Figure 22,
and the loss recovered versus ℓ0 loss in Figure 23.
We used an ℓ1 coefficient of 0.006 initially for all SAEs, and retrained SAEs with a different ℓ1 co-
efficient for cross-sections whose SAE metrics were undesired (e.g. very low ℓ0 / bad reconstruction
or very high ℓ0 ). For the name mover outputs, we used 0.025, and for S-Inhibition keys we used
0.005. The test ℓ0 and loss-recovered metrics were calculated on 81920 unseen activation vectors.
We trained fewer SAEs on the full pre-training distribution compared to the IOI distribution, as
the computational cost is higher. We observe that SAEs with a lower number of active features
per example generally perform better for IOI-related tests, even if their other metrics (such as loss
recovered on O PEN W EB T EXT) are worse.
SAE training loss metrics. The most important loss metrics to track during SAE training are the ℓ0
loss (measuring the average number of active features per activation) and the language model loss
recovered when using the learned features to reconstruct the model’s logits (Bricken et al., 2023).
To turn the loss recovered into a meaningful quantity, it is rescaled against a baseline; both zero
ablation and mean ablation have been used for this purpose in the literature (Bricken et al., 2023;
Kissane et al., 2024). In this work, we used mean ablation, as it is a more strict test of the quality of
approximation.

7.14     A DDITIONAL NOTES ON METHODOLOGY FOR SAE INTERPRETABILITY

Interpretations considered. Let Names be the set of names in our IOI dataset. We consider
the following binary predicates over prompts as possible interpretations for SAE features in the
activations at the S2 and END tokens:


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • IO is 2nd name: the Pos attribute having value corresponding to BAB-type prompts;
       • IO is 1st name: the Pos attribute having value corresponding to ABB-type prompts;
       • S is <name>: the S attribute has a certain value in Names;
       • S is <name> and at 1st position: same as above, but also the S name is at 1st position in
         the prompt (i.e., this is a BAB-type prompt);
       • S is <name> and at 2nd position: same as above, but for ABB-type prompts;
       • IO is <name>: the IO attribute has a certain value in Names;
       • IO is <name> and at 1st position: same as above, but also the IO name is at 1st position
         in the prompt (i.e., this is a ABB-type prompt);
       • IO is <name> and at 2nd position: same as above, but for BAB-type prompts;
       • S is male: the S name is labeled as a male name under our labeling of Names provided by
         GPT-4;
       • S is female: same as above for female names;
       • <name> is in sentence: a certain name in Names;
       • <name> is at 1st position: same as above, but the name is the first name in the sentence;
       • <name> is at 2nd position: same as above, but the name is the second name in the
         sentence;

The next several interpretations are only defined for the keys and values of the name mover heads.
We collect together activations for the keys according to their role in the IOI circuit as opposed
to absolute position: we group together all activations at the IO token position (these are the IO
keys/values), even though they come from different absolute positions across IOI prompts, because
in ABB prompts the IO name comes first, while in BAB prompts it comes second. The same applies
for gathering the S keys/values.
The key/value activations described above have not yet ‘seen’ the repeated name in the sentence,
so there is no meaningful concept of IO and S for them. Instead, the only potentially task-relevant
information contained in them is about the name(s) seen so far in the sentence, and the position (1st
name or 2nd name) where the activation is taken from. Accordingly, the applicable interpretations
for features contained in these activations are different:

       • current token is <name>: the token from which the activations are taken holds a certain
         value in Names.
       • token is <name> and at 1st position: the activation was taken from a token with a certain
         value in Names, and in addition it comes from the first name in the sentence;
       • token is <name> and at 2nd position: same as above, but activation is from the second
         name in the sentence;
       • current token is at 1st position: the activation is from the first name in the sentence;
       • current token is at 2nd position: same as above, but from second name;
       • current token is female: the token the activation is from is female under our labeling of
         Names.

Unions of interpretations. In addition, for each type of predicate that has a free parameter in Names,
we considered unions of up to 10 such predicates (recall that we have a total of 216 names in our
dataset). We ordered the individual predicates according to their F1 score, and chose the union of
the first k ≤ 10 predicates with the highest F1 score as a possible interpretation. Note that the F1
score is not in general a monotone function of k in this setup; indeed, we find that for many features
the highest-F1 -score explanation uses k < 10 features.
Sufficiency/necessity of interpretable features. We take the interpretations of the features de-
scribed above and their respective F1 scores, and for each threshold t ∈ [0, 1] over F1 scores con-
sider two interventions:

       • sufficiency: we subtract from the respective activation all active features with F1 score < t;
       • necessity: we subtract from the respective activation all active features with F1 score ≥ t;


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7.15   A DDITIONAL OBSERVATIONS ON SAE LATENT INTERPRETATIONS

Correlational evaluation. Full-distribution SAEs must capture variation in activations across a large
set of text, of which IOI-like prompts are only a small subset. Consistent with this, we found
that only a subset of full-distribution SAE latents activates on IOI prompts, with the number of
latents that fire on IOI prompts varying strongly between components. We scored the latents that do
fire on IOI prompts and found a significant amount of latent descriptions with high F1 -score. We
summarize the number of high-F1 -score latents per type in Figure 15. Remarkably, we find that
the interpretable latents in the full-distribution SAEs and the task-specific SAEs are qualitatively
similar; corresponding task-specific results are given in Appendix Figures 29 (showing the most
interpretable SAEs at each node of the IOI circuit) and 30 (showing the SAEs chosen to optimize
the tradeoff between the ℓ0 loss and the logit difference reconstruction, which we use throughout the
main body of the paper).
In practice, we want to use latent explanations to get insight into the more general computation of
a component. Thus, we investigated whether the latents found are consistent with the previously
established function of the heads from Wang et al. (2022). We found that this was true for all heads
and that simply looking at the number of latents with a given interpretation draws a clear picture;
examples are provided in Appendix 7.15.
Our results also suggest several details about the IOI circuit that weren’t reported previously, which
we summarize in Appendix 7.15. We were also curious about how the detected latents behave on
arbitrary text of the model’s training distribution. As creating a rigorous test for this is difficult, we
report some anecdotal evidence in support of latent generalization in Appendix 7.15.
Causal evaluation: sufficiency/necessity of interpretable latents. Results here are encourag-
ing: keeping/removing the latents with F1 score ≥ 0.6 often goes a long way towards preserv-
ing/degrading the model’s performance on the task. Appendix Figures 33 and 34 show the results of
these experiments for task SAEs.
Causal evaluation: sparse control via interpretable latents. Here, results are also moderately en-
couraging. We find that, for the task-specific SAEs, editing using the high-F1 -score latents w.r.t. a
given attribute as a guide performs not much worse than the interpretation-agnostic editing method.
Results are provided in Appendix Figure 31. However, for full-distribution SAEs, we again need to
edit a high number of latents to achieve a noticeable effect (results in Appendix Figure 32).
Interpretable latents agree with head roles identified in the IOI circuit by Wang et al. (2022).
For example, duplicate token heads attend to a previous occurrence of the previous token and write
information about this to the residual stream. Consistent with this, we found that SAEs trained on
them contain latents that indicate the duplicated name, the subject in case of IOI. This information is
then used by the induction heads that determine whether the subject is the first or second name. The
subject position is subsequently copied to the END position by the S-Inhibition heads, where it will
query the name movers to not attend to the subject, and to copy and predict the IO name. Indeed, we
find latents of the outputs of induction heads, in the outputs and values of the S-I heads, and in the
queries of the name movers that inform about the position of the indirect object. Lastly, the name
movers attend to the IO position and copy the name to predict it. As anticipated, the name mover
values and outputs contain latents that specify the concrete IO name. In summary, the type of latents
detected informs well about the function of the head on a certain task.
New insights from the latent dictionaries.

       • The first layer DT-heads almost exclusively contain S latents but the third layer duplicate
         token head also has positional latents, suggesting more sophisticated text processing hap-
         pening there.
       • Induction heads encompass different positional latents. L6H9 latents inform about what
         name is at the second position, while L5H5 and L5H8 activate when the IO is at the first
         position. L5H9 is comprised of different latents including positional latents that don’t
         inform about the role (IO vs S) of the name.
       • L7H3 is the only head that contains a significant amount of gender latents.
       • S-Inhibition heads include primarily latents that are a combination of names and S, while
         the name mover queries seem to only contain Pos latents.


                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • The keys and values of name movers both inform about the token at the current position,
         but there is an important difference in the type of latents: while the values primarily contain
         latents that contain the name (that later gets moved to the END position), the keys consist
         of positional latents and combinations of position and name. This hints at an important
         mechanism where the name mover query contains positional information about the S name
         that gets matched with the corresponding key, effectively shifting the attention towards the
         IO token such that the value with the IO gets copied to the END position.

Editing interpretable latents
While the latent descriptions generated through our automatic scoring predict well when a latent is
active, it is still unclear whether they also have an interpretable causal role, i.e. whether activating or
deactivating a certain latent leads to a change in output logits that would be expected from the latent’s
description. To test this, we propose two experiments to judge the faithfulness and completeness of
our interpreted latents that involve patching activations from a counterfactual prompt and calculating
the effect on the model’s output:

       • Estimating Faithfulness: To estimate faithfulness, we construct SAE activations where
         we fix latents with a test F1-score smaller than a threshold and patch activations of latents
         with a high F1-score from the counterfactual prompt. We then calculate reconstructions
         of this new SAE activation vector, patch cross-sections, and record whether the model
         successfully predicts the correct counterfactual name.
       • Estimating Completeness: To estimate completeness, we propose a similar experiment
         where we fix latents with a high test F1-score and patch all remaining latents. This inter-
         vention should not change the output logits if our latents are complete.

We run this experiment on cross-sections of name mover outputs and repeat this experiment for
different thresholds. We observe that for a threshold F1-score of 0.6, the SAE latents are both faithful
and complete to a high degree. We observe that the faithfulness metric significantly decreases for
higher F1-scores of 0.7 and 0.8 but remarkably, we also observe that only fixing latents with a very
high F1-score of > 0.8 while patching all other latents from the counterfactual prompt is sufficient
to keep the model predicting the base prompt’s output.
Generalization of latents to the full distribution. We sample prompts from OpenWebText and vi-
sualize prompts that highly activate a latent. We do this for the name mover queries and outputs. For
the outputs, we calculate the direct-latent-attribution (DFA) metric first proposed by Krzyzanowski
et al. (2024) that calculates per position how large the contribution of its values to activating the
latent is. Thus, it informs what position led to the latent being activated.
We find that latents mostly generalize. For example, we investigated a latent that activated if the
IO name starts with the letter ”E” and we found that on full distribution, this latent fires at tokens
preceding words starting with ”E”. DFA suggests that previous tokens starting with ”E” activate this
latent, and calculating the unembed Wdec [j]WO WU , denoted with ”Positive Logits” and ”Negative
Logits” in Figure 14 shows that activating the latent increases logits for words starting with ”E”.
Together, this hints at a general name moving mechanisms to predict words that previously occurred
in the context that drives in-context learning where the head’s QK-circuit drives attention to the
position of the word to predict, and the OV circuit copies the token from the previous to the current
position to predict it.

7.16    F EATURE OCCLUSION DETAILS

Training an exhaustive set of SAEs. Focusing on the L10H0 queries, we found that our SAEs
consistently find a single feature for almost all IO names, but fail to find a significant number of
features for individual S names.
To investigate further whether this is a result of poor hyperparameter choices, we trained SAEs on
the queries of L10H0 over a wide grid of hyperparameters, so that performance deteriorates/plateaus
at the edges of the grid. We pushed the dictionary size, training dataset size, ℓ1 regularization coef-
ficient and number of training epochs significantly beyond the values used in our other experiments.
Specifically, we used a training set of 100,000 examples (this is more datapoints than all ∼ 93, 000
possible combinations of S, IO and Pos in our data); we trained dictionaries of up to 128∗64 = 8192


                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F1-score: 0.86
Names: Elijah, Jeremiah, Andrew, Eric, Ethan, Evan, Emily, Eli, Elizabeth, Eleanor,
Elias, Leo, Aaron, Alexis, Ellie, Eva, Dave, Paige, Andrea, Keith, Alexa, Alice, Emma


 F1-score: 0.95
 Names: Ashley


Figure 12: Two representative features discovered in the output name mover SAE L9H9 to illustrate
the features behavior or webtext. Both features are IO name features, the upper one containing 23
names, the lower one only a single name. Left: Feature activation per position; Middle: Direct
Feature Attribution (DFA) that tracks the position whose values contribute most to activating the
given feature; Right: The output tokens whose logits get increased (positive) or decreased (negative)
when the feature is active, calculated by vWO WU with v being the decoder weight vector of the
feature of interest, WO the output weight of the head and WU the unembed


features (our supervised feature dictionaries contain ∼ 500 features); we varied the effective ℓ1 reg-
ularization coefficient across two orders of magnitude; and we trained for up to 6, 000 epochs.
Results on the number of IO/S features with F1 score > 0.5 are reported in Figure 7 (left). We
observe that across hyperparameters, we often find as many IO features as there are names in our
dataset; however, the number of S features is consistently low, never exceeding 22.
Magnitudes of the IO and S features. As a first step, we investigate the distribution of the norms of
the features for IO and S across the names in the IOI dataset in the L10H0 queries in our supervised
feature dictionaries from Section 6; results are shown in Figure 13 (left). We observe that the norms
of the IO features are significantly (but not by much) higher than those of the S features.

Norms of S and IO feature vectors in L10H0 queries                                                             1.0
                                                                                                                        L1 coefficient
                                                                                   % low-norm features found


                                       Attribute
                                                                  IO                                           0.8            0.013
                                                                  S                                                           0.025
                                                                                                               0.6            0.400
                                                                                                                              0.500
                                                                                                                              1.000
                                                                                                               0.4            2.000
                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                                                  0.0        0.2      0.4   0.6   0.8    1.0
         1.5            2.0             2.5            3.0             3.5                                                  % high-norm features found
Figure 13: Left: distributions of the ℓ2 norms of the feature vectors for the IO and S attributes from
our supervised feature dictionary for the queries of the L10H0 name mover. Right: the results of
the toy model experiment, where we investigate whether a disparity in feature magnitudes alone can
lead to the occlusion phenomenon. The x-axis shows the fraction of high-magnitude ground-truth
features for which we find an SAE feature with F1 score > 0.9; the y-axis shows the same for the
low-magnitude ground-truth features.

Surgically reducing the magnitude of IO features. To examine the role of feature magnitude in
the occlusion phenomenon, we continuously reduce the magnitude of IO features. Namely, given
our supervised feature dictionary with features {ioa }a∈Names , {sb }b∈Names , {posv }v∈{ABB,BAB} and


                                                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


an activation a(p) for a prompt p where the IO name is a, we construct a new activation
                                      aα (p) = a (p) − αioa
for α ∈ [0, 1]. We find that, applying this intervention without any hyperparameter tuning (with a
modest dictionary size of 1024, and ℓ1 regularization coefficient of 0.2), increasing α from 0 to 1
gradually makes the number of IO features with F1 score > 0.5 to decrease, while the number of S
features with F1 score > 0.5 increases; results are shown in Figure 7 (right).
Reproducing the occlusion phenomenon in a toy model. Finally, we wanted to know if a disparity
in feature magnitudes alone could lead to the occlusion phenomenon. We constructed a simple toy
model closely based on the empirical setup in the queries of the L10H0 head to test this hypothesis.
We form synthetic activations a = ui + vj for random pairs i, j ∈ {1, . . . , |Names|}, where
ui , vj ∈ Rdhead are sampled independently from a standard normal distribution centered at
zero, and then ui are rescaled so that their mean norm matches the mean norm of IO fea-
tures in the L10H0 queries, and similarly for vj and S features. We train SAEs on these
activations over a wide grid of hyperparmeters: dictionary sizes in (512, 1024, 2048), ℓ1 reg-
ularization in (0.0125, 0.025, 0.4, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0), batch size in (256, 1024) and learning rate in
(0.001, 0.003, 0.0003). We trained for 1000 epochs, saving checkpoints in a geometric progres-
sion of epochs. Results for the number of high- and low-magnitude features with F1 score ≥ 0.9
discovered are shown in Figure 13 (right); we observe that we easily find one SAE feature per
each high-magnitude ground-truth feature, but it is more difficult to find an SAE feature for each
low-magnitude feature.
However, we note that with lower F1 thresholds, this effect is less pronounced and eventually dis-
appears.

7.17   F EATURE OVER - SPLITTING IN A MIXTURE OF GAUSSIANS TOY MODEL
            Best total loss (L2 + lambda*L1)


                                               102.5
                                               100.0
                                                97.5
                                                95.0
                                                92.5
                                                90.0                                   SAE class
                                                                                   Ideal 2-feature
                                                87.5                               Randomized many-feature
                                                       0   1   2       3       4        5       6      7
                                                               L1 regularization (lambda)
Figure 14: Main experiment for our toy model of feature oversplitting. The data distribution is a
uniform mixture of two standard multivariate Gaussian random variables in 100 dimensions. Blue:
the (approximate) best possible total loss (in the infinite data limit) achieved by a class of ‘ideal’
SAEs that use two features pointing towards the means of the two components of the mixture.
Orange: an approximate upper bound on the best possible total loss achieved by an SAE with
m = 1, 000 hidden features (in the infinite data limit). The x-axis is the ℓ1 regularization coefficient
λ. The cutoff on the x-axis is chosen so that the idealized solution activates only for a vanishing
fraction (< 2%) of the examples in the mixture.

Our goal in this section is to demonstrate that there exist setups where an SAE with a large number of
hidden features m ≫ 2, when trained on a uniform mixture of two isotropic gaussian variables, will
prefer a solution with ≫ 2 features (as opposed to the ‘ideal’ solution with only two features, one
per component of the mixture), for any value of the ℓ1 regularization coefficient λ and any amount
of training data.


                                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Setup. We consider a simple toy model where activations are distributed according to a uniform
mixture Dtoy of two isotropic gaussians ±µ + N (0, Id ) in Rd (i.e., we first flip a fair coin to
determine the sign of µ, and then sample an extra additive term from N (0, Id )). We sample an
i.i.d. dataset from this mixture. We used d = 100, ∥µ∥2 = 2 in the experiments below; this choice
guarantees that the two components of the mixture are separable with high (> 95%) probability.
The ‘ideal’ solution with 2 features. We might hope that, with the right ℓ1 regularization, an SAE
trained on such a distribution will discover only two interpretable features, one for each component
in the mixture, with the encoder/decoder vectors aligned with µ and −µ respectively, and each
feature activating for (approximately) the examples in its corresponding component.
We find this is the case empirically when we train an SAE with only two hidden features on this
toy distribution. Specifically, there is a range of λ values 1 ≤ λ ≤ 3 where the SAE reliably
approximately recovers this ideal solution, with the encoder bias controlling the trade-off between
the two loss terms: when λ increases, the encoder bias changes so that fewer examples in each
component of the mixture are activated (and the active examples have a lower ℓ1 loss). Beyond this
range, the SAE often fails to activate any feature on any examples (λ > 3 + ε), or activates both
features on almost all examples (λ < 1 − ε).
Analyzing the ideal solution across ℓ1 coefficients. To study the properties of the ‘ideal’ solution
analytically, we make the following assumptions (borne out empirically with 2-feature SAEs) using
only symmetries of the data distribution:

       • the decoder vectors are ±µ, normalized to have unit ℓ2 norm (by symmetry of each com-
         ponent around its mean);
       • the respective encoder vectors are ±kµ for some k > 0 (again by symmetry of each com-
         ponent around its mean);
       • the decoder bias is zero (by symmetry of the mixture around zero);
       • both encoder biases are set to −γ for some γ > 0 (again by symmetry of the mixture
         around zero).

This leaves only two parameters to tune: the encoder bias γ and the encoder scale k. We can thus
use the following strategy to analytically approximate the best loss of this class of solutions for a
given λ:

       • approximate the expected ℓ1 and ℓ2 losses over a fine grid of values for γ and k, for a large
         dataset of samples from the mixture;
       • given a λ value, find the point in the grid that minimizes the total loss ℓ2 + λℓ1 .

We implemented this using 105 samples, with a grid of 100 values for γ in [0, 5] and 20 values for
k in [0, 2], over a grid of 100 values of λ in [0, 20]. We verify that the best values chosen for each
λ are not on the edges of the grid; the resulting curve of best total loss values versus λ is shown in
Figure 14 (blue), cut off at λ ≈ 7, beyond which the selected SAE activates for < 2% of examples
in the components of the mixture.
SAEs with m ≫ 2 features prefer other solutions even with infinite data. Next, we want to show
that with enough features, SAEs will prefer solutions different from the class of 2-feature solutions
described above. How can we give an empirical argument that applies to any amount of training
data and any λ? After all, a trained SAE is a function of the data it is trained on, so no experiment
on datasets of bounded size can establish properties of SAEs trained on arbitrarily large datasets.
We get around this by defining a class of SAEs that is competitive with the class of ideal 2-feature
SAEs upfront, independent of the training sample, by using a randomized construction that works
w.h.p., and then estimating the expected loss of this SAE in the infinite data limit empirically. To
give evidence of our result for arbitrary λ, we consider a fine enough grid of λ values, and for each
λ we construct an SAE that is competitive with the best ideal 2-feature SAE.
Our randomized SAE construction proceeds as follows:

       • Sample m encoder vectors Wenc ∈ Rm×d from β ∗ Dtoy (i.e. a version of Dtoy scaled by
         β) where β > 0 is a hyperparameter that we will tune;


                                                 37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                    ⊤
       • Set the decoder vectors Wdec ∈ Rd×m to be the same as the encoder vectors Wenc , but
         normalized so that each column of Wdec has unit ℓ2 norm;
       • Set all encoder biases to −γ (where γ > 0 is a hyperparameter that we will tune), and the
         decoder bias to 0 ∈ Rd .

We used m = 1, 000, a grid of 100 values for β in [0, 0.1] to search for the best β for each λ, and
fixed γ ≈ 2.35.
Empirical confirmation. Finally, we actually trained SAEs with many hidden features on Dtoy ,
and observed that these SAEs reliably learned solutions with many active features across λ values.

7.18   A DDITIONAL DETAILS FOR S ECTION 5
                                                                                              P
Feature weights are mostly in the interval [0, 1]. Recall that given a reconstruction a
                                                                                      b=         i ui ,
we defined the feature weight for the i-th feature as
                                                              2
                                     weight (i) = u⊤ b/ ∥b
                                                   i a   a∥2 .
For our supervised feature dictionaries, we find that 10% of all weights are negative, and that the
average value of all negative weights across all nodes in the IOI circuit and all three attributes is
−0.037. Similarly, for our task-specific SAE feature dictionaries, even though 31% of all weights
are negative, the average value of all negative weights is −0.002. The number and magnitude of
weights higher than 1 are even smaller.
Causal evaluation using interpretability. While the feature descriptions generated through our
automatic scoring predict well when a feature is active, it is still unclear whether they also have an
interpretable causal role, i.e. whether activating or deactivating a certain feature leads to a change
in output logits that would be expected from the feature’s description. To test this, we propose two
experiments to judge the sufficiency and necessity of our interpreted features that involve patching
activations from a counterfactual prompt and calculating the effect on the model’s output:

       • Estimating sufficiency: To estimate sufficiency, we construct SAE activations where we
         fix features with a test F1-score smaller than a threshold and patch activations of features
         with a high F1-score from the counterfactual prompt. We then calculate reconstructions
         of this new SAE activation vector, patch cross-sections, and record whether the model
         successfully predicts the correct counterfactual name.
       • Estimating necessity: To estimate necessity, we propose a similar experiment where we
         fix features with a high test F1-score and patch all remaining features. This intervention
         should not change the output logits if our features are complete.

We run this experiment on cross-sections of name mover outputs and repeat this experiment for dif-
ferent thresholds. We observe that for a threshold F1-score of 0.6, the SAE features are both faithful
and complete to a high degree. We observe that the faithfulness metric significantly decreases for
higher F1-scores of 0.7 and 0.8 but remarkably, we also observe that only fixing features with a very
high F1-score of ¿0.8 while patching all other features from the counterfactual prompt is sufficient
to keep the model predicting the base prompt’s output.

7.19   A DDITIONAL FIGURES


                                                 38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   L0H1 output                                       839
       put ken
  Ouictate To


                                                  L0H10 output                                       322
          s


                                                   L3H0 output                                       361
    l
Dup


                                                   L5H5 output                                       146
                                                   L6H9 output                                       85     IO is 2nd name
       put n
   Oudt uctio


                                                                                                            IO is 1st name
           s


                                                   L5H8 output                                       127    S is <name>
   In


                                                   L5H9 output                                       25     S is <name> and at 1st position
                                                   L7H3 output                                       173    S is <name> and at 2nd position
                                                                                                            IO is <name>
                                                                                                     572
      put on


                                                   L7H9 output                                              IO is <name> and at 1st position
 Outhibiti
         s


                                                   L8H6 output                                       434    IO is <name> and at 2nd position
                                                                                                            S is male
 S-In


                                                  L8H10 output                                       239    S is female
                                                    L7H3 value                                       305    <name> is in sentence
                                                                                                     1176   <name> is at 1st position
       es n


                                                    L7H9 value
  Valhuibitio


                                                                                                            <name> is at 2nd position
                                                    L8H6 value                                       360    current token is <name>
 S-In


                                                   L8H10 value                                       460    token is <name> and at 1st position
                                                                                                            token is <name> and at 2nd position
                                                    L9H9 query                                       33     current token is at 1st position
                                          ies r
                           Keey Move Queer Move


                                                    L9H6 query                                       36     current token is at 2nd position
                                                   L10H0 query                                       27     current token is female
                                      Nam


                                                      L9H9 key                                       111
                                    r


                                                      L9H6 key                                       83
                               s


                                                     L10H0 key                                       203
                         Nam


                                                                                                            Interpreted
                                                    L9H9 value                                       540    No good description found
                     e r


                                                                                                            Doesn't activate on IOI
 Oute Mov Vale Mov


                                                    L9H6 value                                       720
               u e s


                                                   L10H0 value                                       710
           Nam


                                                   L9H9 output                                       885
    put er


                                                   L9H6 output                                       1068
       s


                                                  L10H0 output                                       233
Nam


                                                              0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 0   1

Figure 15: Interpreting the IOI features learned by SAEs trained on O PEN W EB T EXT. For each
node in the IOI circuit, we show the distribution of interpretations for the features which have any
interpretation with F1 score above a threshold. The numbers in the right column indicate the num-
ber of features with an assigned interpretation by our method, and the color bars show the overall
distribution of the SAE features (conditioned on the feature not being dead on the SAE training
distribution).


                                                                                       39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: Accuracy for probes for the IO, S and Pos attributes in nodes of the IOI circuit, as we
apply our feature editing methods via either supervised (blue) or task-specific topK SAEs (green).
For each cross-section, we train a probe on each location in this cross-section, and report average
accuracies. The ‘baseline test set accuracy’ is the accuracy of each probe on a test set of activations
w.r.t. the one used to train the probe. We always evaluate probe accuracy w.r.t. the attribute value
we expect to observe in an edit. This means that, for example, if we are editing the IO attribute,
we evaluate the IO probes against the name we are editing to, but the S and Pos probes against the
original values of these attributes.


                                                  40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   independent mean                   coupled mean                      names mean
   (B)NM out
    (B)NM qk
     (B)NM q
         S-I v
       S-I out
 Ind+DT out

                    independent MSE                   coupled MSE                       names MSE
   (B)NM out
    (B)NM qk
     (B)NM q
         S-I v
       S-I out
 Ind+DT out
                   0            1                 0            1                    0          1

Figure 17: Fraction of recovered logit difference for several different methods to compute feature
dictionaries, across cross-sections of the circuit. For a definition of the ‘names’ parametrization, see
Appendix 7.12.


                                Attention to S1                          Attention to IO
          Bias X Bias
            Bias X IO
           Bias X Pos
             Bias X S
            IO X Bias
              IO X IO
             IO X Pos
               IO X S
           Pos X Bias
             Pos X IO
            Pos X Pos
              Pos X S
             S X Bias
               S X IO
              S X Pos
                SXS
                            0          2          4                  0         2           4
Figure 18: Attention score decomposition for the L9H6 name mover (see Figure 8 for explanation).
Notice that, in contrast with L10H0 attention socres, there is no significant (inhibitory) interaction
between the IO features in the query and key.


                                                  41
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        Attention to S1               Attention to IO
                            Bias X Bias
                              Bias X IO
                             Bias X Pos
                               Bias X S
                              IO X Bias
                                IO X IO
                               IO X Pos
                                 IO X S
                             Pos X Bias
                               Pos X IO
                              Pos X Pos
                                Pos X S
                               S X Bias
                                 S X IO
                                S X Pos
                                  SXS
                                                    0           2          4     0           2          4
    Figure 19: Attention score decomposition for the L9H9 name mover (see Figure 8 for explanation).


                                  Head Class
                                     Name Mover
                                     Backup Name Mover
                   128               S-Inhibition
                                     Induction
                                     Duplicate Token
Features Per Example


                                  Component
                                     Output
                       32            Query
                                     Value
                                     Key

                        8



                        2


                            0.2               0.0            0.2           0.4       0.6          0.8       1.0
                                                             Logit Difference Recovered
    Figure 20: Metrics for our chosen task-specific SAEs for each relevant node in the IOI circuit. The
    x-axis shows the absolute value of the difference in logit differences between a clean run of the
    model, and a run where the activations at the given node are replaced by the SAE’s reconstructions,
    normalized by the difference between the clean logit difference and the logit difference when the
    node is mean-ablated instead. The y-axis shows the average number of features active per prompt.


                                                                          42
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Head Class
                      128                 Name Mover
                                          Backup Name Mover
                                          S-Inhibition
                                          Induction
                                          Duplicate Token
                           32
Features Per Example


                                    Component
                                          Output
                                          Query
                                          Value
                            8             Key


                            2


                            0


                                  0.0                    0.2                    0.4           0.6           0.8               1.0
                                                                        Logit Difference Recovered
                Figure 21: Counterpart to Figure 20 where the decoder vectors are frozen during SAE training.


                                                                                                component   z--l9h6    z--l8h10
                     0.9                                                                        v--l10h0    q--l9h9    q--l10h10
                                                                                                v--l9h6     z--l9h9    z--l8h6
                     0.8                                                                        v--l9h9     v--l8h10   k--l10h0
                                                                                                k--l8h10    z--l5h9    q--l10h2
                     0.7                                                                        k--l8h6     v--l8h6    z--l7h9
                                                                                                k--l7h9     z--l5h8    k--l9h6
    % dead neurons


                     0.6                                                                        k--l7h3     k--l11h9   z--l7h3
                                                                                                z--l10h10   v--l7h9    q--l10h1
                                                                                                z--l11h9    z--l6h9    k--l9h9
                     0.5                                                                        z--l10h2    k--l11h2   z--l0h10
                                                                                                z--l11h2    v--l7h3    z--l3h0
                     0.4                                                                        k--l10h10   k--l10h1   q--l10h0
                                                                                                z--l5h5     k--l10h2   z--l0h1
                     0.3                                                                        z--l10h1    q--l9h7    Loss Recovered
                                                                                                z--l9h7     q--l11h9   0.30
                     0.2                                                                        z--l9h0     q--l8h6    0.45
                                                                                                q--l9h0     k--l9h7    0.60
                            0.0     2.5    5.0     7.5      10.0 12.5    15.0   17.5   20.0     z--l10h0    q--l11h2   0.75
                                                         Test L0 loss                           q--l9h6     k--l9h0    0.90

                                  Figure 22: ℓ0 loss versus fraction of dead neurons for our full-distribution SAEs.


                                                                                       43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               20.0                                                                v--l10h0        q--l9h6    k--l9h7
                                                                                   v--l9h6         z--l9h6    q--l11h2
               17.5                                                                v--l9h9         q--l9h9    k--l9h0
                                                                                   k--l8h10        z--l9h9    z--l8h10
               15.0                                                                k--l8h6         v--l8h10   q--l10h10
                                                                                   k--l7h9         z--l5h9    z--l8h6
               12.5                                                                k--l7h3         v--l8h6    k--l10h0
                                                                                   z--l10h10       z--l5h8    q--l10h2
Test L0 loss


               10.0                                                                z--l11h9        k--l11h9   z--l7h9
                                                                                   z--l10h2        v--l7h9    k--l9h6
                7.5                                                                z--l11h2        z--l6h9    z--l7h3
                                                                                   k--l10h10       k--l11h2   q--l10h1
                5.0                                                                z--l5h5         v--l7h3    k--l9h9
                                                                                   z--l10h1        k--l10h1   z--l0h10
                2.5                                                                z--l9h7         k--l10h2   z--l3h0
                                                                                   z--l9h0         q--l9h7    q--l10h0
                                                                                   q--l9h0         q--l11h9   z--l0h1
                0.0                                                                z--l10h0        q--l8h6
                      0.2   0.3   0.4      0.5      0.6     0.7   0.8    0.9
                                        Test loss recovered

      Figure 23: ℓ0 loss versus loss recovered (against a mean ablation) for our full-distribution SAEs.


    IO in (B)NM out
     Pos in (B)NM q
    Pos in (B)NM qk
  Pos in Ind+DT out
       Pos in S-I out Intervention
                            Edit 2
          Pos in S-I v      Edit 4
        S in (B)NM q        Edit 6
       S in (B)NM qk
    S in Ind+DT out
          S in S-I out
             S in S-I v
                                            5              4             3     2               1          0        1
Figure 24: Distribution of the average feature weight removed by our interpretation-agnostic edits
using SAE feature dictionaries, over all locations in a given cross-section, normalized by the cor-
responding weight for the supervised feature dictionaries. Weight removed values are transformed
linearly so that a value of 0 indicates that the weight removed by the edit equals the weight removed
by the corresponding ‘ground truth’ supervised edit; and a value of 1 indicates that the edit removed
a total weight of 1, meaning that the edit essentially overwrites all SAE features present in the acti-
vation. Negative values are clipped at −5 to preserve readability.


                                                                    44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  IO in (B)NM out
   Pos in (B)NM q
  Pos in (B)NM qk
Pos in Ind+DT out
                      Intervention
     Pos in S-I out         Edit 8
        Pos in S-I v        Edit 16
                            Edit 32
      S in (B)NM q          Edit 64
     S in (B)NM qk
  S in Ind+DT out
        S in S-I out
           S in S-I v
                           5          4             3       2          1         0          1
Figure 25: Counterpart of Figure 24 for full-distribution SAEs, when editing using features with
high F1 score for the attribute


1.0
0.8
                                                                             Intervention
0.6                                                                           No intervention
0.4                                                                           Edit 2
                                                                              Edit 4
0.2                                                                           Edit 6
                                                                              Supervised edit
0.0
                  q


                                      s in t

                                     Po ut

                                                   v
            t



                          qk


                                                   q

                                                 qk


                                      S i out
                                                  ut

                                                -I v
                                   Po T ou
         ou


                                              S-I
                NM


                                                M
                                                o


                                             -I o
                        NM


                                              M


                                            nS
                                          B)N
                                            S-I
       NM


                                             T
                                         B)N
                                         s in
              (B)


                                         +D


                                         +D

                                         nS
                     (B)


                                        Si
      (B)


                                       n(
                               Ind


                                      nd
                                     n(
            in

                    in


                                    Si
  in


                                   nI
                                  Si
            s


                           in
         Po

                    s
IO


                 Po


                                Si
                            s
                         Po


 Figure 26: Counterpart to Figure 28, where the decoder vectors are frozen during SAE training.


                                               45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1.0
0.8                                                                            Intervention
                                                                                No intervention
0.6                                                                             Edit 4
0.4                                                                             Edit 8
                                                                                Edit 16
0.2                                                                             Edit 32
                                                                                Supervised edit
0.0
                   q
            t



                                            qk


                                 s in t

                                Po ut

                                              v

                                              q

                                            qk


                                 S i out
                                             ut

                                           -I v
                              Po T ou
         ou


                                         S-I
                NM


                                           M
                                           o


                                        -I o
                        NM


                                         M


                                       nS
                                     B)N
                                       S-I
       NM


                                        T
                                    B)N
                                    s in
              (B)


                                    +D


                                    +D

                                    nS
                      (B)


                                   Si
      (B)


                                  n(
                               Ind


                                 nd
                                n(
            in

                    in


                               Si
   in


                              nI
                             Si
            s


                            in
         Po

                    s
 IO


                 Po


                           Si
                            s
                         Po


Figure 27: Counterpart to Figure 28, where we use full-distribution SAEs instead. Here, we need to
change a much higher number of features in order to have a noticeable effect (and sometimes editing
even 32 features fails)


1.0
0.8
                                                                               Intervention
0.6                                                                             No intervention
0.4                                                                             Edit 2
                                                                                Edit 4
0.2                                                                             Edit 6
                                                                                Supervised edit
0.0
                   q


                                      s in t

                                     Po ut

                                                   v
            t



                           qk


                                                   q

                                                 qk


                                      S i out
                                                  ut

                                                -I v
                                   Po T ou
         ou


                                              S-I
                NM


                                                M
                                                o


                                             -I o
                        NM


                                              M


                                            nS
                                          B)N
                                            S-I
       NM


                                             T
                                         B)N
                                         s in
              (B)


                                         +D


                                         +D

                                         nS
                      (B)


                                        Si
      (B)


                                       n(
                              Ind


                                      nd
                                     n(
            in

                    in


                                    Si
   in


                                   nI
                                  Si
            s


                            in
         Po

                    s
 IO


                 Po


                                Si
                            s
                         Po


Figure 28: Accuracy when editing IO, S and Pos for circuit cross-sections using our supervised
feature dictionaries and task-specific SAEs; the outcome in the absence of intervention is shown
in blue for reference. When using task-specific SAEs, we edit either 2, 4 or 6 features (which
means we in total add and/or remove up to that many features from activations). For comparison,
supervised edits always involve removing 1 feature and adding 1 feature. Accuracy is measured as
the proportion of examples for which the model’s prediction agrees with the ground-truth prediction
for the edit; see Section 4.3 and Appendix 7.5 for details.


                                                46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       put ken
                                             L0H1 output

  Ouictate To
                                            L0H10 output

          s
                                             L3H0 output
    l
Dup

                                             L5H5 output
                                             L6H9 output
       put n
   Oudt uctio
           s

                                             L5H8 output                  IO is 2nd name
                                                                          IO is 1st name
   In


                                             L5H9 output                  S is <name>
                                             L7H3 output                  S is <name> and at 1st position
                                                                          S is <name> and at 2nd position
      put on


                                             L7H9 output
                                                                          IO is <name>
 Outhibiti
         s


                                             L8H6 output                  IO is <name> and at 1st position
 S-In


                                            L8H10 output                  IO is <name> and at 2nd position
                                              L7H3 value                  S is male
                                                                          S is female
                                       es n


                                              L7H9 value                  IO is male
                                  Valhuibitio


                                              L8H6 value                  IO is female
                                 S-In


                                             L8H10 value                  <name> is in sentence
                                                                          current token is <name>
                                              L9H9 query                  token is <name> and at 1st position
                           ies r
                               e
 Oute Mov Kee Mov Quee Mov


                                              L9H6 query                  token is <name> and at 2nd position
                                                                          current token is male
                         r


                                             L10H0 query
                     Nam


                                                                          current token is female
                                               L9H9 keys                  template
                 s r
                   e


                                               L9H6 keys
               y


                                              L10H0 keys
           Nam


                                             L9H9 output
    put er


                                             L9H6 output
       s


                                            L10H0 output
Nam


Figure 29: Interpreting the features learned by the task SAEs. For each node in the main IOI circuit
(without backup/negative name movers), we show the distribution of the features which have an
explanation with F1 score above a threshold. The SAE chosen at each node is the one with the most
interpretable features out of all SAEs trained on this node during our hyperparameter sweep.
       put ken


                                             L0H1 output
  Ouictate To


                                            L0H10 output
          s


                                             L3H0 output
    l
Dup


                                             L5H5 output
                                             L6H9 output
       put n
   Oudt uctio
           s


                                             L5H8 output                  IO is 2nd name
                                                                          IO is 1st name
   In


                                             L5H9 output                  S is <name>
                                             L7H3 output                  S is <name> and at 1st position
                                                                          S is <name> and at 2nd position
      put on


                                             L7H9 output
                                                                          IO is <name>
 Outhibiti
         s


                                             L8H6 output                  IO is <name> and at 1st position
 S-In


                                            L8H10 output                  IO is <name> and at 2nd position
                                              L7H3 value                  S is male
                                                                          S is female
                                       es n


                                              L7H9 value                  IO is male
                                  Valhuibitio


                                              L8H6 value                  IO is female
                                 S-In


                                             L8H10 value                  <name> is in sentence
                                                                          current token is <name>
                                              L9H9 query                  token is <name> and at 1st position
                           ies r
                               e
 Oute Mov Kee Mov Quee Mov


                                              L9H6 query                  token is <name> and at 2nd position
                                                                          current token is male
                         r


                                             L10H0 query
                     Nam


                                                                          current token is female
                                               L9H9 keys                  template
                 s r
                   e


                                               L9H6 keys
               y


                                              L10H0 keys
           Nam


                                             L9H9 output
    put er


                                             L9H6 output
       s


                                            L10H0 output
Nam


Figure 30: Interpreting the features learned by the task SAEs. This is a counterpart to Figure 29 for
the SAEs chosen based on the ℓ0 and logit difference recovered metrics.



                                                           47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1.0
0.8
                                                                               Intervention
0.6                                                                             No intervention
0.4                                                                             Edit 2
                                                                                Edit 4
0.2                                                                             Edit 6
                                                                                Supervised edit
0.0
                  q
           t



                                           qk


                                s in t

                               Po ut

                                             v

                                             q

                                           qk


                                S i out
                                            ut

                                          -I v
                             Po T ou
         ou


                                        S-I
                NM


                                          M
                                          o


                                       -I o
                        NM


                                        M


                                      nS
                                    B)N
                                      S-I
       NM


                                       T
                                   B)N
                                   s in
              (B)


                                   +D


                                   +D

                                   nS
                      (B)


                                  Si
      (B)


                                 n(
                              Ind


                                nd
                               n(
            in

                    in


                              Si
  in


                             nI
                            Si
            s


                            in
         Po

                    s
IO


                 Po


                          Si
                            s
                         Po


Figure 31: Interpretation-aware sparse control, using task SAE features with the highest F1 score
with respect to the given attribute.


1.0
0.8                                                                            Intervention
0.6                                                                             No intervention
                                                                                Edit 8
0.4                                                                             Edit 16
                                                                                Edit 32
0.2                                                                             Edit 64
                                                                                Supervised edit
0.0
                  q


                                      s in t

                                     Po ut

                                                   v
            t



                          qk


                                                   q

                                                 qk


                                      S i out
                                                  ut

                                                -I v
                                   Po T ou
         ou


                                              S-I
                NM


                                                M
                                                o


                                             -I o
                        NM


                                              M


                                            nS
                                          B)N
                                            S-I
       NM


                                             T
                                         B)N
                                         s in
              (B)


                                         +D


                                         +D

                                         nS
                      (B)


                                        Si
      (B)


                                       n(
                             Ind


                                      nd
                                     n(
            in

                    in


                                    Si
  in


                                   nI
                                  Si
            s


                            in
         Po

                    s
IO


                 Po


                                Si
                            s
                         Po


                 Figure 32: Counterpart of Figure 31 with full-distribution SAEs.


                                               48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4             Intervention
          Keep only features with F1                    0.0
          Keep only features with F1                    0.2
0.2       Keep only features with F1                    0.4
          Keep only features with F1                    0.6
          Keep only features with F1                    0.8
0.0 Ind+DT out S-I v        S-I out                     (B)NM q (B)NM qk (B)NM out
Figure 33: Measuring the sufficiency of interpretable features for task SAEs: effect of subtracting
features with the lowest F1 score from activations on logit difference. A value of 1 is best.



1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4                                                           Intervention
                                                         Remove features with F1 0.0
                                                         Remove features with F1 0.2
0.2                                                      Remove features with F1 0.4
                                                         Remove features with F1 0.6
                                                         Remove features with F1 0.8
0.0 Ind+DT out S-I v                      S-I out       (B)NM q (B)NM qk (B)NM out
Figure 34: Measuring the necessity of interpretable features for task SAEs: effect of removing
features with the highest F1 score from activations on the logit difference. Values are rescaled
linearly so that a value of 1 corresponds to perfect recovery of the logit difference achieved by mean
ablation (i.e., ideal intervention removing all features). A value of 1 is best.



                                                 49
