Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ROSS -ATTENTION H EAD P OSITION PATTERNS C AN
A LIGN WITH H UMAN V ISUAL C ONCEPTS IN T EXT- TO -
I MAGE G ENERATIVE M ODELS
 Jungwon Park1 , Jungmin Ko2 , Dongnam Byun1 , Jangwon Suh1 , Wonjong Rhee1,2∗
 1
     Department of Intelligence and Information, Seoul National University
 2
     Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
 {quoded97, jungminko, east928, rxwe5607, wrhee}@snu.ac.kr



                                              A BSTRACT

             Recent text-to-image diffusion models leverage cross-attention layers, which have
             been effectively utilized to enhance a range of visual generative tasks. However,
             our understanding of cross-attention layers remains somewhat limited. In this
             study, we introduce a mechanistic interpretability approach for diffusion models
             by constructing Head Relevance Vectors (HRVs) that align with human-specified
             visual concepts. An HRV for a given visual concept has a length equal to the total
             number of cross-attention heads, with each element representing the importance
             of the corresponding head for the given visual concept. To validate HRVs as in-
             terpretable features, we develop an ordered weakening analysis that demonstrates
             their effectiveness. Furthermore, we propose concept strengthening and concept
             adjusting methods and apply them to enhance three visual generative tasks. Our
             results show that HRVs can reduce misinterpretations of polysemous words in im-
             age generation, successfully modify five challenging attributes in image editing,
             and mitigate catastrophic neglect in multi-concept generation. Overall, our work
             provides an advancement in understanding cross-attention layers and introduces
             new approaches for fine-controlling these layers at the head level1 .


1        I NTRODUCTION

Recent advancements in Text-to-Image (T2I) models have demonstrated an unprecedented ability to
generate high-quality images with strong image-text alignment. These models often leverage power-
ful pre-trained text encoders; for instance, Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) uses CLIP (Rad-
ford et al., 2021), while Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) uses T5 (Raffel et al., 2020). Given that
language is more expressive than previously used supervision signals (Gandelsman et al., 2023),
text representations have empowered visual generative tasks, allowing for a high degree of con-
trol over the generation process. However, our understanding of the inner workings of T2I models
remains limited, and even the latest models continue to struggle with certain failure cases.
Significant progress has been made in understanding the inner workings of deep neural networks.
Olah et al. (2018) demonstrated numerous examples showing interpretable features at various levels
in neural networks; Olah et al. (2020) expanded this analysis by exploring connections between units
in the networks. Notably, Templeton et al. (2024) identified interpretable features in the cutting-edge
large language model (LLM)–Claude 3 Sonnet–and used these features to guide the model’s genera-
tion towards safer outcomes. Building on this line of work, we analyze T2I generative models with a
focus on their cross-attention (CA) layers. We introduce a novel method to construct head relevance
vectors (HRVs) that align with human-specified visual concepts. An HRV for a given visual concept
is a vector whose length equals to the total number of CA heads, with each element representing the
importance of the corresponding head for that concept. We demonstrate that these vectors reflect
     ∗
         Corresponding Author.
     1
         Our code is available at https://github.com/SNU-DRL/HRV


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) Ordered weakening analysis of CA heads from high to low relevance for two visual concepts.


               (b) Enhancing three visual generative tasks with our head relevance vectors.

Figure 1: We develop a method for constructing head relevance vectors (HRVs) that align with useful
visual concepts. For a specified visual concept, an HRV assigns a relevance score to individual
cross-attention heads, revealing their importance for the visual concept. Our analysis shows that
the constructed HRVs can serve as interpretable features. We also demonstrate that HRV can be
effectively integrated for improving three visual generative tasks.

human-interpretable features by using ordered weakening analysis, where we sequentially weaken
the activation of CA heads and examine the resulting generated images (Figure 1a).
To demonstrate the utility of HRVs, we propose concept strengthening and concept adjusting meth-
ods to enhance three visual generative tasks (Figure 1b). In image generation, our approach sig-
nificantly reduces the misinterpretation of polysemous words. When generating images from text
prompts containing such words, our method decreased the misinterpretation rate from 63.0% to
15.9%. In image editing, our method enhances the widely used Prompt-to-Prompt (P2P) (Hertz
et al., 2022) algorithm in modifying object attributes (color, material, geometric patterns) and image
attributes (image style, weather conditions), achieving 2.32% to 11.79% higher image-text align-
ment scores compared to state-of-the-art methods. Additionally, in human evaluations, it received
more than twice the preference scores compared to existing methods. In multi-concept generation,
our method improves upon the state-of-the-art Attend-and-Excite (Chefer et al., 2023) algorithm.
By reducing catastrophic neglect – the omission of objects or attributes in generated images – our
approach enhances performance by 2.3% to 6.3% across two benchmark types.
We use Stable Diffusion v1.4 (Rombach et al., 2022) as the primary model for our analysis and
experiments. To show that our findings are not limited to a single model, we also show that they
are consistent in Stable Diffusion XL (Podell et al., 2024). Furthermore, we show that our approach
allows for flexible adjustment of human-specified concepts. These results indicate that our method
of constructing HRVs can be also useful for different model architectures and target concept.

2   R ELATED WORK
Early works on interpretable neurons and interpretable features: Early works on visual gener-
ative models have trained variational autoencoders (VAEs) using specifically designed loss functions
on datasets with distinct attributes (Kulkarni et al., 2015; Higgins et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018;
Klys et al., 2018). While these methods successfully controlled a few attributes present in the train-
ing dataset, they were limited by a lack of fine-grained control, strong dependence on training data,
and possible need for manual supervision of attributes. Another approach is to identify meaningful
features in intermediate layers of neural networks (e.g., generative adversarial networks (GANs)),
and modify those features to control the generation outputs (Plumerault et al., 2020; Shen & Zhou,
2021). Also, a seminal work by Olah et al. (2018) demonstrated that interpretable features in neural
networks can be identified at various levels: single neurons, spatial positions, channels, or groups of
neurons across different positions and channels. They presented numerous examples showing how


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


these interpretable features emerge at various levels within a neural network’s architecture. While
these efforts successfully revealed meaningful features, they were limited by an inability to cap-
ture user-specified or human-specified concepts. Moreover, the identified features were not always
directly usable for controlling attributes in generative tasks.
Recent works with multi-modal and generative models: Since the development of powerful
multi-modal models that can map images and text to a joint embedding space, few studies have used
text to interpret intermediate representations in vision models (Goh et al., 2021; Hernandez et al.,
2022; Yuksekgonul et al., 2023b). Most recently, Gandelsman et al. (2023) examined self-attention
heads from the last layers of CLIP-ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), identifying meaningful correla-
tions with several visual concepts. While these studies primarily focused on non-generative models,
our study shifts focus to the interpretable features within visual generative models. Regarding the
recently proposed large language model, Claude 3 Sonnet, Templeton et al. (2024) demonstrated that
identifying meaningful concepts from model activations provides valuable insights into understand-
ing model behavior. Among the various features identified, their use of safety-related features to
guide text generation towards safer outcomes is particularly relevant for large-scale text-generative
models. Our study also explores large-scale generative models, showing that human-specified visual
concepts can be captured and applied in three distinct visual generative tasks.
Text-to-image diffusion models with cross-attention layers: Building on the large-scale T2I
diffusion models, researchers have developed methods to tackle various visual generative tasks, such
as image editing (Hertz et al., 2022) and multi-concept generation (Chefer et al., 2023). Many of
these studies utilize the publicly available Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), which efficiently
generates images through a diffusion denoising process in latent space. This model incorporates an
autoencoder and a U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) with multi-head cross-attention (CA) layers that
integrate CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) text embeddings. Researchers have explored these CA layers
to enhance control over text-conditioned image generation (Feng et al., 2022; Parmar et al., 2023;
Chefer et al., 2023; Tumanyan et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023). For example, P2P (Hertz et al., 2022)
manipulates image layout and structure by swapping CA maps between source and target prompts.
However, these methods typically update entire CA layers without offering fine-grained control
over individual attention heads. We introduce head relevance vectors and develop two techniques
for head-level control of CA layers, enabling precise steering of human-specified visual concepts.

3   M ETHOD FOR CONSTRUCTING HEAD RELEVANCE VECTORS
The core idea involves selecting a set of visual concepts of interest, using a large language
model (LLM) to pre-select 10 associated words for each concept, and utilizing random image gener-
ations for updating head relevance vectors (HRVs). The key to a successful update lies in identifying
the visual concept that best matches a particular head and increasing the corresponding element of
the HRVs. Figure 2 illustrates the process of a single update. We begin by providing background on
the cross-attention (CA) layer, followed by detailed descriptions of our methodology for construct-
ing HRVs that correspond to a set of human-specified visual concepts.

Cross-attention in T2I diffusion models: Let P be a generation prompt, Zt be a noisy image at
generation timestep t, and ψ(·) be a CLIP text-encoder. In each CA head, the spatial features of the
noisy image ϕ(Zt ) are projected to a query matrix Q = lQ (ϕ(Zt )), while the CLIP text embedding
ψ(P) is projected to a key matrix K = lK (ψ(P)) and a value matrix V = lV (ψ(P)), using learned
linear layers lQ , lK , and lV . Then, the CA map is calculated by measuring the correlations between
Q and K as
                                                        QKT

                                         M = softmax      √      ,                                 (1)
                                                            d
where d is the projection dimension of the keys and queries. The CA output MV is a weighted aver-
age of the value V, with the weights determined by the CA map M. This operation is performed in
parallel across multi-heads in the CA layer, and their outputs are concatenated and linearly projected
using a learned linear layer to produce the final CA output.

Image generation prompts, visual concepts, and concept-words: To generate 2,100 random
images, we used 2,100 generation prompts. Of these, 1,000 prompts were constructed using 1,000
ImageNet classes (Deng et al., 2009), formatted as ‘A photo of a {class name}.’ The remaining 1,100


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Overview of a single HRV update for a cross-attention (CA) head position h. While
generating a random image, the most relevant visual concept is identified. Then the concept’s head
relevance vector (HRV) is updated to have an increased value in position h. For illustration purpose,
we are showing only 5 visual concepts (N = 5) and 6 CA heads (H = 6). In our main experiments,
we adopt N = 34 and H = 128. This update is repeated over all the head positions h = 1, . . . , H
and all timesteps t = 1, . . . , T for a sufficiently large number of random image generations.

prompts were adopted from PromptHero (PromptHero) to enhance diversity. The visual concepts
can be specified as an arbitrary set. In our study, we have interacted with GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024)
to list 34 commonly used visual concepts including object categories and image properties. While
our study mainly focuses on the 34 visual concepts, we demonstrate in Appendix J that a new visual
concept can be flexibly and easily added. For each of the selected visual concepts, we have generated
10 representative concept-words using GPT-4o. The full list of 34 visual concepts, along with 10
corresponding concept-words for each, can be found in Table 3 of Appendix A.
T2I models and head relevance vectors: We focus on Stable Diffusion v1, which contains H =
128 CA heads. Let C1 , . . . , CN represent the specified visual concepts, where N = 34 in our
main experiments. For each visual concept Cn , we define a head relevance vector (HRV) as an
H-dimensional vector that expresses how each CA head is activated by the corresponding visual
concept. Initially, all N head relevance vectors are set to zero and are iteratively updated following
the process illustrated in Figure 2. The full iteration involved 2,100 generated images, with each
image used to iterate over all H = 128 heads and T = 50 timesteps. Extension to a larger diffusion
model, Stable Diffusion XL, is discussed in Section 6.1.
Concatenation of the N token embeddings: In each HRV update shown in Figure 2, we gener-
ate a concatenation of token embeddings for the N visual concepts and use it to identify the best
matching visual concept for the h-th head. To enhance diversity in the process, we randomly sample
one concept-word for each visual concept from the list provided in Table 3 of Appendix A. The
sampled N concept-words are individually embedded using the CLIP text encoder ψ(·), followed
                                              (h)
by the learned linear key projection layer lK at the h-th CA head position. This produces N key
matrices K1 , K2 , . . . , KN ∈ R77×F , each corresponding to a concept, with each key matrix con-
taining 77 token embeddings, where F is a feature dimension. For instance, if the sampled word
for the third concept C3 is ‘white,’ the corresponding key matrix K3 would be [<SOT>, <white>,
<EOT>, · · · , <EOT>], where <SOT> and <EOT> are key-projected embeddings of special to-
kens. We only extract the embedding of the semantic token <white> from K3 , denoted as K             b3
     n3 ×F
∈R         , where n3 = 1 since there is only one semantic token, <white>. Similarly, we extract
the embeddings for the other concepts, obtaining K  b 1, K
                                                         b 2, . . . , K
                                                                      b N . These N embeddings are then
                                                     N ′ ×F
concatenated to form K = [K1 , K2 , . . . , KN ] ∈ R
                          b    b   b         b              , where N ′ represents the total number of
                                            ′
semantic tokens across all N concepts (N = N if each concept-word consists of a single token).
Updating of the head relevance vectors: We calculate the cross-attention (CA) maps M       c ∈
  R2 ×N ′
R         , where R is the width or height of the image latent, by applying Eq. 1 using the con-


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       ′                                                      2
catenated token embeddings K      b ∈ RN ×F , in place of K, and the image query Q(h) ∈ RR ×F from
h-th head position. This measures the correlation between the visual information at h-th head posi-
tion and the textual information of the N visual concepts, resulting in N groups of CA maps. If a
word consists of multiple tokens, we average the CA maps across the token dimension so that each
                                                                                     2
word corresponds to a single CA map. This process produces a matrix of shape RR ×N . This matrix
is then averaged across spatial dimension (i.e., R2 ) to yield a single strength value for each visual
concept Cn , n = 1, . . . , N . We use the argmax operation on these N strength values to identify the
visual concept with the largest value, which eliminates the problem of different representation scales
across H CA heads (Appendix B.2). Then, we update that visual concept’s HRV by increasing its
h-th component by one. This update process is repeated over all head positions h = 1, . . . , 128 and
all timesteps t = 1, . . . , 50 for 2100 random image generations. At the end, each HRV is normalized
to have its L1 norm equivalent to H = 128. Pseudo-code is provided in Appendix B.1.


4   O RDERED WEAKENING ANALYSIS OF HEAD RELEVANCE VECTORS

In this section, we investigate whether the constructed HRVs can effectively and reliably serve as
interpretable features. As our primary analysis tool, we introduce ordered weakening across the H
cross-attention heads by multiplying −2 to a target head’s CA maps. This weakening is applied
consistently across all timesteps during image generation, but only to the CA maps of all semantic
tokens, leaving special tokens unchanged. Using this approach, we compare images generated under
two different head-weakening orders. In the most relevant head positions first (MoRHF), we weaken
H heads starting from the strongest to the weakest, where the strength of head h is determined by
the value of the h-th element in the HRV. In the least relevant head positions first (LeRHF), the
order is reversed, from the weakest to the strongest. If an HRV reliably represents a visual concept,
we expect MoRHF to impact the corresponding concept in the generated images more quickly than
LeRHF. The head weakening is inspired by a rescaling technique in P2P (Hertz et al., 2022) and the
ordering was inspired by the metrics defined in Samek et al. (2016) and Tomsett et al. (2020).
Analysis results for three visual concepts are shown in Figure 3. Comparison of generated images
are shown in Figure 3a. In the top case, where the visual concept of Material is weakened, the
characteristics of copper in the generated image already disappeared when the most relevant 11
heads are weakened. In contrast, the copper remains visible until the least relevant 71 heads are
weakened. A similar observation can be made for the visual concepts of Animals and Geometric
Patterns. An additional 33 examples can be found in Figures 11 and 13–15 of Appendix C. It is
noted that a caution is required when analyzing the results, especially for LeRHF. For the HRV of a
given visual concept, the least relevant heads have little effect on the concept of interest but could be
significantly relevant to other visual concepts. Therefore, interpreting the changes observed in the
LeRHF-generated images requires careful consideration of other visual concepts.
We have also plotted the trends of CLIP image-text similarity in Figure 3b. CLIP similarity was
measured between the generated images and the concept-words used in the prompts. For each data
point in the CLIP score plots, we used between 30 and 150 images, depending on the specific visual
concept. The prompt templates and concept-words used for each visual concept are detailed in Ap-
pendix C.1. These plots clearly show that relevant concepts are removed significantly faster during
MoRHF weakening, while they are preserved for a longer duration in LeRHF weakening. Additional
similarity plots for six more visual concepts can be found in Figure 12 of Appendix C.2. Addition-
ally, we compare HRV-based ordered weakening with random order weakening in Appendix C.3,
further supporting HRV’s concept-awareness.


5   S TEERING VISUAL CONCEPTS IN THREE VISUAL GENERATIVE TASKS

Head relevance vectors are not only valuable as interpretable features but can also be used to steer
visual concepts in generative tasks. In this section, we demonstrate that polysemous word challenges
can be addressed and that leading methods, such as P2P (Hertz et al., 2022) for image editing and
Attend-and-Excite (A&E) (Chefer et al., 2023) for multi-concept generation, can be significantly
enhanced. All of our experiments are conducted using Stable Diffusion v1.4, 50 timesteps with
PNDM sampling (Liu et al., 2022), and classifier-free guidance at a scale of 7.5. All CLIP-based
metrics are calculated using the OpenCLIP ViT-H/14 model (Ilharco et al., 2021).


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             (a) Generated images as weakening progresses in either MoRHF or LeRHF order.


 (b) Change in CLIP image-text similarity score as weakening progresses in either MoRHF or LeRHF order.

Figure 3: Ordered weakening analysis for three visual concepts: The visual concept of interest
disappears significantly faster with MoRHF, where the most relevant heads in the corresponding
HRV are weakened first. Note that 128 corresponds to the weakening of all heads.


Figure 4: Two rescaling vectors for visual concept steering. Left: Concept strengthening uses HRV
of a desired visual concept as the rescaling vector. Concept adjusting combines HRVs of a desired
and an undesired visual concepts to define the rescaling vector: 2 · (HRV of desired concept) − 1 ·
(HRV of undesired concept). Here, H = 128 denotes the number of CA heads. Right: For both
concept steering methods, the h-th CA map of a target token is rescaled using rh , the h-th element
of the rescaling vector, where h = 1, . . . , H. Here, L = 77 denotes the token length.

Two rescaling vectors for visual concept steering – concept strengthening and concept ad-
justing: We define two rescaling vectors as illustrated in Figure 4, both utilizing pre-constructed
HRVs. In Section 3, we have constructed 34 HRVs for the 34 visual concepts listed in Table 3 of
Appendix A. We utilize the pre-constructed HRVs to steer the corresponding concepts. For some vi-
sual generative tasks, only a desired concept can be identified, and we apply concept strengthening.
In other tasks, both a desired and an undesired concept can be identified, typically in cases where the
generative model fails to meet the user’s intention. In such cases, we apply concept adjusting. The
rescaling vector of concept adjusting is designed to be closely related to that of concept strengthen-
ing; the two vectors become equivalent when desired and undesired concepts are identical.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1   I MAGE GENERATION – REDUCING MISINTERPRETATION OF POLYSEMOUS WORDS

The same word can have different meanings de-
pending on the context. Stable Diffusion (SD)
models are known for misinterpreting such pol-
ysemous words, often generating images that
do not comply with the user’s intended mean-
ing. Two examples are shown in Figure 5. SD
fails to recognize that ‘lavender’ clearly refers
to a color and ‘Apple’ to an electronic device.
This misinterpretation by SD may arise from
limitations in the CLIP text encoder, which
has been reported to exhibit bag-of-words is- Figure 5: Examples of image generations from
sues (Yuksekgonul et al., 2023a). The problem Stable Diffusion (SD) and SD-HRV (ours) using
can be resolved by adopting concept adjusting prompts frequently misinterpreted by T2I mod-
to SD as shown in Figure 5, where we name els. SD-HRV effectively reduces misinterpreta-
our method as SD-HRV. For the lavender case, tion compared to SD.
SD-HRV resolves this issue by applying con-
cept adjusting to the token ‘lavender,’ using Color as the desired visual concept and Plants as the
undesired visual concept. For the Apple case, concept adjusting is applied to the token ‘Apple,’ using
Brand Logos as the desired and Fruits as the undesired. Examples of 10 cases, including the 2 cases
shown in Figure 5, can be found in Figures 18–19 of Appendix D.1. There, we provide 10 images
generated with 10 random seeds for each case. Additionally, we investigated the performance of
concept strengthening compared to concept adjusting and found, as expected, that concept adjusting
performs better. The details can be found in Appendix D.3.
We have also performed a human evaluation over the 10 cases, each with 10 random seeds, and
the details can be found in Appendix D.2. Based on the human evaluation, the human perceived
misinterpretation rate dropped significantly from 63.0% to 15.9% when SD-HRV was adopted.

5.2   I MAGE EDITING – SUCCESSFUL EDITING FOR FIVE CHALLENGING VISUAL CONCEPTS

Image editing involves generating an image that aligns with the target prompt while minimizing
structural changes from the source image. Although recently developed methods excel at image
editing, certain visual concepts remain challenging to edit. For example, concepts related to mate-
rials, geometric patterns, image styles, and weather conditions are known to be particularly difficult
to edit. To address this problem, we propose applying concept strengthening to P2P (Hertz et al.,
2022). We refer to our method as P2P-HRV. The key idea is to apply concept strengthening to
the edited token, the token that describes how the attribute of the source image should be changed,
thereby strengthening the concept related to the editing target. The detailed explanations of P2P-
HRV method are provided in Appendix E.1.
Experimental settings: We focus on five challenging visual concepts as editing targets, includ-
ing three object attributes (Color, Material, and Geometric Patterns) and two image attributes (Im-
age Styles and Weather Conditions). We compare P2P-HRV with SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021),
P2P (Hertz et al., 2022), PnP (Tumanyan et al., 2023), MasaCtrl (Cao et al., 2023), and FPE (Liu
et al., 2024). For each method, we generate 500 edited images for each editing target (250 for
Weather Conditions) using the prompts described in Appendix E.2. For object attributes (Color, Ma-
terial, and Geometric Patterns), we evaluated performance using both CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)
and BG-DINO scores. The CLIP score evaluates CLIP image-text similarity between the edited
image and the target prompt. The BG-DINO score assesses structure preservation using Grounded-
SAM-2 (Ravi et al., 2024; Ren et al., 2024) for extracting non-object parts from the source and
edited images and then comparing them with DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023) embeddings. The BG-
DINO score is inspired by the segment-and-embed metrics used in prior research (Parmar et al.,
2023; Kim et al., 2024). For image attributes (Image Styles and Weather Conditions), we conducted
a human evaluation to assess human preference (HP) scores, as BG-DINO is not well-suited for
these edits, which involve modifying the entire image rather than preserving non-object parts. In the
human evaluation, we compared P2P-HRV with the other methods by asking ‘Which edited image
better matches the target description, while maintaining essential details of the source image?’ We
normalized the HP-score, setting P2P-HRV’s preference score to 100.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Examples of image editing for the five challenging visual concepts. In these examples, all
comparison methods frequently fail to make the desired edits, whereas our P2P-HRV successfully
achieves the intended modifications.


Figure 7: Quantitative comparison of image editing methods for three object attributes using CLIP
and BG-DINO scores.


Table 1: CLIP scores and human evaluation scores               Experimental results: Figure 6 presents five
for two image attributes. The best and second-best             exemplary cases of image editing across the
results are highlighted in bold and underlined, re-            five challenging visual concepts. The figure
spectively.                                                    demonstrates that our approach significantly
                                                               improves image-text alignment compared to the
                             Image Attribute                   previously known methods. While only five
 Method             Image Style       Weather Conditions       cases are shown in this figure, an extensive list
                  CLIP     HP-score   CLIP     HP-score        of additional examples can be found in Fig-
 SDEdit (0.5)     0.2938      -       0.2817      -            ures 24–34 of Appendix E.5. For the edit-
 SDEdit (0.7)     0.3217     15.8     0.2908     39.5          ing of three object attributes, CLIP similar-
 P2P              0.3120     30.6     0.2788     33.9          ity and BG-DINO scores are presented in Fig-
 PnP              0.3286     41.9     0.3046     35.0
                                                               ure 7. P2P-HRV achieves Pareto-optimal per-
 MassaCtrl        0.2722      -       0.2524      -
                                                               formance compared to previous SOTA methods
                                                               across all three object attributes. For the edit-
 FPE              0.3236     25.7     0.2962     35.5
                                                               ing of two image attributes, CLIP similarity and
 P2P-HRV (Ours)   0.3424     100      0.3348     100
                                                               human preference performance are presented in
                                                               Table 1. Our P2P-HRV improves CLIP perfor-


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


mance by 4.20% on Image Style and 9.91% on Weather Conditions compared to the previous SOTA,
PnP. In the human evaluation, we have found that P2P-HRV received 2.39 and 2.53 times more votes
in HP-scores for Image Style and Weather Conditions, respectively, compared to the second-best
methods.

5.3    M ULTI - CONCEPT GENERATION – REDUCING CATASTROPHIC NEGLECT

T2I generative models often struggle with multi-concept generation, failing to capture all the speci-
fied subjects or attributes in a prompt. To address this issue, known as catastrophic neglect, Attend-
and-Excite (A&E) (Chefer et al., 2023) iteratively updates the image latent using gradients derived
from the CA maps of selected tokens during image generation. To further improve A&E, we propose
incorporating our concept strengthening approach, which we refer to as A&E-HRV.

Experimental settings: We investigated A&E-HRV using two types of prompts: (i) ‘a {Animal
A} and a {Animal B}’ (Type 1) and (ii) ‘a {Color A} {Animal A} and a {Color B} {Animal B}’ (Type
2), originally examined in the A&E work (Chefer et al., 2023). Type 1 evaluates multi-object gen-
eration, while Type 2 adds the challenge of binding color attributes to each animal. In these ex-
periments, we used 12 animals and 10 colors, as detailed in Appendix F. We assessed 66 prompts
for Type 1 and 150 for Type 2, with 30 random seeds applied across all methods. Following A&E,
we adopted three evaluation metrics. Full prompt similarity measures the CLIP similarity between
the generated image and the full prompt. Minimum object similarity is calculated by measuring
the CLIP image-text similarity between the image and two sub-prompts, which are created by split-
ting the original prompt at ‘and.’ The lower similarity score between the two sub-prompts is then
reported. BLIP-score measures the CLIP text-text similarity between the prompt and the image
caption generated with BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023).

Experimental results: Table 2 presents the quantitative comparisons, while Figure 8 shows qual-
itative results. As shown in Table 2, A&E-HRV outperforms other methods across all metrics and
prompt types. In Figure 8, the top row shows results for Type 1 prompt, while the bottom row shows
results for Type 2 prompt. The existing methods either neglect key visual concepts or fail to generate
realistic images. In contrast, our approach captures all concepts and generates realistic images for
both prompt types. Additional comparisons are provided in Figure 36 of Appendix F.2.

Table 2: Quantitative results of multi-concept generation. The best and second-best results are
highlighted in bold and underlined, respectively. The percentage in parentheses indicates the im-
provement over the second best result, A&E.

                               Type1: a {Animal A} and a {Animal B}          Type2: a {Color A} {Animal A} and a {Color B} {Animal B}
Method
                           Full Prompt      Min. Object       BLIP-score         Full Prompt        Min. Object       BLIP-score
Stable Diffusion              0.3000           0.1611           0.5934             0.3420             0.1458            0.5633
Structured Diffusion          0.2831           0.1545           0.5626             0.3307             0.1424            0.5508
Attend-and-Excite (A&E)       0.3544           0.2017           0.7049             0.3883             0.1972            0.6373
A&E-HRV (Ours)            0.3702 (+4.5%)   0.2078 (+3.0%)   0.7491 (+6.3%)     0.3971 (+2.3%)     0.2073 (+5.1%)    0.6580 (+3.2%)


Figure 8: Examples of multi-concept generation for Type 1 and Type 2 prompts. We compare
Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), Structured Diffusion (Feng et al., 2022), and Attend-and-
Excite (Chefer et al., 2023) with ours.


                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6     D ISCUSSION
6.1   E XTENSIONS TO A LARGER ARCHITECTURE

The recently introduced Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL) (Podell et al., 2024) adopts a U-Net backbone
that is three times larger than its predecessors, scaling up to 1300 cross-attention (CA) heads. To
investigate the generalization capability of HRV, we have performed an extended study with SDXL.
Using SDXL, we conducted the ordered weakening analysis to evaluate whether HRVs can serve as
interpretable features. An exemplary result for the visual concept Furniture is shown in Figure 9.
The sofa disappeared when the most relevant 211 heads were weakened. In contrast, the sofa re-
mained visible until the least relevant 711 heads were weakened. Additional 45 examples and the
similarity plots for nine visual concepts can be found in Figures 37–42 of Appendix G.1. For SDXL
experiments, we utilize the SD-XL 1.0-base model.


Figure 9: Ordered weakening analysis for SDXL: generated images are shown as weakening pro-
gresses in either MoRHF or LeRHF order.

6.2   D O GENERATION TIMESTEPS AFFECT HOW HEADS RELATE TO VISUAL CONCEPT ?

Diffusion models generate images by iteratively process-
ing an image latent through the same U-Net network. A
natural question is whether the patterns of head relevance
vectors change across different timesteps during genera-
tion. To explore this, we calculated head relevance vec-
tors for each visual concept at every timestep, resulting
in 1700 vectors (34 visual concepts×50 timesteps). Fig-
ure 10 presents a t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008)
plot of these 1700 vectors. In the t-SNE plot, visual con-
cepts are clearly separated, while timesteps are not. This
indicates that generation timesteps do not significantly af-
fect the head relevance patterns of each visual concept.
Further analysis, including cosine similarity plots, is pro- Figure 10: t-SNE plot of 1700 head
vided in Appendix I.                                         relevance vectors across 34 visual con-
                                                             cepts and 50 generation timesteps.
6.3 L IMITATION

We examined the 34 concepts listed in Table 3 of Appendix A and identified two types of failure
cases. The first type arises from limitations in the underlying T2I model, while the second is related
to our proposed algorithm or the concept-words used to represent the concept. Appendix H provides
a detailed discussion of these failure cases, along with examples for each, shown in Figures 45-46.

7     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we present findings from our exploration of cross-attention heads in T2I models.
We demonstrate that head relevance vectors (HRVs) can be effectively and reliably constructed
for human-specified visual concepts without requiring any modifications or fine-tuning of the T2I
model. Furthermore, we show that HRVs can be successfully applied to improve performance of
three visual generative tasks. Our work provides an advancement in understanding cross-attention
layers and introduces novel approaches for exploiting these layers at the head-level.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


8   R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

We provide our core codebase in our code repository, which includes the methodology implementa-
tion, settings, generation prompts, and benchmarks for image editing and multi-concept generation.


9   E THIC S TATEMENT

Our work presents new techniques for controlling and refining text-to-image diffusion models, en-
hancing both image generation and editing capabilities. While these advancements hold significant
potential for creative and practical applications, they also raise ethical concerns about the possible
misuse of generative models, such as creating manipulated media for disinformation. It is important
to recognize that any image editing or generation tool can be used for both positive and negative pur-
poses, making responsible use essential. Fortunately, various research in detecting harmful content
and preventing malicious editing are making significant progress. We believe our detailed analysis
of cross-attention heads will contribute to these efforts by providing a deeper understanding of the
mechanisms behind the text-to-image generative models.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was partly supported by a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by
the Korea government (MSIT) (No. NRF-2020R1A2C2007139) and by Institute of Information &
communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government
(MSIT) ([NO.RS-2021-II211343, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (Seoul National
University)], [No. RS-2023-00235293, Development of autonomous driving big data processing,
management, search, and sharing interface technology to provide autonomous driving data accord-
ing to the purpose of usage]).


R EFERENCES
Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Yinqiang Zheng. Mas-
 actrl: Tuning-free mutual self-attention control for consistent image synthesis and editing. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 22560–22570,
 2023.

Hila Chefer, Yuval Alaluf, Yael Vinker, Lior Wolf, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Attend-and-excite:
  Attention-based semantic guidance for text-to-image diffusion models. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–10, 2023.

Ricky TQ Chen, Xuechen Li, Roger B Grosse, and David K Duvenaud. Isolating sources of disen-
  tanglement in variational autoencoders. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31,
  2018.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An im-
  age is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2021.

Weixi Feng, Xuehai He, Tsu-Jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Akula, Pradyumna Narayana, Sugato
 Basu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Training-free structured diffusion guidance for
 compositional text-to-image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05032, 2022.

Yossi Gandelsman, Alexei A Efros, and Jacob Steinhardt. Interpreting clip’s image representation
  via text-based decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05916, 2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gabriel Goh, Nick Cammarata, Chelsea Voss, Shan Carter, Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schubert, Alec
  Radford, and Chris Olah. Multimodal neurons in artificial neural networks. Distill, 6(3):e30,
  2021.
Evan Hernandez, Sarah Schwettmann, David Bau, Teona Bagashvili, Antonio Torralba, and Jacob
  Andreas. Natural language descriptions of deep features. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=NudBMY-tzDr.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher P Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew M Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. ICLR (Poster), 3, 2017.
Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori,
  Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali
  Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Openclip, July 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.5143773. If you use this software, please cite it as below.
Jimyeong Kim, Jungwon Park, and Wonjong Rhee. Selectively informative description can re-
  duce undesired embedding entanglements in text-to-image personalization. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8312–8322, 2024.
Jack Klys, Jake Snell, and Richard Zemel. Learning latent subspaces in variational autoencoders.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Tejas D Kulkarni, William F Whitney, Pushmeet Kohli, and Josh Tenenbaum. Deep convolutional
  inverse graphics network. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 19730–19742. PMLR, 2023.
Bingyan Liu, Chengyu Wang, Tingfeng Cao, Kui Jia, and Jun Huang. Towards understanding
  cross and self-attention in stable diffusion for text-guided image editing. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7817–7826, 2024.
Luping Liu, Yi Ren, Zhijie Lin, and Zhou Zhao. Pseudo numerical methods for diffusion models on
  manifolds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09778, 2022.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.01073, 2021.
Chris Olah, Arvind Satyanarayan, Ian Johnson, Shan Carter, Ludwig Schubert, Katherine Ye, and
  Alexander Mordvintsev. The building blocks of interpretability. Distill, 3(3):e10, 2018.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.001.
  https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in.
OpenAI. Hello gpt-4o. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/, 2024. Accessed:
  2024-06-11.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning
 robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193, 2023.
Gaurav Parmar, Krishna Kumar Singh, Richard Zhang, Yijun Li, Jingwan Lu, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Zero-shot image-to-image translation. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, pp.
  1–11, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Antoine Plumerault, Hervé Le Borgne, and Céline Hudelot. Controlling generative models with
  continuous factors of variations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1laeJrKDB.

Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. SDXL: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=di52zR8xgf.

PromptHero. https://prompthero.com/. Accessed: 2024-06-03.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of machine learning research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.

Royi Rassin, Eran Hirsch, Daniel Glickman, Shauli Ravfogel, Yoav Goldberg, and Gal Chechik.
  Linguistic binding in diffusion models: Enhancing attribute correspondence through attention
  map alignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham
  Khedr, Roman Rädle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, et al. Sam 2: Segment anything in images
  and videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714, 2024.

Tianhe Ren, Shilong Liu, Ailing Zeng, Jing Lin, Kunchang Li, He Cao, Jiayu Chen, Xinyu Huang,
  Yukang Chen, Feng Yan, et al. Grounded sam: Assembling open-world models for diverse visual
  tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14159, 2024.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceed-
  ings, part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.

Wojciech Samek, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Sebastian Lapuschkin, and Klaus-Robert
 Müller. Evaluating the visualization of what a deep neural network has learned. IEEE transactions
 on neural networks and learning systems, 28(11):2660–2673, 2016.

Yujun Shen and Bolei Zhou. Closed-form factorization of latent semantics in gans. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1532–1540, 2021.

Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian Chen,
  Adam Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, Hoagy Cunningham, Nicholas L
  Turner, Callum McDougall, Monte MacDiarmid, C. Daniel Freeman, Theodore R. Sumers,
  Edward Rees, Joshua Batson, Adam Jermyn, Shan Carter, Chris Olah, and Tom Henighan.
  Scaling monosemanticity: Extracting interpretable features from claude 3 sonnet. Trans-
  former Circuits Thread, 2024. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/
  scaling-monosemanticity/index.html.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Richard Tomsett, Dan Harborne, Supriyo Chakraborty, Prudhvi Gurram, and Alun Preece. San-
  ity checks for saliency metrics. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  34(04):6021–6029, Apr. 2020. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i04.6064. URL https://ojs.aaai.
  org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/6064.
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1921–1930, 2023.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.
Qiucheng Wu, Yujian Liu, Handong Zhao, Trung Bui, Zhe Lin, Yang Zhang, and Shiyu Chang.
  Harnessing the spatial-temporal attention of diffusion models for high-fidelity text-to-image syn-
  thesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7766–
  7776, 2023.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Pratyusha Kalluri, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. When and
 why vision-language models behave like bags-of-words, and what to do about it? In The Eleventh
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Maggie Wang, and James Zou. Post-hoc concept bottleneck models. In
 The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=nA5AZ8CEyow.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONTENTS

A 34 visual concepts and full list of concept-words                                                16

B Details of HRV construction                                                                      17
    B.1 Pseudo-code for HRV construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17
    B.2 Role of the argmax operation in HRV construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         18

C Details and additional results on ordered weakening analysis                                     19
    C.1 Prompts used for ordered weakening analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19
    C.2 Additional results on ordered weakening analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       20
    C.3 Comparison with random order weakening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         20
    C.4 Ordered rescaling with varied rescaling factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20

D Details on reducing misinterpretation of polysemous words                                        27
    D.1 Prompts and selected concepts for reducing misinterpretation . . . . . . . . . . . .       27
    D.2 Human evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     30
    D.3 Comparison of concept strengthening and concept adjusting . . . . . . . . . . . .          30

E Details and additional results on image editing                                                  31
    E.1 Detailed explanations on P2P-HRV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31
    E.2 Prompts for image editing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31
    E.3 Metrics for image editing and human evaluation on two image attributes . . . . . .         32
    E.4 Trade-off effect of self-attention replacement in P2P and P2P-HRV . . . . . . . . .        33
    E.5 Additional results on image editing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    36

F Details and additional experiments on multi-concept generation                                   46
    F.1   Comparison with attribute-binding method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     46
    F.2   Additional results on multi-concept generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47

G Additional results using SDXL                                                                    48
    G.1 Additional results on ordered weakening analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       48
    G.2 Ordered weakening analysis with more complex images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          54
    G.3 Reducing misinterpretation in SDXL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       55

H Limitation                                                                                       56

I   Additional analysis: the effect of timesteps on head relevance vectors                         59

J   Extending human visual concepts                                                                59


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      34 VISUAL CONCEPTS AND FULL LIST OF CONCEPT- WORDS
In this paper, we use 34 visual concepts, each paired with 10 concept-words, as shown in Table 3.

                            Table 3: 34 visual concepts and full list of concept-words.

    Visual Concept           Concept-words
    Color                    red, blue, green, yellow, black, white, purple, gray, pink, brown

    Animals                  dog, cat, elephant, lion, bird, fish, butterfly, bear, horse, cow

    Plants                   tree, flower, grass, bush, cactus, vine, oak tree, moss, tulip, rose

    Fruits and Vegetables    apple, banana, carrot, tomato, broccoli, strawberry, potato, orange, lettuce, grapes

    People                   child, woman, man, elderly person, teenager, athlete, farmer, doctor, teacher, tourist

    Vehicles                 car, bicycle, airplane, train, boat, motorcycle, bus, truck, scooter, helicopter

    Buildings                skyscraper, house, church, library, museum, school, hospital, warehouse, apartment, castle

    Furniture                chair, table, sofa, bed, bookshelf, desk, wardrobe, dresser, cabinet, coffee table

                             smartphone, laptop, television, camera, tablet, headphones, microwave, refrigerator, printer,
    Electronics
                             smartwatch

    Clothing                 t-shirt, jeans, jacket, dress, skirt, sweater, shorts, coat, blouse, pants

    Accessories              hat, scarf, sunglasses, watch, belt, necklace, earrings, bracelet, gloves, handbag

    Tools                    hammer, screwdriver, wrench, drill, saw, pliers, tape measure, chisel, level, shovel

    Toys                     doll, teddy bear, puzzle, action figure, toy car, lego, ball, kite, yo-yo, board game

    Food and Beverages       pizza, salad, burger, pasta, soup, coffee, tea, juice, cake, sandwich

    Books and Documents      novel, dictionary, textbook, magazine, newspaper, journal, notebook, manual, report, brochure

                             soccer ball, tennis racket, basketball, baseball glove, hockey stick, golf club, surfboard, ski poles,
    Sports Equipment
                             boxing gloves, cricket bat

    Musical Instruments      guitar, piano, violin, drum, flute, saxophone, trumpet, harp, cello, clarinet

                             latin alphabet, greek alphabet, english alphabet, punctuation marks, mathematical symbols,
    Written Characters
                             uppercase letters, lowercase letters, digits, consonants, vowels

    Shape                    circle, square, triangle, rectangle, oval, hexagon, octagon, star, heart, diamond

    Texture                  smooth, rough, fuzzy, slippery, sticky, soft, hard, bumpy, grainy, glossy

    Size                     small, medium, large, tiny, huge, miniature, gigantic, petite, bulky, massive

    Counting                 one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten

    Image style              abstract, realistic, minimalist, cartoon, vintage, modern, black and white, sepia, surreal, pop art

    Material                 wood, metal, plastic, glass, fabric, paper, stone, rubber, leather, ceramic

    Lighting Conditions      bright, dim, dark, natural light, artificial light, backlit, soft light, harsh light, spotlight, twilight

    Facial Expressions       happy, sad, angry, surprised, confused, laughing, crying, smiling, frowning, disgusted

    Facial Features          eyes, nose, mouth, ears, eyebrows, lips, cheeks, chin, forehead, teeth

    Poses and Gestures       standing, sitting, running, jumping, waving, clapping, pointing, hugging, dancing, kneeling

    Nature Scenes            forest, beach, mountain, river, desert, meadow, waterfall, jungle, lake, canyon

    Weather Conditions       windy, sunny, cloudy, stormy, foggy, rainy, snowy, hail, thunderstorm, drizzle

    Time of Day              morning, noon, afternoon, evening, night, sunrise, sunset, midnight, dusk, dawn

    Geo-locations            New York, Beijing, Paris, Tokyo, London, Sydney, Cairo, Rome, Moscow, Rio de Janeiro

    Brand Logos              Nike, McDonald’s, Coca-Cola, Google, Microsoft, Amazon, Adidas, Samsung, Starbucks, BMW

    Geometric Patterns       stripes, polka dots, chevron, plaid, argyle, houndstooth, lattice, hexagons, spirals, waves


                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     D ETAILS OF HRV CONSTRUCTION
B.1   P SEUDO - CODE FOR HRV CONSTRUCTION

Algorithm 1 HRV construction
Require: N : Number of human-specified visual concepts
Require: T : Total number of generation timesteps
Require: H: Total number of CA heads
Require: P: Set of prompts for random image generation
Require: S: Set of concept-words covering N visual concepts
Require: ψ: CLIP text-encoder
            (h)
Require: lK : Key projection layer for the h-th cross-attention (CA) head
Require: ξ: Function to extract for semantic token embeddings
Require: Q(t,h) : Image query matrix at timestep t and the h-th CA head
 1: Initialize HRV matrix V as a zero matrix 0 ∈ RN ×H
 2: for each prompt P ∈ P do
 3:    while generating a random image with prompt P do
 4:       for all t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
 5:          for all h = 1, 2, . . . , H do
 6:             for all n = 1, 2, . . . , N do
 7:                Sample a concept-word Wn for visual concept Cn from S
                                                                             (h)
 8:                Compute key-projected embedding of Wn : Kn = lK (ψ(Wn )) ∈ R77×F
 9:                Extract semantic token embeddings: K         b n = ξ(Kn )
10:             end for
11:             Concatenate K    b 1, K
                                      b 2, . . . , K
                                                   b N along the token dimension:

                                     K
                                     b = [K
                                          b 1, K            b N ] ∈ RN ′ ×F
                                               b 2, . . . , K                               (2)

12:          Calculate the CA map M           b and Q = Q(t,h) ∈ RR2 ×F :
                                  c using K = K
                                                          !
                                              Q(t,h) · K
                                                       bT       2   ′
                                M = softmax
                                c                 √         ∈ RR ×N                         (3)
                                                    d

13:          Average Mc along the token dimension for multi-token concept-words, resulting in a
                                 2
             matrix of shape RR ×N
14:          Average the resulting matrix over the spatial dimension (R2 ), producing M
                                                                                      f ∈ RN
15:          Apply an argmax operation over the token dimension (N ):
                                               f ← argmax(M)
                                               M          f                                 (4)

16:          Update the h-th column of the HRV matrix V by adding M:
                                                                  f

                                           V[:, h] ← V[:, h] + M
                                                               f                            (5)
17:        end for
18:      end for
19:   end while
20: end for
21: Return: HRV matrix V ∈ RN ×H


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2   ROLE OF THE ARGMAX OPERATION IN HRV CONSTRUCTION

During HRV construction, we apply the argmax operation to the averaged CA maps before using
them to update the HRV matrix (see Eq. 4). This step addresses the varying representation scales
across H CA heads. To demonstrate these scale differences, we compute the averaged L1-norm of
the CA maps before applying the softmax operation (refer to Eq. 3 for notations):
                                                                   !
                                                        (t,h) b T
                                     1       X        Q      · K
                         L(t,h) = 2       ·                √                                 (6)
                                  R · N′ 2 ′                 d
                                            R ,N                       1

In Table 4, we show the mean and standard deviation of L(t,h) across 2100 generation prompts
and 50 timesteps for each CA head in Stable Diffusion v1.4. The CA heads exhibit variation in
their representation scales, with the head having the largest scale showing a mean value 8.1 times
higher than that of the smallest scale. Since the softmax operation maps large-scale values closer to
a Dirac-delta distribution and small-scale values closer to a uniform distribution, it is necessary to
align the scales between CA heads before accumulating the information into the HRV matrix. We
achieve this by simply applying the argmax operation, as shown in Eq. 4, which resolves the issue
of differing representation scales across the CA heads.
As explained in the previous paragraph, the softmax operation introduces an imbalance when sum-
ming without the argmax operation, where CA heads with larger scales produce vectors closer to a
Dirac-delta distribution, while those with smaller scales produce vectors closer to a uniform distribu-
tion. This imbalance favors CA heads with larger representation scales, leading to an overemphasis
on the largest concept chosen by these larger-scale heads compared to the largest concept chosen
by smaller-scale CA heads. For example, as shown in Table 4, the largest concept chosen by the
CA head at [Layer 15-Head 4] would be overemphasized compared to the largest concept chosen
by the CA head at [Layer 16-Head 1]. A similar issue arises when using the max operation instead
of argmax, as the maximum values from larger-scale CA heads are much larger than those from
smaller-scale CA heads. To address this, we apply the argmax operation before summation, ensur-
ing that the largest concept from each CA head contributes a value of 1 to the HRV matrix, regardless
of its scale. This straightforward approach eliminates the bias toward larger-scale CA heads.

Table 4: Mean and standard deviation of the averaged L1-norm, L(t,h) , of CA maps before applying
the softmax operation. The statistics are calculated over 2100 generation prompts and 50 timesteps.
The largest and smallest mean values are highlighted in bold.

                Head 1        Head 2        Head 3        Head 4        Head 5        Head 6        Head 7        Head 8
   Layer 1    1.16 ± 0.16   1.58 ± 0.19   1.08 ± 0.26   1.45 ± 0.18   1.73 ± 0.36   1.75 ± 0.39   1.89 ± 1.26   0.92 ± 0.22
   Layer 2    1.24 ± 0.21   1.19 ± 0.29   1.30 ± 0.24   1.43 ± 0.20   0.99 ± 0.34   1.08 ± 0.24   0.89 ± 0.12   1.07 ± 0.28
   Layer 3    1.48 ± 0.12   2.42 ± 0.35   1.33 ± 0.14   1.95 ± 0.38   2.25 ± 0.47   1.69 ± 0.29   1.51 ± 0.20   1.69 ± 0.38
   Layer 4    1.79 ± 0.25   2.10 ± 0.32   1.10 ± 0.28   1.13 ± 0.14   1.39 ± 0.16   2.18 ± 0.70   1.57 ± 0.24   1.14 ± 0.16
   Layer 5    1.38 ± 0.16   1.55 ± 0.20   1.57 ± 0.36   1.44 ± 0.18   1.35 ± 0.21   1.46 ± 0.33   1.72 ± 0.48   1.30 ± 0.28
   Layer 6    1.65 ± 0.20   1.87 ± 0.56   1.41 ± 0.27   1.50 ± 0.17   2.30 ± 0.29   2.05 ± 0.63   1.65 ± 0.21   1.84 ± 0.62
   Layer 7    1.64 ± 0.52   1.79 ± 0.70   1.30 ± 0.19   1.34 ± 0.22   2.37 ± 0.36   2.37 ± 0.30   3.04 ± 1.33   1.90 ± 0.54
   Layer 8    1.24 ± 0.14   2.06 ± 0.26   1.53 ± 0.20   1.64 ± 0.19   1.28 ± 0.21   1.66 ± 0.22   1.82 ± 0.20   2.14 ± 0.31
   Layer 9    2.10 ± 0.26   2.19 ± 0.29   1.74 ± 0.22   2.10 ± 0.25   1.56 ± 0.21   1.32 ± 0.15   1.61 ± 0.19   2.00 ± 0.28
   Layer 10   1.89 ± 0.23   1.14 ± 0.12   1.47 ± 0.18   2.17 ± 0.21   1.39 ± 0.16   1.50 ± 0.19   2.12 ± 0.21   1.95 ± 0.29
   Layer 11   2.19 ± 0.20   1.64 ± 0.19   2.38 ± 0.25   2.15 ± 0.22   2.36 ± 0.26   2.37 ± 0.38   2.18 ± 0.21   2.15 ± 0.29
   Layer 12   1.26 ± 0.13   2.36 ± 0.62   1.49 ± 0.21   1.49 ± 0.15   1.44 ± 0.18   1.78 ± 0.33   1.26 ± 0.14   2.10 ± 0.28
   Layer 13   1.46 ± 0.21   1.40 ± 0.25   1.65 ± 0.22   1.44 ± 0.18   1.66 ± 0.47   1.51 ± 0.22   1.47 ± 0.22   1.27 ± 0.16
   Layer 14   1.17 ± 0.30   1.19 ± 0.34   1.59 ± 0.49   2.10 ± 1.05   0.98 ± 0.29   1.51 ± 0.34   1.02 ± 0.47   2.35 ± 0.55
   Layer 15   1.20 ± 0.38   2.16 ± 0.46   1.88 ± 0.40   4.11 ± 1.65   1.62 ± 0.39   0.76 ± 0.13   1.84 ± 0.28   1.48 ± 0.37
   Layer 16   0.51 ± 0.04   1.80 ± 0.33   1.14 ± 0.31   1.84 ± 0.33   0.91 ± 0.38   1.15 ± 0.18   1.17 ± 0.11   1.06 ± 0.21


                                                             18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     D ETAILS AND ADDITIONAL RESULTS ON ORDERED WEAKENING ANALYSIS

In this section, we present the generation prompts used for the ordered weakening analysis intro-
duced in Section 4. Additionally, we provide MoRHF and LeRHF plots for 6 more visual concepts,
along with more detailed qualitative results.


C.1   P ROMPTS USED FOR ORDERED WEAKENING ANALYSIS

We conducted the ordered weakening analysis across 9 visual concepts: Animals, Color, Fruits
and Vegetables, Furniture, Geometric Patterns, Image Style, Material, Nature Scenes, and Weather
conditions. The prompt templates and words for each concept are listed in Table 5. For each prompt,
we use 3 random seeds to generate images. For instance, the concept Color used the prompt template
“a {Color} {Objects A}” with 3 random seeds, covering 10 colors and 5 objects. This results in 150
generated images per data point in the line plot shown in Figure 3b of the manuscript.


Table 5: Prompt and word list for ordered weakening analysis. Visual concepts marked with an
asterisk(∗ ) use words that do not overlap with the concept-word list in Table 3.

                                Prompt Template
       Visual Concept
                                Words
                                photo of a {Animals}
       Animals∗
                                • {Animals}: rabbit, frog, sheep, pig, chicken, dolphin, goat, duck, deer, fox

                                a {Color} {Objects}
       Color∗
                                • {Color}: coral, beige, violet, cyan, magenta, indigo, orange, turquoise, teal, khaki
                                • {Objects}: car, bench, bowl, balloon, ball

                                photo of {Fruits and Vegetables}
       Fruits and Vegetables∗
                                • {Fruits and Vegetables}: lemons, blueberries, onions, raspberries, pineapples, cherries,
                                cucumbers, bell peppers, cauliflowers, mangoes

                                photo of a {Furniture}
       Furniture
                                • {Furniture}: bed, table, chair, sofa, recliner, bookshelf, dresser, wardrobe, coffee table,
                                TV stand

                                a {Objects} with a {Geometric Patterns} pattern
       Geometric Patterns
                                • {Objects}: T-shirt, pillow, wallpaper, umbrella, blanket
                                • {Geometric Patterns}: polka-dot, leopard, stripe, greek-key, plaid

                                a {Image Style} style painting of a {Landscapes}
       Image Style
                                • {Image Style}: cubist, pop art, steampunk, impressionist, black-and-white, watercolor,
                                cartoon, minimalist, sepia, sketch
                                • {Landscapes}: castle, mountain, cityscape, farmland, forest

                                a {Objects} made of {Material}
       Material∗
                                • {Objects}: bowl, cup, table, ball, teapot
                                • {Material}: copper, marble, jade, gold, basalt, silver, clay, steel, tin, bronze

                                photo of a {Nature Scenes}
       Nature Scenes∗
                                • {Nature Scenes}: glacier, coral reef, swamp, pond, fjord, rainforest, grassland, marsh,
                                creek, island

                                a {Animals} on a {Weather Conditions}
       Weather Conditions
                                • {Animals}: cat, dog, rabbit, frog, bird
                                • {Weather Conditions}: snowy, rainy, foggy, stormy


                                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   A DDITIONAL RESULTS ON ORDERED WEAKENING ANALYSIS

Figure 11 presents the randomly selected examples of the ordered weakening analysis for 6 addi-
tional visual concepts: Animals, Fruits and Vegetables, Furniture, Material, Nature Scenes, and
Weather Conditions. The MoRHF weakening rapidly removes concept-relevant content, whereas
the LeRHF weakening either preserves the original image longer or removes irrelevant content first.
Figure 12 shows changes in CLIP image-text similarity scores for MoRHF and LeRHF weakening
across these six visual concepts, showing consistent trends. Overall, these results demonstrate how
the head relevance vector (HRV) effectively prioritizes heads based on their relevance to each visual
concept. Additional qualitative examples are provided in Figure 13–15.

C.3   C OMPARISON WITH RANDOM ORDER WEAKENING

As an additional analysis, we compare HRV-based ordered weakening with random order weaken-
ing by calculating the area between the LeRHF and MoRHF line plots. The definitions of MoRHF
and LeRHF for HRV-based ordered weakening are provided in Section 4. For random order weak-
ening, the H cross-attention heads are first ordered randomly, and then MoRHF is defined as the
first-to-last order and LeRHF as the last-to-first order based on this random ordering. A larger
(LeRHF − MoRHF) area indicates that the ordering of CA heads better reflects the relevance of the
corresponding concept. Table 6 compares HRV-based ordered weakening and three random weak-
ening approaches across six visual concepts. The results show that HRV-based ordered weakening
achieves a higher (LeRHF − MoRHF) area, demonstrating its effectiveness in ordering heads based
on their relevance to the given concept.

Table 6: Comparison of (LeRHF − MoRHF) areas between HRV-based ordered weakening and
three random weakening cases across six visual concepts. Larger values indicate better alignment
of CA head ordering with the relevance of the corresponding concept. Random Order - Mean rep-
resents the average value across the three random order cases. The highest value for each concept is
highlighted in bold.

                           Material   Geometric Patterns    Furniture   Image Style   Color   Animals   Average
   Ours (HRV)                6.63           14.75             14.42        9.46       7.33     8.13      10.12
   Random Order - Case 1    -1.94            4.29             -5.48        -1.81      -1.83    3.02      -0.63
   Random Order - Case 2     5.85            0.14             8.38         -1.89      -3.39    0.19      1.55
   Random Order - Case 3     1.68           -3.61             2.99         2.20       5.33     -2.91     0.95
   Random Order - Mean       1.86            0.27             1.96         -0.50      0.04     0.10      0.62



C.4   O RDERED RESCALING WITH VARIED RESCALING FACTORS

In the ordered weakening analysis, we selected −2 as the rescaling factor. This choice is inspired
by P2P-rescaling (Hertz et al., 2022), which uses factors in the range of [−2, 2] to adjust the CA
maps of the U-Net for image editing. To explore the impact of different rescaling factors, we present
two examples in Figures 16-17. A rescaling factor of 1 leaves the original image generation process
unchanged, while factors greater than 1 strengthen the concept and factors smaller than 1 weaken
it. Strengthening produces minimal changes, likely because the concept is already present in the
image. Weakening works effectively with factors below 0, with stronger effects observed as the
factor decreases further.


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Ordered weakening analysis of six additional concepts: qualitative results using Stable
Diffusion v1.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Ordered weakening analysis of six additional concepts: quantitative results using Stable
Diffusion v1.


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Ordered weakening analysis of nine concepts with additional examples: qualitative re-
sults using Stable Diffusion v1 (Part 1 of 3).



                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: Ordered weakening analysis of nine concepts with additional examples: qualitative re-
sults using Stable Diffusion v1 (Part 2 of 3).



                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Ordered weakening analysis of nine concepts with additional examples: qualitative re-
sults using Stable Diffusion v1 (Part 3 of 3).



                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: Ordered rescaling with varying rescaling factors, using HRV for the Color concept and
the generation prompt ‘an orange rose.’ As the rescaling factor decreases, the weakening effect
becomes more pronounced.


Figure 17: Ordered rescaling with varying rescaling factors, using HRV for the Fruits and Vegeta-
bles concept and the generation prompt ‘photo of grapes.’ As the rescaling factor decreases, the
weakening effect becomes more pronounced.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     D ETAILS ON REDUCING MISINTERPRETATION OF POLYSEMOUS WORDS
D.1   P ROMPTS AND SELECTED CONCEPTS FOR REDUCING MISINTERPRETATION

We identified 10 prompts that the text-to-image (T2I) generative model frequently misinterprets and
carefully selected desired and undesired concepts from our 34 visual concepts to help reduce these
misinterpretations. Table 7 lists these 10 prompts, along with the desired and undesired concepts for
each polysemous word. For both Stable Diffusion (SD) and SD-HRV, we generated 100 images us-
ing these 10 prompts with 10 random seeds. The full set of generated images is shown in Figures 18
and 19. We categorized the misinterpretation into three types: (i) containing the undesired meaning,
(ii) missing the desired meaning, and (iii) both, and mark the images showing any of these misin-
terpretations. For the last prompt, ‘A single rusted nut,’ where ‘nut’ was misinterpreted as Food and
Beverages instead of Tools, SD-HRV only partially resolved the issue by removing ‘nut’ as Food
and Beverages but failed to generate it as Tools. This suggests that SD-HRV is not perfect, and there
is still room for improvement in addressing such misinterpretations. Our current implementation for
SD-HRV requires manual settings for the target token, as well as the desired and undesired concepts.
However, our tests with an LLM show that it effectively identifies the inputs needed for SD-HRV,
suggesting that constructing an automatic pipeline using LLMs is feasible.

      Table 7: The list of prompts often misinterpreted, with polysemous words underlined.

                Prompt                               Desired Concept   Undesired Concept
                A vase in lavender color             Color             Plants
                An Apple device on a table           Brand Logos       Fruits and Vegetables
                A rose-colored vase                  Color             Plants
                A single orange-colored plate        Color             Fruits and Vegetables
                A crane flying over a grass field    Animals           Tools
                A bowl in mint color on a table      Color             Fruits and Vegetables
                An olive-colored plate on a table    Color             Fruits and Vegetables
                A plum-colored bowl on a table       Color             Fruits and Vegetables
                An apricot-colored bowl on a table   Color             Fruits and Vegetables
                A single rusted nut                  Tools             Food and Beverages


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 18: Complete set of generated images used for the human evaluation (Part 1 of 2). Images
showing misinterpretations are marked with red boxes.


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 19: Complete set of generated images used for the human evaluation (Part 2 of 2). Images
showing misinterpretations are marked with red boxes.


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2   H UMAN EVALUATION

We evaluate the human perceived misinterpretation rate using Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT),
requiring participants to have over 500 HIT approvals, an approval rate above 98%, and live in
the US. The survey begins with a sample question accompanied by its correct answer, which is
repeated at the end without the answer. Participants who missed the sample question are excluded,
leaving 36 valid responses. The misinterpretation rate measures how often polysemous words are
misinterpreted in the generated images. We use 10 prompts from Table 7 and 10 random seeds to
generate 100 images for each T2I model. This results in 200 total images for comparison between
Stable Diffusion (SD) and SD-HRV (Ours). These images are organized into 10 problem sets, each
containing 20 images generated with the same prompt using either SD or SD-HRV. Each problem
set consists of 4 questions, with each question presenting 5 images generated using the same T2I
model but with different random seeds. Each participant receives 3 randomly selected problem sets,
containing 12 questions and 60 images. Details of the human evaluation setup are summarized
in Table 8. For each question, participants are shown 5 images and asked to count how many
depict the intended meaning of the polysemous word without including the unintended meaning:
“Count how many of the following five images contain {intended meaning of the polysemous word}
but no {unintended meaning of the polysemous word}.” This count is then subtracted from 5 to
determine the count of images with misinterpretations. After applying concept adjusting with our
head relevance vectors on Stable Diffusion, the misinterpretation rate drops from 63.0% to 15.9%.

          Table 8: Overview of human evaluation details for assessing misinterpretation.

   Number of valid                                                       Number of questions
                         Type of questions         Number of questions                         Filtering process
      responses                                                            per participant
                       Counting images that                               12 questions with
         36                                                40                                         O
                     satisfy the given condition                         60 generated images


D.3   C OMPARISON OF CONCEPT STRENGTHENING AND CONCEPT ADJUSTING

We can also apply concept strengthening, instead of concept adjusting, on Stable Diffusion to reduce
misinterpretations. While this approach resolves misinterpretations in some prompts, it is not fully
effective in others. Figure 20 shows two cases: the left column shows where concept strengthening
fails, and the right column shows where it succeeds. In contrast, concept adjusting succeeds in
both cases. This is likely because, in some instances, the undesired concepts are relatively strong,
requiring explicit redirection of the T2I model away from those undesired concepts.


Figure 20: Comparison of concept strengthening and concept adjusting. Concept strengthening fails
in the left case, while concept adjusting succeeds in both cases.


                                                         30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     D ETAILS AND ADDITIONAL RESULTS ON IMAGE EDITING

E.1   D ETAILED EXPLANATIONS ON P2P-HRV

Brief overview of P2P replacement. P2P generates target images using the CA maps calculated
during the source image generation. Given a source prompt P and a target prompt P ∗ , P2P simulta-
neously generates images for both prompts, starting from the same Gaussian noise Z1 and the same
random seed s. The diffusion denoising process unfolds over timesteps t = 1, 2, . . . , T , where t = 1
represents pure noise and t = T the fully denoised image. Let τc denote the CA replacement steps
in P2P. During the first τc timesteps (t ≤ τc ), P2P injects structural information from the source
image into the target by replacing the CA maps of the target prompt with those from the source
prompt. For the remaining timesteps (t > τc ), target image is generated using its own CA maps
without replacement. At each timestep t, if Mt and M∗t represent CA maps from the source and
target prompts, respectively, and Mf t denotes the modified CA maps used for generating the target
image, then Mf t is calculated according to the following equation:

                               f t (Mt , M∗ , t) =       Mt , if t ≤ τc
                               M          t                                                        (7)
                                                         M∗t , otherwise

                                          f t and the target prompt P ∗ to generate target images.
In short, P2P uses these modified CA maps M

P2P-HRV. We enhance P2P by applying concept strengthening on the edited token. Consider
the source prompt P = ‘a blue car’ and the target prompt P ∗ = ‘a red car’. During the first τc
timesteps, P2P replaces the CA maps of P ∗ with those of P while generating the target image.
However, this can lead to a mismatch with the target prompt, as the CA maps for ‘blue’ may interfere
with properly changing the color from ‘blue’ to ‘red.’ To address this, we leave the CA maps for
the edited token (‘red’ in this case) unchanged during the first τc timesteps, while replacing the CA
maps for the other tokens. This ensures that the CA maps for ‘blue’ are excluded from the target
image generation. The calculation of the modified CA maps M    f t is therefore adjusted as

                                                    ∗ h                     ∗
                                           
                                           ch · (Mt )i,j ∗ , if t ≤ τc , j ̸= j
                    f t (Mt , M∗ , t))h ∗ = (Mt )h ∗ ,
                   (M                                         if t ≤ τc , j ∗ = j                  (8)
                               t      i,j
                                            ∗ i,jh
                                            (Mt )i,j ∗ ,      otherwise,

where i represents a pixel value, j a source text token, j ∗ a target text token, h a CA head position
index, and ch = 1 for all h = 1, · · · , 128. The term (M   f t )h ∗ denotes the (i, j ∗ )-component of
                                                                 i,j
the modified h-th CA map (M  f t )h . To further steer the model to focus on the concept being edited,
we apply concept strengthening by setting ch = rh , where rh is the h-th component of the rescale
vector defined in Figure 4 of Section 5. This is applied across all head positions h = 1, · · · , 128.
This final method is referred to as P2P-HRV.

E.2   P ROMPTS FOR IMAGE EDITING

We compare P2P-HRV with several state-of-the-art image editing methods across five editing tar-
gets, including three object attributes—Color, Material, and Geometric Patterns—and two image
attributes—Image Style and Weather Conditions. The prompt template and concept-words for each
visual concept are listed in Table 9. For each prompt, we generate images using 10 random seeds.
For example, in the Color editing task, 10 random seeds are used with the prompt template ‘a
{Color A} {Objects}’ (source prompt) → ‘a {Color B} {Objects}’ (target prompt), covering 10
color pairs (Color A, Color B) and 5 objects (Objects), resulting in 500 generated images for each
T2I model. The words for Color A and Color B are sampled from the concept-word set of the visual
concept Color in the first row of Table 9. The words for Objects are sampled similarly. The same
process is applied to the other editing tasks, except for Weather Conditions, which uses 5 attribute
pairs (Weather Condition A, Weather Condition B), generating 250 images for each T2I model. The
full list of prompts and attribute pairs for all five editing tasks can be found in our core codebase.


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 9: Prompt and word list for image editing

                            Prompt Template
       Visual Concept
                            Words
                            a {Color A} {Objects}
       Color                → a {Color B} {Objects}

                            • {Color}: blue, brown, red, purple, pink, yellow, green, white, gray, black
                            • {Objects}: car, bench, bowl, balloon, ball

                            a {Objects} made of {Material A}
       Material             → a {Objects} made of {Material B}

                            • {Objects}: bowl, cup, table, ball, teapot
                            • {Material}: wood, glass, steel, copper, silver, marble, paper, jade, gold, basalt,
                            granite, clay, leather

                            a {Objects} with a {Geometric Patterns A} pattern
       Geometric Patterns   → a {Objects} with a {Geometric Patterns B} pattern

                            • {Objects}: T-shirt, pillow, wallpaper, umbrella, blanket
                            • {Geometric Patterns}: polka-dot, leopard, stripe, greek-key, plaid

                            a {Image Style A} style painting of a {Landscapes}
       Image Style          → a {Image Style B} style painting of a {Landscapes}

                            • {Image Style}: cubist, pop art, steampunk, impressionist, black-and-white, watercolor,
                            cartoon, minimalist, sepia, sketch
                            • {Landscapes}: castle, mountain, cityscape, farmland, forest

                            a {Animals} on a {Weather Conditions A} day
       Weather Conditions   → a {Animals} on a {Weather Conditions B} day

                            • {Animals}: cat, dog, rabbit, frog, bird
                            • {Weather Conditions}: snowy, rainy, foggy, stormy



E.3   M ETRICS FOR IMAGE EDITING AND HUMAN EVALUATION ON TWO IMAGE ATTRIBUTES

For object attributes (Color, Material, and Geometric Patterns), we evaluated performance using
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and BG-DINO scores. The CLIP score measures the CLIP image-text
similarity between the edited image and the target prompt, assessing how well the edited image
aligns with the target prompt. Meanwhile, the BG-DINO score assesses structure preservation,
focusing only on the non-object parts of the image, as the editing targets are restricted to the objects
themselves. To compute the BG-DINO score, we use Grounded-SAM-2 (Ravi et al., 2024; Ren
et al., 2024) to extract non-object parts from the source and edited images, process these segmented
images with the DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023) model to obtain embeddings, and calculate cosine
similarity between these two embeddings. While prior works (Parmar et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024)
have employed segment-and-embed metrics using LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018) or CLIP embeddings
to focus on specific image regions, we adopt DINOv2 embeddings because the DINOv2 model is
trained with a self-supervised objective that enables it to capture unique image characteristics.
For image attributes (Image Styles and Weather Conditions), we conducted a human evaluation to
assess human preference (HP) scores, rather than using the BG-DINO score, as BG-DINO is not
suitable for evaluating structure preservation in these cases, which involve edits across the entire
image. Using Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT), we measured HP scores while ensuring quality by
requiring participants to have over 500 HIT approvals, an approval rate above 98%, and live in the
US. Each survey begins with a sample question that includes the correct answer, which is repeated
at the end without the answer provided. After filtering out raters who missed the sample question,
we collect 28 valid responses for Image Style and 35 for Weather Conditions.
We use 50 prompt pairs for Image Style and 25 for Weather Conditions, as presented in Table 9. For
human evaluation, we randomly select a seed previously used to measure CLIP image-text similari-
ties. Images are then generated for each prompt pair using P2P-HRV and four other high-performing


                                                             32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


methods, resulting in 250 images for Image Style and 125 for Weather Conditions. This creates 200
binary choice questions for Image Style and 100 for Weather Conditions, with each participant an-
swering 20 randomly selected questions. Details of the human evaluation setup are summarized in
Table 10. In each question, we present participants with two images—one generated using our ap-
proach and the other by a different method—and ask, ‘Which edited image better matches the target
description, while maintaining essential details of the source image?’ If participants cannot decide,
they can select the option ‘Cannot Determine / Both Equally.’ The results are shown in Table 1 of
Section 5.2. The HP-score in Table 1 is calculated by dividing the number of selections for the other
method by the number of selections for ours and multiplying by 100. For example, an HP score
of 35.0 for PnP (Tumanyan et al., 2023) in Weather Conditions editing indicates that our method
received 2.86 (= 100/35.0) times more votes than PnP in this editing task.

           Table 10: Overview of human evaluation details for two image attribute editing.

                        Number of valid                                             Number of questions
      Editing Target                      Type of questions   Number of questions                         Filtering process
                           responses                                                  per participant
                                           Binary choice
       Image Style            28                                     200                    20                   O
                                              question
                                           Binary choice
   Weather Conditions         35                                     100                    20                   O
                                              question


E.4   T RADE - OFF EFFECT OF SELF - ATTENTION REPLACEMENT IN P2P AND P2P-HRV

While P2P primarily focuses on cross-attention (CA) map replacement, it also shows that adjusting
the self-attention (SA) replacement rates can enhance structure preservation. The SA replacement
rate determines the initial timesteps during which the SA maps of the edited images are replaced
with those of the source images. Higher replacement rates enhance structure preservation by incor-
porating more structural information from the source images but can reduce image-text alignment
due to the increased reliance on source image data. This trade-off effect is illustrated in Figure 21,
where both P2P and P2P-HRV are evaluated in Color editing benchmark with varying SA replace-
ment rates. In this figure, BG-DINO measures structure preservation, while the CLIP image-text
similarity measures image-text alignment. Notably, P2P-HRV consistently achieves significantly
higher image-text alignment across all SA replacement rates compared to P2P. This result shows
clear Pareto-optimal improvements of P2P-HRV over P2P. For all editing benchmarks in this paper,
we use an SA replacement rate of 0.4 for P2P and 0.9 for P2P-HRV, as both provide a balanced
trade-off between the two metrics. Examples of images generated with varying SA replacement
rates are shown in Figures 22 and 23.


Figure 21: Trade-off effect of self-attention replacement in P2P and P2P-HRV (Ours). Both methods
are evaluated on the Color editing benchmark with SA replacement rates varying from 0.0 to 1.0.
Red-highlighted SA replacement rates indicate points where P2P and P2P-HRV achieve a balanced
trade-off between the CLIP and BG-DINO scores. These values are used for P2P and P2P-HRV in
all experiments presented in this paper.


                                                              33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 22: Qualitative results of image editing comparing P2P (Hertz et al., 2022) and ours, based
on the variation of self-attention replacement rate (Part 1 of 2).


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 23: Qualitative results of image editing comparing P2P (Hertz et al., 2022) and ours, based
on the variation of self-attention replacement rate (Part 2 of 2).


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.5   A DDITIONAL RESULTS ON IMAGE EDITING

Figures 24–34 present additional qualitative results of image editing for three object attributes and
two image attributes.


Figure 24: Qualitative results of image editing for three object attributes and two image at-
tributes (Part 1 of 2).


Figure 25: Qualitative results of image editing for three object attributes and two image at-
tributes (Part 2 of 2).


                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 26: Qualitative results of image editing for the visual concept Color (Part 1 of 2). The results
were generated using 10 random seeds and were used in the quantitative evaluation.



                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 27: Qualitative results of image editing for the visual concept Color (Part 2 of 2). The results
were generated using 10 random seeds and were used in the quantitative evaluation.



                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 28: Qualitative results of image editing for the visual concept Material (Part 1 of 2). The
results were generated using 10 random seeds and were used in the quantitative evaluation.



                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 29: Qualitative results of image editing for the visual concept Material (Part 2 of 2). The
results were generated using 10 random seeds and were used in the quantitative evaluation.



                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 30: Qualitative results of image editing for the visual concept Geometric Pat-
terns (Part 1 of 2). The results were generated using 10 random seeds and were used in the quanti-
tative evaluation.


                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 31: Qualitative results of image editing for the visual concept Geometric Pat-
terns (Part 2 of 2). The results were generated using 10 random seeds and were used in the quanti-
tative evaluation.


                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 32: Qualitative results of image editing for the visual concept Image Style (Part 1 of 2). The
results were generated using 10 random seeds and were used in the quantitative evaluation.



                                                 43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 33: Qualitative results of image editing for the visual concept Image Style (Part 2 of 2). The
results were generated using 10 random seeds and were used in the quantitative evaluation.



                                                 44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 34: Qualitative results of image editing for the visual concept Weather Conditions. The
results were generated using 10 random seeds and were used in the quantitative evaluation.



                                               45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     D ETAILS AND ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS ON MULTI - CONCEPT
      GENERATION

Attend-and-Excite (A&E) excites signals for subjects using averaged cross-attention maps, which
are averaged across different CA layers. A&E-HRV extends this by using HRVs to re-weight each
cross-attention map before averaging. Both A&E and A&E-HRV are applied only to noun tokens, as
in the original Attend-and-Excite. In our multi-concept generation experiments, we used two types
of prompts: (i) ‘a {Animal A} and a {Animal B}’ (Type 1) and (ii) ‘a {Color A} {Animal A} and a
{Color B} {Animal B}’ (Type 2). Table 11 lists the 12 animals and 10 colors used to generate these
prompts, with the full prompt list available in our core codebase.

                           Table 11: Word list for multi-concept generation

      Visual Concept     Words
      Animals            dog, cat, squirrel, fox, lion, frog, deer, penguin, bird, horse, bear, fish
      Color              blue, brown, red, purple, pink, yellow, green, white, gray, black


F.1   C OMPARISON WITH ATTRIBUTE - BINDING METHOD

In this section, we compare A&E-HRV with the recently proposed attribute-binding method, Syn-
Gen (Rassin et al., 2024). Since SynGen requires attribute words to be included in the prompt, we
focus our comparison on Type 2 prompts. The quantitative results, shown in Table 12, show that our
approach consistently outperforms SynGen across all three metrics–full prompt similarity, minimum
object similarity, and BLIP-score–by margins of 2.8% to 5.8%. The qualitative results in Figure 35
show that SynGen often fails to generate both objects, while our approach generates object concepts
more reliably.

Table 12: Type 2 results: Multi-concept generation using SynGen and our method. The percentage
in parentheses indicates the improvement over the result of SynGen.

                                  Type2: a {Color A} {Animal A} and a {Color B} {Animal B}
                Method
                                       Full Prompt          Min. Object        BLIP-score
                SynGen                   0.3820                0.1960             0.6398
                A&E-HRV (Ours)       0.3971 (+4.0%)        0.2073 (+5.8%)    0.6580 (+2.8%)


Figure 35: Qualitative comparison of the results for Type 2 prompts between SynGen (Rassin et al.,
2024) and ours.


                                                      46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2   A DDITIONAL RESULTS ON MULTI - CONCEPT GENERATION

Figure 36 presents additional qualitative results of multi-concept generation for both Type 1 and
Type 2 prompts.


Figure 36: Qualitative comparison of the results for Type 1 and Type 2 prompts. We compare
Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), Structured Diffusion (Feng et al., 2022), and Attend-and-
Excite (Chefer et al., 2023) with ours.


                                               47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G     A DDITIONAL RESULTS USING SDXL
G.1   A DDITIONAL RESULTS ON ORDERED WEAKENING ANALYSIS

Figures 37–42 present additional results from the ordered weakening analysis on Stable Diffusion
XL (SDXL) (Podell et al., 2024).


Figure 37: Ordered weakening analysis using SDXL: Change in CLIP image-text similarity score
as weakening progresses in either MoRHF or LeRHF order.


                                               48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 38: Ordered weakening analysis using SDXL: Generated images as weakening progresses in
either MoRHF or LeRHF order (Part 1 of 5).



                                               49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 39: Ordered weakening analysis using SDXL: Generated images as weakening progresses in
either MoRHF or LeRHF order (Part 2 of 5).



                                               50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 40: Ordered weakening analysis using SDXL: Generated images as weakening progresses in
either MoRHF or LeRHF order (Part 3 of 5).



                                               51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 41: Ordered weakening analysis using SDXL: Generated images as weakening progresses in
either MoRHF or LeRHF order (Part 4 of 5).



                                               52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 42: Ordered weakening analysis using SDXL: Generated images as weakening progresses in
either MoRHF or LeRHF order (Part 5 of 5).



                                               53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.2   O RDERED WEAKENING ANALYSIS WITH MORE COMPLEX IMAGES

In this section, we present two examples of ordered weakening analysis applied to more complex
images using the prompts ‘a plastic car melting’ and ‘a metal chair rusting.’ Before starting the
analysis, we introduce a new concept, Physical and Chemical Processes, into our set of 34 concepts,
adding five corresponding concept-words: melting, rusting, boiling, freezing, and burning. We
then re-compute HRV vectors. In the top example of Figure 43, we perform ordered weakening
analysis with the generation prompt ‘a plastic car melting’ by weakening either the Physical and
Chemical Processes or the Vehicles concept. When weakening Physical and Chemical Processes
in MoRHF order, the concept of ‘melting’ is eliminated first, while the ‘car’ persists for a longer
period. In contrast, when weakening Vehicles, the concept of ‘car’ is eliminated first, and ‘melting’
is preserved longer. Notably, the entangled property ‘plastic’ is initially affected when weakening
‘melting,’ but it is removed more slowly from the image. This is even more apparent in the bottom
example of Figure 43, where weakening Physical and Chemical Processes eliminates ‘rusting’ first,
while the concept of ‘metal’ is retained longer. These examples demonstrate that our HRV and
ordered weakening analysis work well with more complex images.


Figure 43: Ordered weakening analysis with more complex images: Generated images as weakening
progresses in either MoRHF or LeRHF order using SDXL.


                                                 54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.3   R EDUCING MISINTERPRETATION IN SDXL

SDXL significantly improves image generation performance compared to SD v1 models, thanks to
its three times larger U-Net backbone and two CLIP text encoders. It also reduces misinterpretation
issues with prompts from Table 7, but the problem is not entirely resolved, as undesired concepts still
appear in generated images. For instance, among 100 images generated using these prompts, nearly
all included the desired concepts, but about 35 also contained undesired concepts. Figure 44 illus-
trates this with two prompts: ‘An Apple device on a table’ and ‘A rose-colored vase.’ With SDXL,
desired concepts (Apple device or rose-colored vase) are consistently generated; however, one image
for the first prompt included the undesired concept of a fruit apple, and nine images for the second
prompt included the undesired concept of a flower rose. In both cases, SDXL-HRV (SDXL with
concept adjusting) effectively reduces misinterpretation by preventing the generation of undesired
concepts.
In Figure 44, SDXL-HRV images for ‘A rose-colored vase’ tend to exhibit rose coloring across most
parts of the images. We suspect this issue is related to the normalization of HRV vectors, which are
currently normalized to have an L1 norm equal to their length, H. This approach is based on the
fact that a vector with all elements set to one also has an L1 norm of H, and using this vector as a
rescaling factor does not alter the image generation process. For SD v1.4, H = 128, but for SDXL,
H = 1300, which may cause some HRV vector elements to become too large when rescaling CA
maps. One possible solution is to clamp each HRV element to an upper bound b, replacing any value
greater than b with b. Future work will explore this and other normalization strategies to identify
approaches better suited to high H value.


Figure 44: Two examples on misinterpretation reduction in SDXL. Images showing misinterpreta-
tions are marked with red boxes.


                                                  55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    L IMITATION
We examined 34 concepts listed in Table 3 and identified two types of failure cases. The first
type stems from limitations in the underlying T2I model, where it struggles to correctly understand
certain concepts. For example, in Counting and Lighting Conditions, the model fails to generate
accurate outputs, as shown in Figure 45. The second type is related to our HRV or concept-words.
Here, the T2I model correctly understands the concept, but MoRHF and LeRHF weakening fail to
produce meaningful differences. An example of this is Facial Expression, with related failure cases
shown in Figure 46.
In Figures 45-46, we generate images using SDXL with the same random seed for three prompts
in each concept case. For the first type of failure, shown in Figure 45, the model often struggles
to understand certain concepts, failing to distinguish between words like ‘three’ and ‘four’ in the
Counting examples or ‘natural light,’ ‘spotlight,’ and ‘dark light’ in the Lighting Conditions exam-
ples. These issues make it difficult to assess whether HRVs identify appropriate CA head orderings
relevant to these concepts, as the base model, SDXL, does not reliably generate the intended out-
puts. We believe such failures could be addressed in the future with more advanced T2I models.
For the second type of failure, shown in Figure 46, SDXL correctly generates facial expressions that
match the prompts. However, HRV fails to find meaningful CA head orderings, preventing it from
distinguishing between MoRHF and LeRHF weakening. This may be due to the concept-words
used for Facial Expression being too broad to represent the concept effectively. The concept-words
for Facial Expression include Happy, Sad, Angry, Surprised, Confused, Laughing, Crying, Smiling,
Frowning, Disgusted. We will further explore this limitation in future work.


                                                56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 45: First type of failure cases: The baseline T2I model, SDXL, struggles to correctly un-
derstand the concepts, making it difficult to assess whether HRVs identify appropriate CA head
orderings relevant to the corresponding concepts. The images are generated with SDXL.


                                               57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 46: Second type of failure cases: Our HRV fails to identify the relevant CA head order-
ing for the corresponding concept, preventing it from distinguishing between MoRHF and LeRHF
weakening. The images are generated with SDXL.


                                               58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I   A DDITIONAL ANALYSIS : THE EFFECT OF TIMESTEPS ON HEAD RELEVANCE
    VECTORS

In this section, we further analyze 1700 vectors (34 visual concepts×50 timesteps) obtained from
Section 6.2. We start by reshaping these vectors into a tensor with dimensions 34×50×128, where
34 represents visual concepts, 50 represents timesteps, and 128 represents the number of CA head
positions in the T2I model. We then average this tensor over the timestep dimension to obtain 34
vectors, each with a size of 128, corresponding to the head relevance vectors (HRVs). Similarly,
averaging over the visual concept dimension yields 50 vectors, also of size 128, which we refer to
as timestep vectors. To examine directional variations in the 34 HRVs, we compute and visualize
their cosine similarities in Figure 47a. We also visualize the cosine similarities between the 50
timestep vectors in Figure 47b. Compared to Figure 47a, Figure 47b shows almost no directional
variation between the 50 timestep vectors (note the colorbar scale). This supports the conclusion of
Section 6.2, where we suggested that the generation timesteps do not significantly affect the head
relevance patterns of each visual concept.


(a) Cosine similarities of 34 head relevance vec-        (b) Cosine similarities of 50 timestep vectors.
tors (HRVs).

Figure 47: Cosine similarity plots of (a) 34 head relevance vectors and (b) 50 timestep vectors.
Visual concepts are clearly separated, while timesteps are not.


J   E XTENDING HUMAN VISUAL CONCEPTS
In this paper, we use 34 visual concepts to construct head relevance vectors (HRVs), but users
can flexibly add or remove visual concepts as needed. In this section, we explore the effect of
adding a new visual concept to the existing set of 34. To demonstrate this, we add the concept
Tableware, creating a set of 35 extended visual concepts. We then construct HRVs individually for
both the 34-concept and 35-concept sets and compare them through visualization. Stable Diffusion
v1 has 16 multi-head CA layers, each containing 8 CA heads, for a total of 128 heads, making
HRV visualization straightforward. In Figure 49, we visualize each set of HRVs, with darker colors
representing higher values. The two sets of HRVs for the original 34 visual concepts (Figure 48a
and Figure 48b) are highly similar. This indicates that adding the new concept Tableware does not
significantly alter the patterns of HRVs for each concept. Additionally, Figure 49 shows 2 examples
of ordered weakening analysis with the added concept Tableware, demonstrating that the HRV for
the new concept Tableware is effective.


                                                    59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 (a) Visualization of HRVs for 34 visual concepts        (b) Visualization of HRVs for 35 visual concepts

Figure 48: Visualization of head relevance vectors (HRVs) for (a) 34 visual concepts used in this
paper, and (b) 35 extended visual concepts (the original 34 visual concepts plus the Tableware con-
cept). HRVs for (a) and (b) are constructed individually (Best viewed with zoom).


Figure 49: Ordered weakening analysis for Tableware concept: Generated images as weakening
progresses in either MoRHF or LeRHF order using Stable Diffusion v1.4.


                                                    60
