Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONFORMAL S TRUCTURED P REDICTION
 Botong Zhang, Shuo Li & Osbert Bastani
 Computer and Information Science
 University of Pennsylvania
 {bzhang16, lishuo1, obastani}@seas.upenn.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         Conformal prediction has recently emerged as a promising strategy for quanti-
         fying the uncertainty of a predictive model; these algorithms modify the model
         to output sets of labels that are guaranteed to contain the true label with high
         probability. However, existing conformal prediction algorithms have largely tar-
         geted classification and regression settings, where the structure of the prediction
         set has a simple form as a level set of the scoring function. However, for complex
         structured outputs such as text generation, these prediction sets might include a
         large number of labels and therefore be hard for users to interpret. In this paper,
         we propose a general framework for conformal prediction in the structured pre-
         diction setting, that modifies existing conformal prediction algorithms to output
         structured prediction sets that implicitly represent sets of labels. In addition, we
         demonstrate how our approach can be applied in domains where the prediction
         sets can be represented as a set of nodes in a directed acyclic graph; for instance,
         for hierarchical labels such as image classification, a prediction set might be a
         small subset of coarse labels implicitly representing the prediction set of all their
         more fine-descendants. We demonstrate how our algorithm can be used to con-
         struct prediction sets that satisfy a desired coverage guarantee in several domains.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently proven to be highly effective at solving challenging
prediction problems. Despite this progress, a key challenge is the difficulty building reliable systems
out of DNNs since they are intrinsically prone to error. One way to address this challenge is to
use uncertainty quantification to determine when the model’s predictions may be unreliable. As
a consequence, uncertainty quantification has been a key strategy for improving reliability when
integrating DNNs into broader systems or when interfacing with human experts.
Conformal prediction has emerged as a promising strategy for uncertainty quantification (Vovk et al.,
2005; Angelopoulos et al., 2023). This technique replaces a model f : X → Y with a conformal
predictor h : X → 2Y ; given an input x ∈ X , h(x) ⊆ Y is a set of labels that captures the
uncertainty of the model. One of the key advantages of conformal prediction is that it provides
a coverage guarantee—roughly speaking, h(x) is guaranteed to contain the ground truth label y ∗
corresponding to x with high probability under standard assumptions. This strategy provides the
user with an interpretable form of uncertainty quantification. For instance, suppose a robot is using
an object detector to identify obstacles; if we apply conformal prediction to the object detector, then
the robot could avoid the entire prediction set of obstacles to ensure safety with high probability.
Most existing conformal prediction algorithms target the classification and regression settings, where
prediction sets have simple structures—e.g., a subset of labels in classification, or prediction inter-
vals in regression. However, many practical prediction problems involve far more complex struc-
tured outputs. While we can naı̈vely apply existing algorithms to these problems, the resulting pre-
diction sets ignore the structure of the label space, which can lead to prediction sets that are large and
uninterpretable. As a consequence, there has been recent interest in developing conformal prediction
algorithms that are tailored to structured prediction; however, existing approaches have all targeted
specific domains, such as code generation (Khakhar et al., 2023) and question answering (Mohri &
Hashimoto, 2024; Quach et al., 2024), and do not provide general algorithms.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Standard Conformal Prediction

                       balance beam, horizontal
                       bar, parallel bars

                    Conformal Structured Prediction

                       gymnastic apparatus


                   (a) Example                                             (b) Overview

Figure 1: (a) Structured prediction sets improve interpretability while maintaining the coverage
guarantee. In this example, the standard conformal prediction set (top) is guaranteed to include the
true label “balance beam” with high probability, but may be more difficult to interpret for some-
one without gymnastics knowledge. In contrast, the structured prediction set (bottom) can be more
interpretable since it contains only a single coarse-grained label “gymnastic apparatus”, while guar-
anteeing that the true label is descendant of this label in the label hierarchy with high probability.
The error level for both the standard conformal prediction and conformal structured prediction is
0.05 (i.e., the desired coverage level is 0.95). See Section 5.2 and Appendix A.3 for more examples.
(b) An overview of our framework. To estimate the conformal predictor parameter τ , our algorithm
uses a statistical test ϕ designed to either establish marginal or PAC coverage guarantees based on
the given calibration set. It iterates until an invalid τi is identified and returns the last valid threshold
τi−1 . This computation assumes given a subroutine to compute the optimal prediction set ỹ. In gen-
eral, any optimizer can be used in conjunction with our framework; for the case where the prediction
sets are derived from a DAG structure (including hierarchical labels), we show how the optimization
problem can be encoded as an integer program.



We propose a novel framework for conformal structured prediction. Our goal is to generate struc-
tured prediction sets, which are interpretable representations of a potentially large number of con-
crete labels. For instance, in image classification, a structured prediction set might be a small set of
coarse-grained labels that implicitly represent the set of all fine-grained labels that are leaf nodes of
the coarse-grained labels in the label hierarchy (see Figure 1a). Alternatively, for a question answer-
ing task where the answer is a year, a structured prediction set might be a small set of intervals.
As with traditional conformal prediction, our framework considers a search space over conformal
predictors parameterized by a single real number τ ∈ R, which intuitively says that the prediction
set should include labels with predicted probability at least τ . However, whereas in traditional con-
formal prediction, the search space over τ is monotone (i.e., coverage always decreases in τ whereas
prediction set size always decreases in τ ), this is no longer the case in the structured prediction set
setting. Existing conformal prediction algorithms make significant use of this monotonic structure to
enable efficient estimation of the optimal choice of τ . Our framework modifies these existing algo-
rithms using an approach inspired by techniques from the learn-then-test framework (Angelopoulos
et al., 2022) (which is designed to handle potential lack of monotonicity due to non-standard choice
of loss function). Roughly speaking, our algorithm searches sequentially over the space of candi-
date τ and returns as soon as it finds one that is invalid. For achieving marginal coverage guarantees,
the correctness guarantee follows directly from learn-then-test. We extend these ideas to the setting
of probably approximately correct (PAC) (or training conditional) coverage guarantees (Vovk, 2012;
Park et al., 2020). In particular, we provide a strategy that can be applied to obtaining PAC prediction
sets in the structured prediction setting.
Next, we instantiate our framework in the context of a general class of structured prediction sets. We
consider structured prediction sets that are subsets of a directed acyclic graph (DAG). For instance,
the DAG might represent the label hierarchy, where the internal nodes are coarse-grained labels and
the leaf nodes are fine-grained labels. Then, a structured prediction set might be a small subset
of coarse-grained labels, which corresponds to the prediction set of fine-grained labels that are de-
scendants of those coarse-grained labels. In this setting, we describe how to compute the optimal
structured prediction set for a given value of τ by expressing the optimization problem as an integer
program. This algorithm can then be used both in conjunction with our framework to estimate the
optimal parameter τ , as well as during inference to compute structured prediction sets.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We empirically evaluate our approach in five domains: (i) predicting integers represented by a list of
MNIST digits (LeCun & Cortes, 2010), where the structured prediction sets are ranges, (ii) hierar-
chical image classification using the ImageNet dataset (Deng et al., 2009), (iii) a question answering
benchmark based on the SQuAD dataset (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) restricted to questions where the
answers are years, and the structured prediction sets are unions of a small number of intervals, (iv) a
Python code generation task based on the MBPP dataset (Austin et al., 2021), where the structured
prediction sets consist of partial programs (i.e., programs with holes indicating portions that remain
to be implemented), and (v) predicting emotion labels in a given piece of text based on the GoEmo-
tions dataset (Demszky et al., 2020). Our experiments demonstrate how our approach can be used
to construct small prediction sets while satisfying a desired coverage guarantee (marginal or PAC).
Contributions. We propose the first general framework (summarized in Figure 1b) for conformal
prediction applied to structured label spaces. We assume the user provides a search space of inter-
pretable structures that implicitly represent prediction sets of labels. Then, our framework constructs
a conformal predictor that is guaranteed to achieve the desired coverage guarantee (either marginal
or PAC) while attempting to minimize prediction set size.
Related work. Traditional conformal prediction algorithms provide a marginal coverage guaran-
tee (Vovk et al., 2005; Angelopoulos et al., 2023), which says that assuming examples are drawn
i.i.d. from the data distribution, then the prediction set contains the true label with high probability:
                                  PZ∼Dn ,(x,y∗ )∼D [y ∗ ∈ hZ (x)] ≥ 1 − ϵ,
where x is the input, y ∗ is the true label, D is the data distribution, Z is the calibration set provided to
the conformal prediction algorithm, hZ is the conformal predictor constructed using Z, and ϵ ∈ R>0
is a given error bound. Alternate algorithms disentangle the probability over Z from the one over
(x, y ∗ ) to provide probably approximately correct (PAC) (or training conditional) coverage:
                          PZ∼Dn P(x,y∗ )∼D [y ∗ ∈ hZ (x)] ≥ 1 − ϵ ≥ 1 − δ.


Conformal prediction has recently been applied to deep learning, including image classification (An-
gelopoulos et al., 2023; Park et al., 2020), anomaly detection (Li et al., 2022a), object detection (Li
et al., 2022b; Andéol et al., 2023), semantic segmentation (Angelopoulos et al., 2022), and question
answering (Li et al., 2024). However, in these domains, the label space is either a finite set (i.e.,
classification) or a real number (i.e., regression), or a relatively simple product of the two. For in-
stance, in object detection, the label is a list of tuples (x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 , c), where (x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 ) ∈ R4
are real-valued coordinates and c ∈ C is an object category. We can straightforwardly quantify
uncertainty separately for each component using traditional conformal prediction.
However, in many domains, we may require alternative representations of the prediction sets to
ensure interpretability. For instance, a natural way to represent uncertainty for hierarchical label
spaces is to use coarse-grained labels (see Figure 1a for an example). Mortier et al. (2022) takes
this approach, but unlike our method, they do not offer formal coverage guarantees. Furthermore,
their goal is to find the prediction set with the highest probability mass, whereas our goal is to find
the smallest possible prediction sets under a constraint that the coverage rate meets a desired level.
Therefore, their approach sometimes obtains significantly lower coverage (e.g., ≤ 50%), whereas
our results demonstrate that our approach achieves the desired coverage rate. Khakhar et al. (2023)
provides a conformal prediction algorithm where the true label is a program, and the prediction set
is implicitly represented as a “partial program” where certain portions have been omitted. Quach
et al. (2024) and Mohri & Hashimoto (2024) adopt similar strategies for certain question answering
tasks. However, these existing approaches are highly specialized to a specific form of prediction
set, whereas our approach is general. Moreover, Quach et al. (2024) still use sets of samples, which
may suffer from lack of interpretability. Mohri & Hashimoto (2024)’s algorithm is closely related to
the learn-then-test algorithm. However, they do not consider a tree structure of structured prediction
sets; instead, they only consider a single sequence of increasingly coarse-grained labels. Thus, their
approach is not applicable to our problem.
Next, Angelopoulos et al. (2024) considers hierarchical image classification in ImageNet. However,
their goal is to minimize more general risk functions instead of prediction set size, whereas our
goal is to extend conformal prediction to structured prediction. In particular, their purpose is to
control an alternative risk function based on the hierarchical label structure, while still constructing
traditional prediction sets. Indeed, we believe that our approach could be combined with theirs to
further improve interpretability of the resulting prediction sets. For this specific task, their algorithm


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


can be viewed as producing a structured prediction set; however, even in this context, their search
is constrained to only parent nodes of the class with the highest estimated probability ŷ, whereas
our search space is much more general (and can be much more flexibly specified by the user).
Angelopoulos et al. (2021) proposes an algorithm that introduces regularization to encourage smaller
and stable sets. However, the goal of their paper is to reduce the average prediction set size by adding
a regularization term, whereas our goal is to compute structured prediction sets.
More broadly, conformal prediction has been worked with other kinds of structure. For instance,
Lee et al. (2024) and Dunn et al. (2022) address cases where inputs are grouped and where repeated
measurements are present in the dataset, respectively. However, these are examples of structure in
the input space instead of the label space. Finally, Angelopoulos et al. (2022) studies minimizing
risk functions other than prediction set size; though they are studying a very different problem, their
techniques can also be applied to our problem when aiming to achieve marginal guarantees. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to adapt these techniques to provide PAC guarantees.

2    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
As with existing conformal prediction algorithms, we assume that the model f : X → Y is implicitly
represented by a scoring function g : X ×Y → R, so f (x) = arg maxy∈Y g(x, y). Typically, g(x, y)
is the predicted probability that the true label for input x is y, but we make no assumptions about g.
Given g, we consider a space of structured prediction sets Ỹ, along with a mapping γ : Ỹ → 2Y
such that γ(ỹ) ⊆ Y is a prediction set of labels, and a size function σ : Ỹ → R measuring the size
of a structured prediction set. We consider conformal predictors hτ : X → Ỹ of the form
                                                        g(x, y) · 1(y ∈ γ(ỹ)) ≥ τ,
                                                    X
                   hτ (x) = arg min σ(ỹ) subj. to                                               (1)
                               ỹ∈Ỹ                 y∈Y

where τ ∈ R is a real-valued parameter that we need to estimate. In other words, we want the
smallest prediction set according to the size function σ that achieves cumulative score at least τ .
Intuitively, if g(x, y) is the predicted probability of y given x, then the constraint says that ỹ covers
τ fraction of labels y ∈ Y weighted by their probability g(x, y). In general, while g does not need
to be a predicted probability, our approach may be more effective when this is the case.
The main challenge is estimating the parameter τ . We assume given a held-out calibration set
Z ⊆ (X × Y)n of i.i.d. samples (x, y ∗ ) ∼ D from the underlying data distribution D. Then, we
want to choose the smallest possible τ subject to some kind of coverage guarantee; i.e., y ∗ ∈ hτ (x)
with high probability assuming (x, y ∗ ) ∼ D. Specifically, we consider two coverage guarantees.
First, we consider a marginal guarantee
                            P(x,y∗ )∼D,Z∼Dn [y ∗ ∈ γ(hτ̂ (Z) (x))] ≥ 1 − ϵ,
where τ̂ : (X × Y)∗ → R is an estimator outputting a choice of τ for a given Z ∈ (X × Y)∗ ,
and ϵ ∈ R>0 is a given error bound (note that τ depends implicitly on ϵ). Second, we consider a
probably approximate correct (PAC) guarantee (or training-conditional guarantee)
                      PZ∼Dn [P(x,y∗ )∼D [y ∗ ∈ γ(hτ̂ (Z) (x))] ≥ 1 − ϵ] ≥ 1 − δ,
where ϵ, δ ∈ R>0 are given error bounds. Intuitively, PAC guarantees “disentangle” the probability
over the calibration set Z and the current example (x, y ∗ ); they are useful when the goal is to provide
a 1 − ϵ guarantee across all predictions with high probability.
Finally, given τ , computing hτ is nontrivial in general. We can typically formulate the computation
of hτ as a constraint solving problem such as an integer program; we describe how to do so for a
special case in Section 3. Our estimators τ̂ require that hτ is computed using the same algorithm
on the calibration examples as on the new examples, but do not make any other assumptions; for
instance, it could rely on heuristics instead of finding the global optimum.

3    A LGORITHMS FOR S TRUCTURED C ONFORMAL P REDICTION
Our algorithm considers a finite set of candidate thresholds Tϵ∗ ⊆ R. We assume that T =
(τ1 , τ2 , ..., τk ) is ordered by τ1 > τ2 > ... > τk . We assume these thresholds are in descending


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


order (i.e., from least to most desirable). At a high level, our algorithm will consider each candidate
threshold τi in sequence, using a statistical test in conjunction with the calibration set Z to determine
if τi is valid. We use ϕ : (X ×Y)∗ ×R → {0, 1} to denote this statistical test; its first argument is the
calibration set Z, its second argument is a candidate threshold τ , and its output is ϕ(Z, τ ) = 1 if it
determines τ is valid and ϕ(Z, τ ) = 0 otherwise. We provide tests for marginal and PAC coverage.
Now, our algorithm considers increasingly desirable candidate thresholds τi ; for each one, it runs
the statistical test ϕ(Z, τi ) to determine whether τi is valid. The search halts when ϕ(Z, τi ) = 0
for the first time at τi , and the algorithm returns τi−1 . Formally, given an error level ϵ ∈ [0, 1] and
m ∈ N, our algorithm returns the threshold τ̂ (Z) = τî(Z,ϕ) , where
                                                              i
                                                                      1(ϕ(Z, τi′ ) = 1).
                                                              ^
                         î(Z, ϕ) = arg max i subj. to
                                      i∈[k]                   i′ =1
In other words, î is the largest i ∈ [k] before which all τi′ ’s are valid. Below, we describe specific
implementations of the statistical test ϕ for marginal and PAC guarantees.
Marginal guarantees. Given ϵ ∈ [0, 1], we use the following statistical test:
                                                                             

               ϕϵmarginal (Z, τ ) = 1        1(y∗ ̸∈ γ(hτ (x))) ≤ (n + 1)ϵ .
                                        X

                                         (x,y ∗ )∈Z
We have the following marginal coverage guarantee:
Theorem 3.1. The estimator τ̂ (Z, ϵ) = τî(Z,ϕϵ ) satisfies
                                                   marginal

                           PZ∼Dn ,(x,y∗ )∼D [y ∗ ∈ γ(hτ̂ (Z,ϵ) (x))] ≥ 1 − ϵ.

Proof. This result follows from the learn-then-test algorithm (Angelopoulos et al., 2022).

PAC guarantees. Given ϵ, δ ∈ [0, 1], consider the statistical test
                                                                       

                     PAC (Z, τ ) = 1             1(y∗ ̸∈ γ(hτ (x))) ≤ ℓ̂ ,
                                           X
                    ϕϵ,δ              
                                              (x,y ∗ )∈Z
where
                                ℓ̂ = arg max h subj. to F (ℓ; n, ϵ) < δ,
                                       ℓ∈N
                     Pℓ     n j
                                       n−j
where F (ℓ; n, p) =     j=0 j p (1 − p)    < δ is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of
the random variable Binomial(n, p). Then, we have the following guarantee:
Theorem 3.2. The estimator τ̂ (Z, ϵ, δ) = τî(Z,ϕϵ,δ ) satisfies
                                                       PAC

                    PZ∼Dn [P(x,y∗ )∼D [y ∗ ∈ γ(hτ̂ (Z,ϵ,δ) (x))] ≥ 1 − ϵ] ≥ 1 − δ.

Proof. Let i0 be the smallest index of τi such that τi is invalid (i.e., τ ̸∈ Tϵ∗ ), and let τ0 = τi0 .
Also, let z = 1(y ∗ ̸∈ hτ0 (x)); note that z is a function of the random variable (x, y ∗ ) ∼ D, and in
particular z ∼ Bernoulli(µ) with µ = P[y ∗ ̸∈ hτ0 (x)]. Since τ0 is invalid, we have µ > ϵ.
Next, the sum in ϕϵ,δ     PAC is a sum of i.i.d. samples from Bernoulli(µ).   In particular, let Z =
{(xi , yi∗ )}ni=1 , let zi = 1(yi∗ ̸∈ γ(hτ0 (x0 ))), and let b =
                                                                 Pn
                                                                  i=1 zi ; note that b is a sum of n
i.i.d. Bernoulli random variables with mean µ, so b ∼ Binomial(n, µ). Now, ϕϵ,δ PAC has form

                                      PAC (Z, τ ) = 1) = 1(b ≤ ℓ̂),
                                   1(ϕϵ,δ
so
                   P(ϕϵ,δ
                       PAC (Z, τ ) = 1) = P(b ≤ ℓ̂) = F (ℓ̂; n, µ) ≤ F (ℓ̂; n, ϵ) < δ,
where the first inequaltiy follows since the CDF of the Binomial(n, p) is monotonically decreasing
                                     ∂
in p and µ ≤ ϵ (this follows since ∂p  F (ℓ; n, p) ≤ 0).

Finally, note that our algorithm returns a valid parameter τi as long as ϕϵ,δ PAC (Z, τ ) = 0, since it
returns τi for some i < i0 , and by definition of i0 , all of these τi are valid. Thus, our algorithm
returns a valid τi with probability at least 1 − δ, as claimed.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4    A PPLICATION TO DAG S TRUCTURED P REDICTION S ETS

Problem formulation. We consider a prediction problem where the prediction set consists of se-
lecting a subset of nodes in a directed acyclic graph (DAG). For example, the DAG may be a tree
representing hierarchical labels. Consider a DAG G = (V, E) with vertices V = [k] = {1, ..., k}
and directed edges E ⊆ V × V . For example, for image classification, G might encode a hierarchy
of image categories. We let L ⊆ V denote P the leaf nodes of G; we assume that each v ∈ L is
labeled with a probability pv , such that v∈L pv = 1. In our image classification example, a leaf v
corresponds to a fine-grained label, and pv might be the predicted probability of that label.
Now, we consider structured prediction sets of the form ỹ ⊆ V , where |ỹ| ≤ m for a given hyperpa-
rameter m. Furthermore, we assume that the size function is σ(ỹ) = |leaves(ỹ)|, where

                       leaves(ỹ) = {v ∈ L | ∃v ′ ∈ ỹ . v is a descendant of v ′ }.

We say a leaf node v ∈ L is covered by ỹ if v ∈ leaves(ỹ). In other words, the size of ỹ is the number
of leaf nodes v that are the descendants of some node v ′ ∈ ỹ. For instance, if ỹ = {cat, dog}, then
σ(ỹ) would be the number of kinds of cats and dogs in the label space. We also assume that the
cumulative label probability in (1) has the form

                                     g(x, y) · 1(y ∈ γ(ỹ)) =
                               X                                   X
                                                                               pv .
                               y∈Y                              v∈leaves(ỹ)


In other words, to obtain the cumulative label probability for ỹ, we simply sum the probabilities pv
of the leaf nodes that are covered by ỹ. In our image classification example, this value would simply
be the sum of all the fine-grained label probabilities that are subsumed by the labels in ỹ. With these
assumptions, the definition of hτ (x) in (1) becomes
                                                                      X
                       hτ (x) = arg min |leaves(ỹ)| subj. to                    pv ≥ τ.
                                     ỹ∈Ỹ                        v∈leaves(ỹ)


If we additionally unroll the definition of Ỹ, then the objective becomes
                                                                X
                 hτ (x) = arg min |leaves(ỹ)| subj. to                   pv ≥ τ ∧ |ỹ| ≤ m,            (2)
                              ỹ⊆V
                                                           v∈leaves(ỹ)


i.e., we need to compute a subset of nodes ỹ of size at most m such that the leaf nodes covered by ỹ
have cumulative probability at least τ , while minimizing the number of leaf nodes covered by ỹ.
Our framework can also be used to represent qualitatively very different domains from our image
classification example. For instance, suppose we want to represent uncertainty in a predicted date;
then, we might consider a conjunction of prediction intervals of years—e.g., 1968-1972 or 2010-
2012. To do so, each node in G can represent an interval I = [ℓ, u], with the children of a node
being the intervals I ′ that are immediately contained in [ℓ, u] (i.e., there is no I ′′ in the search space
such that I ′ ⊊ I ′′ ⊊ I). Furthermore, we assume that each leaf node of G corresponds to an interval
where ℓ = u, so it represents a single year. Then, ỹ = {I1 , ..., Im′ } (for some m′ ≤ m) would
be a conjunction of intervals, and leaves(ỹ) would be the years contained in at least one of these
intervals. We can also handle instances where G varies from one input to another.
We emphasize that our DAG structure is a structure on the space of prediction sets, and can differ
from the structure of the label space. In applications where the label space has a tree or DAG
structure, we can naturally consider structured prediction sets that conform to this structure, but this
is not a requirement. For instance, if the label space has a graph structure, we could still construct
prediction sets representing sets of labels, and impose a DAG structure on these prediction sets (e.g.,
based on set inclusion). Thus, our approach can be flexibly applied to more complex domains.
Integer programming algorithm. We describe an integer program to solve (2). For each node
v ∈ V , our optimization problem includes two variables αv , βv ∈ {0, 1}. Intuitively, αv = 1
indicates that v ∈ ỹ, and βv = 1 indicates that v is covered by ỹ (in general, v ∈ V is covered by ỹ


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


if there is some v ′ ∈ ỹ such that v is a descendant of v ′ ). Then, our integer program is
                                     X
                                min        βv                                                             (3)
                                α,β
                                       v∈L
                                       X
                            subj. to         αv ≤ m                                                       (4)
                                       v∈V
                                       αv → βv         (∀v ∈ V )                                          (5)
                                                                   ′
                                       βv → β   v′ (∀(v, v ) ∈ E)                                         (6)
                                                    _
                                       βv′ → αv′ ∨        βv     (∀v ′ ∈ V )                              (7)
                                                      (v,v ′ )∈E
                                       X
                                             p v · βv ≥ τ                                                 (8)
                                       v∈L

We have included some Boolean constraints for clarity; in general, a Boolean constraint of the form
α → β is equivalent to the linear constraint α ≤ β, and α → β ∨ β ′ is equivalent to α ≤ β + β ′ .
The objective constraints in our integer program have the following intuition:

       • Eq. (3): The objective is to minimize the number of leaf nodes covered by ỹ.
       • Eq. (4): The prediction set ỹ contains at most m nodes.
       • Eq. (5): If v is contained in ỹ, then v is covered by ỹ.
       • Eq. (6): If v is covered by ỹ and v ′ is a child of v, then v ′ is also covered ỹ.
       • Eq. (7): If v ′ is covered by ỹ, then either v ′ is contained in ỹ or at least one parent of v ′ is
         covered by ỹ.
       • Eq. (8): The cumulative probability of leaf nodes covered by ỹ is at least τ .

Given the solution α∗ , β ∗ to this integer program, our algorithm returns ỹ = {v ∈ V | αv∗ = 1}.

5     E XPERIMENTS
We empirically validate our approach by demonstrating that it constructs prediction sets that satisfy
the desired coverage guarantees while producing reasonably sized prediction sets.1 We evaluate
our approach on five tasks: (i) predicting numbers represented as lists of MNIST digits (LeCun &
Cortes, 2010), (ii) ImageNet classification (Deng et al., 2009) with hierarchical label space tasks,
(iii) SQuAD question answering (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) where the answer is a year, (iv) Python code
generation based on the MBPP dataset (Austin et al., 2021), similar to the task studied in Khakhar
et al. (2023), and (v) predicting emotions on the GoEmotions dataset (Demszky et al., 2020).

5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

MNIST digits. The goal in this task is to predict a number represented as a list of k MNIST digits
(we use k ∈ {2, 3}). Each digit is classified using a standard feedforward network fθ . We consider
prediction sets inspired by significant figures for representing measurements—namely, a prediction
set is represented by a confident prediction in the first h ≤ k digits, and uncertain in the remaining
ones. In more detail, a prediction set has the form ỹ = [d1 , ..., dk ], where di ∈ {0, 1, ..., 9, ∅} for
each i ∈ [k], and where di = ∅ implies that di′ = ∅ for all i′ ≥ i. Then, we have
              ( k                           )
               X
                     ′      k−i  ′                                         {d}            if d ̸= ∅
     γ(ỹ) =        di · 10     di ∈ γ(di )         where      γ(d) =
                                                                           {0, 1, ..., 9} otherwise.
               i=1

For example, [1, 2, ∅] represents the prediction set {120, 121, ..., 129}. According to our opti-
mization problem setup, the prediction set consists of at most m intervals, which together form
a non-continuous digit interval as the final prediction. Finally, the DAG is constructed by having
  1
    The implementation is available at
https://github.com/botong516/Conformal-Structured-Prediction.


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[d1 , ..., di , ∅, ∅, ..., ∅] → [d1 , ..., di , di+1 , ∅, ..., ∅] for all d1 , ..., di , di+1 ̸= ∅. In other words,
one node is the child of another if it predicts the same prefix and exactly one additional digit. A
leaf node of this DAG is a sequence of k digits [d1 , ..., dk ]; we associate with this leaf node with the
                 Qk
probability i=1 fθ (di | xi ), where [x1 , ..., xk ] is the sequence of input images and fθ (di | xi ) is
the predicted probability that xi is an image of digit di according to fθ .
Image classification with hierarchical labels. We consider image classification using ResNet-
50 (He et al., 2015) on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). In this domain, the DAG is a tree; we take
the original 1000 ImageNet labels to be leaves of the tree, and a standard set of coarse-grained
labels (e.g., animal, living thing, etc.) as the internal nodes. We include an edge (v, v ′ ) ∈ E if v
is an immediate hypernym of v ′ in the WordNet lexical database (Miller, 1994). A prediction set
ỹ = {ℓ1 , ..., ℓm′ } is a set of m′ ≤ m internal nodes, representing the set of fine-grained labels
corresponding to leaf nodes that are descendants of some ℓ ∈ ỹ (e.g., the prediction set might be
“dog or cat”). We associate with each leaf node the probability fθ (ℓ | x), where ℓ is the fine-grained
label associated with the leaf node, x is the input image, and fθ is the pretrained ResNet-50 model.
Question answering about dates. We consider a question answering task based on the Stanford
Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD) (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), but focusing on questions where
the answer is a year in the range from 1970 to 2020. The DAG is constructed as the set of intervals
[ℓ, u], where ℓ, u ∈ {1970, 1971, . . . , 2020}. We have edge [ℓ, u] → [ℓ′ , u′ ] if [ℓ′ , u′ ] ⊊ [ℓ, u], and
there is no interval [ℓ′′ , u′′ ] such that [ℓ′ , u′ ] ⊊ [ℓ′′ , u′′ ] ⊊ [ℓ, u]. Each leaf node is a year [ℓ, u] where
ℓ = u; we associate it with the probability of the answer being ℓ as predicted by the Llama-3.1-70B-
Instruct model (Dubey et al., 2024)—i.e., fθ (ℓ | x), where x is the question, fθ is the Llama model,
and fθ (ℓ | x) is the probability of the sequence of tokens representing the year ℓ with a standard
question answering prompt asking the model for the answer to question x. We provide additional
details on the dataset, prompt, and the DAG structure in Appendix A.1.
Python code generation. We investigate the problem of code generation in Python using the MBPP
dataset (Austin et al., 2021). In our experiments, we provided the gpt-4o-mini model with a natural
language prompt along with k lines of code from the original ground truth program in the dataset,
instructing the model to complete the program to solve the prompt. In this context, the DAG structure
is defined by the AST parsed from the generated program. We assign each node a probability equal
to the sum of the probabilities of the tokens contained with that node.
Emotion label prediction for text. Finally, we use the GoEmotions dataset (Demszky et al., 2020),
which consists of 27 emotion categories annotated on 58,000 English Reddit comments, to demon-
strate the application of our framework to predict the emotion labels in a given piece of text. Similar
to the ImageNet task, the DAG in this domain is also a tree, following the structure proposed in the
GoEmotions dataset (Demszky et al., 2020). We use the provided set of concrete emotion labels
(e.g., amusement, fear, grief, etc.) as the leaves of the tree. The definitions of prediction sets and
leaf node probabilities are consistent with those from the ImageNet task, with fθ being a pretrained
RoBERTa base model (Sam Lowe, 2024).
Hyperparameters. We use m ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8} (default of m = 4), ϵ ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2} (default
of ϵ = 0.1), and δ ∈ {0.1, 0.01, 0.001} (default of δ = 0.01).
Baseline. We compare our approach with a baseline strategy adapted from Khakhar et al. (2023).
While the strategy proposed is specialized to the code domain, we generalize it to apply to arbitrary
DAG structures. Unlike our approach, this baseline leverages existing PAC prediction set algorithms,
which require that the monotonicity assumption holds. Thus, their algorithm restricts the structure
of the prediction sets across different values of τ to enforce monotonicity. In contrast, our approach
proves a novel conformal prediction bound (Theorem 3.2) to avoid the need for monotonicity.
Metrics. We report empirical coverage rate and average prediction set size on a held-out test set:
                                                   1
                                                                 1(y∗ ∈ γ(ỹ))
                                                          X
                               Coverage Rate =
                                                 |Ztest | ∗       (x,y )∈Ztest
                                                      1               X
                      Average Prediction Set Size =                                σ(ỹ).
                                                    |Ztest |
                                                                  (x,y ∗ )∈Ztest

Our goal is for the coverage rate to exceed ϵ while minimizing average prediction set size. We show
averages and standard deviations over 5 runs.


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            1.0                                                          1.0                                                          1.0
            0.9                                                          0.9                                                          0.9
            0.8                                                                                                                       0.8
Coverage Rate


                                                             Coverage Rate


                                                                                                                          Coverage Rate
                                                                         0.8
            0.7                            m=1                                                          m=1                           0.7
                                           m=2                           0.7                            m=2                                                            = 0.001
            0.6                            m=4                           0.6                            m=4                           0.6                              = 0.01
            0.5                            m=8                           0.5                            m=8                           0.5                              = 0.1
                                           Model Acc.                                                   Model Acc.                                                   Model Acc.
            0.4                            Reference                     0.4                            Reference                     0.4                            Reference
            0.30.80          0.85       0.90       0.95                  0.30.80          0.85       0.90       0.95                  0.30.80          0.85       0.90        0.95
                       Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                   Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                   Desired Coverage Rate (1 )
                           (a) Marginal                                             (b) PAC (δ = 0.01)                                            (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 2: Prediction set coverage rates for the question answering task, for (a) marginal guarantee,
(b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC guarantee with fixed m and varying δ.

                         m=1                                                          m=1                                                           = 0.001
            40           m=2                                             40           m=2                                             50            = 0.01
                         m=4                                                          m=4                                             40            = 0.1
Average Size


                                                             Average Size


                                                                                                                          Average Size
            30           m=8                                             30           m=8
                                                                                                                                      30
            20                                                           20
                                                                                                                                      20
            10                                                           10                                                           10
                0.80         0.85       0.90          0.95                   0.80         0.85       0.90          0.95                   0.80         0.85       0.90          0.95
                       Desired Coverage Rate (1   )                                 Desired Coverage Rate (1   )                                 Desired Coverage Rate (1   )
                           (a) Marginal                                             (b) PAC (δ = 0.1)                                             (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 3: Prediction set sizes for the question answering task, with the baseline represented by
dashed lines, for (a) marginal guarantee, (b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC
guarantee with fixed m and varying δ.


5.2              R ESULTS

Here, we show results only for the question answering task; results for the MNIST, ImageNet, code
generation, and GoEmotions tasks can be found in Appendix A.4, and exhibit similar trends.
Coverage guarantees. First, we study the coverage rates achieved by our approach. Results are
shown in Figure 2; Figure 2a shows results with the marginal guarantee for different m values across
the given error levels ϵ, Figure 2b shows results with the PAC guarantee for different m and fixed
δ, and Figure 2c shows results with the PAC guarantee for different δ and fixed m; coverage rates
for the baseline are shown in Figure 11 in Appendix A.4. In general, for both our algorithm and for
the baseline, the empirical coverage rates are above the desired coverage level (i.e., the “Reference”
line). As expected, as ϵ increases, the coverage rate tends to decrease (but remains above the desired
coverage rate); m and δ do not significantly affect coverage.
For the marginal guarantee, mean coverage rates remain close to the desired rate, while for the PAC
guarantee, coverage for all values holds within one standard deviation. Note that marginal guar-
antees are on average over both the training set and the new examples; thus, the average coverage
across different random seeds is above the desired coverage level, but any individual random seed
may fall above or below this level. In contrast, PAC prediction sets hold with high probability over
the training set; thus, the coverage is above the desired level for almost all random seeds. Intuitively,
PAC guarantees are more conservative than marginal guarantees but provide greater reliability. In
domains where it is critical for the deployed model to satisfy the coverage guarantee, PAC prediction
sets should be used; otherwise, marginal guarantees may suffice.
Prediction set size. Next, we study the average size of the prediction sets constructed using our
approach in terms of number of concrete labels and compare it to the prediction sets obtained using
the baseline. Results are shown in Figure 3; Figure 3a shows results with the marginal guarantee for
different m values across the given error levels ϵ, Figure 3b shows results with the PAC guarantee
for different m and fixed δ, and Figure 3c shows results with the PAC guarantee for different δ and
fixed m. Results for the baseline are represented by dashed lines. As expected, prediction set size


                                                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                ϵ = 0.05             ϵ = 0.1             ϵ = 0.2

                  m=1         [1979, 2019]         [1979, 2019]       [1987, 2020]
                             [1979, 1980],            [1979],         [1996, 2001],
                  m=2
                              [1997, 2019]         [1997, 2019]       [2007, 2020]
                                                                               
                            [1979, 1980],          [1979],          [1997], 
                                 [1997],              [1997],            [2015],
                                                                               
                  m=4
                            
                                [2007],   
                                                
                                                     [2007],   
                                                                   
                                                                     [2016, 2017], 
                                                                                    
                              [2015, 2019]         [2015, 2019]           [2019]

Table 1: Structured prediction sets for the question, “When was 7 Lincoln Square completed?” with
the ground truth answer “1979”. Intervals in red contain the ground truth year.


decreases as ϵ and δ increase and as m increases; its dependence on δ is much less pronounced than
its dependence on ϵ and m. Our approach outperforms the baseline in terms of prediction set size
for almost every parameter setting, and significantly so for m = 2 and m = 4.
In general, the sensitivity of the hyperparameter m depends on the DAG structure and the perfor-
mance of the underlying model. For the question answering task, the decrease in size with m is
especially significant, likely due to the low accuracy of the underlying model (≈ 33.2%). Since all
nodes tend to have similar probability masses, usually without any dominant ones, changes in m can
significantly affect the nodes selected when m is small (e.g., 1 or 2). As m becomes larger (e.g., 4
or 8), the algorithm gains greater flexibility in selecting which nodes to include in the prediction set;
thus, the prediction set size typically becomes less sensitive to m as it becomes larger.
Qualitative examples. We provide a qualitative example from the question answering task to show:
(i) how structured sets differ from standard conformal prediction sets, and (ii) how hyperparameters
influence the sets. In the example presented in Table 1, standard conformal prediction yields a
prediction set containing six years—{1979, 1997, 2007, 2016, 2017, 2019}—spanning a broad
range of possibilities. We then construct structured prediction sets with m ∈ {1, 2, 4} and ϵ ∈
{0.05, 0.1, 0.2}. Note that increasing m increases the number of intervals but reduces the number of
labels in the concrete set. Also, for a fixed m, increasing ϵ generally produces fewer and narrower
intervals, albeit at the expense of higher miscoverage rates. In this example, m = 4 provides a
good tradeoff, summarizing {2016, 2017, 2019} into the interval [2015, 2019] while preserving the
singleton years 1979, 1997, and 2007. See Appendix A.3 for additional examples.
In general, the choice of m depends on the needs of the given application domain. It governs the
trade-off between the interpretability and granularity of the resulting prediction sets. In particular,
larger values of m allow more labels to be included in the set, often capturing finer-grained categories
such as “attire” or “Blenheim spaniel”. Conversely, smaller values of m result in sets with fewer
or coarse-grained labels such as “artifact” or “dog”, which can be more interpretable for users. We
suggest that practitioners try different values of m, and manually examine the resulting prediction
sets to determine which choices offer the best tradeoff between interpretability and coverage.
Computational cost. We also evaluate the running time of our approach compared to our baseline.
We find that (i) our approach outperforms the baseline in terms of running time for most domains,
(ii) increasing the DAG size does not necessarily lead to higher computation time, (iii) running time
usually remains consistent across hyperparameters, (iv) the overall running time is smaller for fixed
DAGs where we can leverage warm-starting; see Appendix A.2 for details.

6   C ONCLUSION
We have proposed a novel algorithm for conformal structured prediction that constructs structured
prediction sets that satisfy either a marginal or PAC coverage guarantee. Our algorithm enables un-
certainty quantification in settings where the label space cannot be represented simply by a collection
of regression and/or classification outputs. Furthermore, we have demonstrated how our approach
can be applied to domains where the structured prediction sets are defined by a DAG, which in-
cludes settings such as hierarchical labels and text generation. Finally, in our empirical evaluation,
we have demonstrated that our algorithm can construct reasonable prediction sets that satisfy the
desired coverage guarantee across several application domains.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by NSF Award CCF-1917852, NSF Award CCF-2338777, ARO Award
W911NF20-1-0080, and an Amazon Research Award Fall 2023. The views expressed are those of
the authors and do not reflect the official policy or position of the Department of Defense, the Army
Research Office, the U.S. Government, or Amazon.

R EFERENCES
Léo Andéol, Thomas Fel, Florence De Grancey, and Luca Mossina. Confident object detection via
   conformal prediction and conformal risk control: an application to railway signaling, 2023. URL
   https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.06052.
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Jitendra Malik, and Michael I. Jordan. Uncertainty
  sets for image classifiers using conformal prediction. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Emmanuel J. Candès, Michael I. Jordan, and Lihua Lei.
  Learn then test: Calibrating predictive algorithms to achieve risk control, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2110.01052.
Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, et al. Conformal prediction: A gentle introduction.
  Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 16(4):494–591, 2023.
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Adam Fisch, Lihua Lei, and Tal Schuster. Conformal
  risk control. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.
Dorottya Demszky, Dana Movshovitz-Attias, Jeongwoo Ko, Alan Cowen, Gaurav Nemade, and Su-
  jith Ravi. GoEmotions: A dataset of fine-grained emotions. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie
  Schluter, and Joel Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4040–4054, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.372. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2020.acl-main.372.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Abhimanyu Dubey et al. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2407.21783.
Robin Dunn, Larry Wasserman, and Aaditya Ramdas. Distribution-free prediction sets for two-layer
  hierarchical models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.07441.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
Adam Khakhar, Stephen Mell, and Osbert Bastani. Pac prediction sets for large language models of
  code. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 16237–16249. PMLR, 2023.
Yann LeCun and Corinna Cortes. MNIST handwritten digit database. 2010. URL http://yann.
  lecun.com/exdb/mnist/.
Yonghoon Lee, Rina Foygel Barber, and Rebecca Willett. Distribution-free inference with hierar-
  chical data, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.06342.
Shuo Li, Xiayan Ji, Edgar Dobriban, Oleg Sokolsky, and Insup Lee. Pac-wrap: Semi-supervised
  pac anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery and Data Mining, volume 9 of KDD ’22, pp. 945–955. ACM, August 2022a. doi:
  10.1145/3534678.3539408. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3534678.3539408.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shuo Li, Sangdon Park, Xiayan Ji, Insup Lee, and Osbert Bastani. Towards pac multi-object detec-
  tion and tracking, 2022b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.07482.
Shuo Li, Sangdon Park, Insup Lee, and Osbert Bastani. Traq: Trustworthy retrieval augmented ques-
  tion answering via conformal prediction, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.
  04642.
George A. Miller. WordNet: A lexical database for English. In Human Language Technology:
  Proceedings of a Workshop held at Plainsboro, New Jersey, March 8-11, 1994, 1994. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/H94-1111.
Christopher Mohri and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Language models with conformal factuality guaran-
  tees. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Thomas Mortier, Eyke Hüllermeier, Krzysztof Dembczyński, and Willem Waegeman. Set-valued
  prediction in hierarchical classification with constrained representation complexity, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.06676.
Sangdon Park, Osbert Bastani, Nikolai Matni, and Insup Lee. Pac confidence sets for deep neural
  networks via calibrated prediction. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Victor Quach, Adam Fisch, Tal Schuster, Adam Yala, Jae Ho Sohn, Tommi S Jaakkola, and Regina
  Barzilay. Conformal language modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2024.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad: 100,000+ questions
  for machine comprehension of text, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.05250.
Sam Lowe. roberta-base-goemotions (revision 58b6c5b), 2024. URL https://huggingface.
  co/SamLowe/roberta-base-go_emotions.
Vladimir Vovk. Conditional validity of inductive conformal predictors. In Asian conference on
  machine learning, pp. 475–490. PMLR, 2012.
Vladimir Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic learning in a random world,
  volume 29. Springer, 2005.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS ON Q UESTION A NSWERING TASK

The SQuAD dataset contains 691 questions where the set of possible answers include at least one
that is a four-digit number. From this subset, we conducted experiments on questions with answers
between 1970 and 2020, resulting in a total of 262 examples. Each example is a (question, context,
answer) triplet, where the context provides background information to answer the question. We
used a two-shot prompting technique to obtain the log probability from the Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct
model (Dubey et al., 2024). Figure 4 shows the prompt template used, where {question} and
{context} are replaced based on the current example. Then, for each year in [1970, 2020], we com-
pute the model’s probability of generating {year} as a response to the {question} and {context}.
Finally, Figure 5 illustrates the DAG used in this task.


Figure 4: The two-shot prompt used for our question answering task; here, {question} and
{context} are replaced with the corresponding data from each example in our dataset, and {year}
is replaced with each year between 1970 and 2020.


            Figure 5: Illustration of the DAG structure for our question answering task.


A.2   C OMPUTATIONAL C OST AND S CALABILITY

Our method leverages Integer Programming (IP) to select nodes as prediction sets on DAGs, which
can sometimes be computationally intensive, particularly as the size of the DAG increases. We
evaluate the running time and scalability of this approach, including a comparison to our baseline
adapted from Khakhar et al. (2023). Figure 6 shows the average time required to solve each IP
problem as a function of m, for each of our application domains. As can be seen, both the code
generation and GoEmotions tasks have very fast solve times due to their small tree sizes. As shown
in the top right subplot of each plot, MBPP is still significantly faster than GoEmotions. The MBPP
dataset consists of entry-level Python programs; therefore, the resulting ASTs are usually very small.
The GoEmotions tree structure is also relatively simple, consisting of 8 layers, 27 leaves, and 52


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  20         m=1                           0.06                                                  m=1                           0.06
                             m=2                                                                      12         m=2


                                              Solve time (s)


                                                                                                                                  Solve time (s)
                                                           0.04                                                                                0.04
                             m=4                                                                                 m=4
                             m=8                           0.02                                       10         m=8                           0.02
                  15
    Solve time (s)                                         0.00                                           8                                    0.00


                                                                                        Solve time (s)
                                                                    MBPP   GoEmotions                                                                   MBPP   GoEmotions

                  10                                                                                      6
                                                                                                          4
                      5
                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                          0
                      0
                          SQuAD MNIST MNIST ImageNet MBPP GoEmotions                                          SQuAD MNIST MNIST ImageNet MBPP GoEmotions
                                (k=2) (k=3)                                                                         (k=2) (k=3)
                                      (a) Marginal                                                                          (b) PAC

Figure 6: Average time (second) required to solve each Integer Programming (IP) problem in the
test set for each of the five domains in our experiments, as m varies, for (a) marginal guarantee and
(b) PAC guarantee.


                            m=1                            100                                                  m=1                            100
                  8         m=2                                                                       8         m=2
                                              Solve time (s)


                                                                                                                                  Solve time (s)
                            m=4                                50                                               m=4                                50
                            m=8                                                                                 m=8
                  6                                             0                                     6                                             0
    Solve time (hr)


                                                                                        Solve time (hr)


                                                                    MBPP   GoEmotions                                                                   MBPP   GoEmotions

                  4                                                                                   4


                  2                                                                                   2


                  0 SQuAD MNIST MNIST ImageNet MBPP GoEmotions                                        0 SQuAD MNIST MNIST ImageNet MBPP GoEmotions
                          (k=2) (k=3)                                                                         (k=2) (k=3)
                                      (a) Marginal                                                                          (b) PAC

Figure 7: Average time (hour) required to estimate τ for each of the five domains in our experiments,
as m varies, for (a) marginal guarantee and (b) PAC guarantee.



nodes. The 2-digit MNIST and ImageNet problems also have relatively fast solve times. The 2-digit
MNIST tree has 3 layers, 100 leaves, and 111 nodes, whereas the ImageNet tree is a lot larger,
with 18 layers, 1000 leaves, and 1816 nodes. Thus, increasing the DAG size may not increase
computation time.
When extending to the 3-digit MNIST problem, the computation time for the IP becomes slower,
especially for the PAC guarantee. The 3-digit MNIST tree has 4 layers, 1000 leaves, and 1111
nodes, which significantly increases the number of nodes compared to the 2-digit MNIST tree and
notably increases the tree density compared to the ImageNet tree. Thus, the computation for the
IP may become intensive as the density of the DAG scales up. A practical strategy to alleviate this
computational burden is to simplify the DAG by removing some internal nodes while preserving the
overall hierarchy. In particular, if a node v is removed, its parent nodes become the parents of each
of v’s children. This approach allows us to maintain the structured prediction set property while
improving computational efficiency, though it may affect interpretability of the resulting structured
prediction sets.
The structure for the question answering task is not a tree but a DAG, where a single node can have
multiple parents. It has 51 layers, 51 leaves, and 650 nodes, making it relatively sparse compared to
structures for the other four domains. In this case, there is a drastic increase in running time when
m = 2. As we leverage an off-the-shelf optimizer, the process of node selection largely occurs
under the hood. Consequently, there may be cases where the runtime is unusually high on certain


                                                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        m=1                                      3.5                                                        m=1                                                m=1
                                                                           m=1                                                                                       16
              14        m=2                                                m=2                                      8       m=2                                                m=2
                        m=4                                      3.0                                                        m=4                                      14        m=4
                                                                           m=4
              12        m=8                                                m=8                                              m=8                                                m=8
                                                                 2.5                                                6                                                12
              10


                                                                                                      Solve time (hr)
Solve time (hr)


                                                                                                                                                       Solve time (hr)
                                                   Solve time (hr)
                                                                 2.0                                                                                                 10
                  8
                                                                                                                    4                                                    8
                                                                 1.5
                  6                                                                                                                                                      6
                  4                                              1.0
                                                                                                                    2                                                    4
                  2                                              0.5                                                                                                     2
                  0     (baseline)    (baseline)                 0.0       (baseline)    (baseline)                 0                                                    0     (baseline)    (baseline)
                                                                         Marginal       PAC                                 (baseline)    (baseline)
                      Marginal       PAC                                                                                  Marginal       PAC                                 Marginal       PAC
             (a) Question answering                                    (b) 2-digit MNIST                                (c) 3-digit MNIST                                    (d) ImageNet

Figure 8: Average time (hour) required to complete each of the four tasks—(a) question answering,
(b) 2-digit MNIST, (c) 3-digit MNIST, and (d) ImageNet—with nontrivial solve times (as shown
in Figure 6 and Figure 7), along with their respective baselines, as m varies, for both marginal and
PAC guarantees.


Figure 9: Comparison of prediction sets generated by conformal structured prediction under PAC
guarantee and the standard PAC prediction algorithm (Vovk, 2012; Park et al., 2020). For both
methods, the error level is 0.05 and the confidence level is 0.99 (δ = 0.01).


DAGs. Selecting a different m can help mitigate this issue. As shown in the plot, the running time
for a given type of problem remains consistent overall across different hyperparameters.
It is important to note that the runtime for solving each individual IP problem does not always reflect
the overall runtime of the entire framework. When it comes to solving sequences of IP problems
(such as during τ estimation), certain problem setups can largely benefit from reduced runtime
through the chosen optimizer’s built-in techniques. For instance, as shown in Figure 7, the Python
code generation problem loses its advantage of extremely fast IP solve times during the τ estimation
phase, likely because the DAG structure (i.e. AST tree) varies across samples. As a result, additional
computation time is required to build each DAG, and furthermore we cannot use warm-starting.
Finally, our approach significantly outperforms the baseline in most domains. Figure 8 shows the
average time required to complete the four tasks with nontrivial solve times (i.e., question answering,
2-digit MNIST, 3-digit MNIST, and ImageNet). For the question answering and ImageNet task, our
approach is significantly faster than the baseline. In the 2-digit MNIST problem, we outperform the
baseline with stronger improvements under the marginal guarantee. However, for the 3-digit MNIST
problem, our approach is slightly slower than the baseline. The faster running time of our approach
is likely due to having fewer restrictions on the structure of the prediction sets across different τ .

A.3                   A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES

Comparison with standard PAC prediction sets. Figure 9 compares our approach to the standard
PAC prediction set algorithm (Vovk, 2012; Park et al., 2020), with ϵ = 0.05 and δ = 0.01. As can be
seen, the standard prediction set is much larger than the one constructed by our algorithm. The large
prediction set includes labels from very distant categories, making it harder to interpret compared to
having just two coarse-grained labels that summarize the labels. In our structured prediction set, the


                                                                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        ϵ = 0.05                        ϵ = 0.1                           ϵ = 0.2

                             m=1                          whole                       artifact                            hairpiece
                                                           dog,                       toy spaniel,
                             m=2                                                                                            wig
                                                         artifact                     attire     
                                                       toy dog,                 Blenheim spaniel,
                             m=4                         clothing,                       attire,                               wig
                                                      hunting dog                English setter 


Table 2: Structured prediction sets for the image in Figure 9. Labels in red contain the ground class.


                          root

                          _(_)                                                                            root

       _.join                           _ for _ in _                                                      _(_)

                                                                                           _.join                     _ for _ in _
         ''              _ or _                   x                _(_)
                                                                                             ''           _ or _                  x                _(_, _)
                 _()                  '_'                _.split          '_'
                                                                                                    _()             '_'               _.split        '_'       word
             _.capitalize                                word                                 _.capitalize                                re
                  x                                                                                 x


    ’’.join(x.capitalize() or ’_’                                                         # ’’.join(x.capitalize() or ’
        ,→ for x in word.split(’_                                                             ,→ _’ for x in re.split(’_
        ,→ ’))                                                                                ,→ ’, word))

                           (a) Ground truth                                               ’’.join(x.capitalize() or ’_’
                                                                                              ,→ for x in ??)

                                                                                                                  (b) Prediction set
                                       root                                                                                       root

                                            +                                                                                         +

                _(_,_)                                      _(_,_)                                      _(_,_)                                       _(_,_)

    zigzag        n           -                 zigzag        -           -                zigzag         -               -               zigzag           n      -

                                  k                               n           n                               n               n                                       n

                                  1                               1           k                               1               k                                       k


  zigzag(n, k - 1) + zigzag(n -                                                           # zigzag(n - 1, n - k) +
      ,→ 1, n - k)                                                                            ,→ zigzag(n, n - k)

                          (c) Ground truth                                                zigzag(n - 1, n - k) + zigzag(
                                                                                              ,→ n, ??-??)

                                                                                                                   (d) Prediction set

Figure 10: Structured prediction sets for the code generation domain. We show (a,c) the ground
truth AST, and (b,d) the predicted AST (nodes removed by our algorithm to obtain the prediction
set are crossed out in red). The corresponding code is shown below (for (b,d), commented code is
the original prediction). The hyperparameters used are ϵ = 0.2, m = 1 for (b) and ϵ = 0.15, m = 2
for (d).


different dog breeds have been summarized as simply “dog”, and the different man-made artifacts
have been summarized as “artifact”. The fact that the labels are quite coarse reflects the inherent
uncertainty in the prediction for this image.
Impact of hyperparameters. In Table 2, we show additional prediction sets for the same image as
in Figure 9 to show how hyperparameters influence the prediction sets. Similar to our findings in Ta-
ble 1, for smaller m, our prediction sets contain fewer labels, making them more interpretable, while
prediction sets with larger m contain more fine-grained labels. Also, with higher ϵ, our algorithm is
allowed to make more errors, resulting in much smaller prediction sets.


                                                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Example structured prediction sets in code domain. We show two examples of structured predic-
tion sets in the code generation domain in Figure 10. In each example, the AST on the left represents
the ground truth program, with its corresponding code generation shown directly below. The AST
on the right, with certain nodes removed (crossed in red), represents a structured prediction set for
it, where the partial code is shown under the figure with the complete code prediction provided in
the comment. The removed portions are denoted as ?? in the generated code to indicate uncertainty.
Compared to traditional prediction sets consisting of multiple complete programs, the structured
prediction sets improve interpretability by explicitly preserving the confident portions of the code
while leaving the uncertain parts unspecified. Note that after removing the uncertain components,
the remaining partial programs each contain the respective ground truth program.

A.4                A DDITIONAL Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

               1.0                                                      1.0                                                        1.0
               0.9                                                      0.9                                                        0.9
               0.8                                                      0.8                                                        0.8
                                                            Coverage Rate


                                                                                                                       Coverage Rate
   Coverage Rate


               0.7                           m=1                        0.7                           m=1                          0.7
                                             m=2                                                      m=2                                                          = 0.001
               0.6                           m=4                        0.6                           m=4                          0.6                             = 0.01
               0.5                           m=8                        0.5                           m=8                          0.5                             = 0.1
                                             Model Acc.                                               Model Acc.                                                 Model Acc.
               0.4                           Reference                  0.4                           Reference                    0.4                           Reference
               0.30.80         0.85       0.90       0.95               0.30.80         0.85       0.90       0.95                 0.30.80         0.85       0.90        0.95
                         Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                               Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                 Desired Coverage Rate (1 )
                            (a) Marginal                                      (b) PAC (δ = 0.01)                                             (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 11: Coverage rates for the question answering task using the baseline, for (a) marginal
guarantee, (b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC guarantee with fixed m and
varying δ.


               1.00                                                     1.000                                                      1.000
                                                                        0.975                                                      0.975
               0.95                                                     0.950                                                      0.950
   Coverage Rate


                                                            Coverage Rate


                                                                                                                       Coverage Rate


                                            m=1                         0.925                           m=1                        0.925
               0.90
                                            m=2                         0.900                           m=2                        0.900                             = 0.001
               0.85                         m=4                         0.875                           m=4                        0.875                             = 0.01
                                            m=8                         0.850                           m=8                        0.850                             = 0.1
               0.80                         Model Acc.                  0.825                           Model Acc.                 0.825                           Model Acc.
                                            Reference                   0.800                           Reference                  0.800                           Reference
                   0.80       0.85       0.90       0.95                     0.80         0.85       0.90       0.95                    0.80         0.85       0.90        0.95
                        Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                  Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                 Desired Coverage Rate (1 )

                            (a) Marginal                                      (b) PAC (δ = 0.01)                                             (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 12: Coverage rates for the 2-digit MNIST task with n = 200, for (a) marginal guarantee, (b)
PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC guarantee with fixed m and varying δ.


               1.00                                                     1.000                                                      1.000
                                                                        0.975                                                      0.975
               0.95                                                     0.950                                                      0.950
   Coverage Rate


                                                            Coverage Rate


                                                                                                                       Coverage Rate


               0.90                         m=1                         0.925                           m=1                        0.925
                                            m=2                         0.900                           m=2                        0.900                             = 0.001
               0.85                         m=4                         0.875                           m=4                        0.875                             = 0.01
                                            m=8                         0.850                           m=8                        0.850                             = 0.1
               0.80                         Model Acc.                  0.825                           Model Acc.                 0.825                           Model Acc.
                                            Reference                                                   Reference                  0.800                           Reference
                                                                        0.800
                   0.80       0.85       0.90       0.95                     0.80         0.85       0.90       0.95                    0.80         0.85       0.90        0.95
                        Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                  Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                 Desired Coverage Rate (1 )

                            (a) Marginal                                      (b) PAC (δ = 0.01)                                             (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 13: Coverage rates for the 2-digit MNIST task using the baseline with n = 200, for (a)
marginal guarantee, (b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC guarantee with
fixed m and varying δ.


                                                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               40                                                              40                                                           35
               35            m=1                                                           m=1                                                           = 0.001
                             m=2                                               35          m=2                                              30           = 0.01
               30            m=4                                               30          m=4                                              25           = 0.1


                                                                   Average Size


                                                                                                                                Average Size
   Average Size
               25            m=8                                               25          m=8
                                                                                                                                            20
               20                                                              20
               15                                                                                                                           15
                                                                               15
               10                                                              10                                                           10
                5                                                               5                                                            5
                0                                                               0                                                            00.80
                 0.80         0.85       0.90               0.95                 0.80         0.85       0.90            0.95                              0.85       0.90            0.95
                        Desired Coverage Rate (1        )                               Desired Coverage Rate (1     )                               Desired Coverage Rate (1     )
                               (a) Marginal                                             (b) PAC (δ = 0.1)                                              (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 14: Prediction set sizes for the 2-digit MNIST task (n = 200), with the baseline represented
by dashed lines, for (a) marginal guarantee, (b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c)
PAC guarantee with fixed m and varying δ.


               1.00                                                            1.00                                                         1.00
               0.95                                                            0.95                                                         0.95
                                                                   Coverage Rate


                                                                                                                                Coverage Rate
   Coverage Rate


               0.90                         m=1                                0.90                         m=1                             0.90
               0.85                         m=2                                0.85                         m=2                             0.85                           = 0.001
                                            m=4                                                             m=4                                                            = 0.01
               0.80                         m=8                                0.80                         m=8                             0.80                           = 0.1
                                            Model Acc.                                                      Model Acc.                                                   Model Acc.
               0.75                         Reference                          0.75                         Reference                       0.75                         Reference
                   0.80       0.85       0.90       0.95                           0.80       0.85       0.90       0.95                        0.80       0.85       0.90        0.95
                        Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                      Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                   Desired Coverage Rate (1 )
                               (a) Marginal                                             (b) PAC (δ = 0.01)                                             (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 15: Coverage rates for the 3-digit MNIST task with n = 200, for (a) marginal guarantee, (b)
PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC guarantee with fixed m and varying δ.


               1.00
                                                                               1.00                                                         1.00
               0.95                                                            0.95                                                         0.95
                                                                   Coverage Rate


                                                                                                                                Coverage Rate
   Coverage Rate


               0.90                         m=1                                0.90                           m=1                           0.90
               0.85                         m=2                                                               m=2                                                            = 0.001
                                            m=4                                0.85                           m=4                           0.85                             = 0.01
               0.80                         m=8                                0.80                           m=8                           0.80                             = 0.1
                                            Model Acc.                                                        Model Acc.                                                   Model Acc.
               0.75                         Reference                          0.75                           Reference                     0.75                           Reference
                   0.80       0.85       0.90       0.95                           0.80         0.85       0.90       0.95                      0.80         0.85       0.90        0.95
                        Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                        Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                   Desired Coverage Rate (1 )
                               (a) Marginal                                             (b) PAC (δ = 0.01)                                             (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 16: Coverage rates for the 3-digit MNIST task using the baseline with n = 200, for (a)
marginal guarantee, (b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC guarantee with
fixed m and varying δ.


                   600         m=1                                                          m=1                                             1200           = 0.001
                   500         m=2                                             1000         m=2                                                            = 0.01
                                                                                                                                            1000
                   400         m=4                                              800         m=4                                                            = 0.1
                                                                   Average Size


                                                                                                                                Average Size


                                                                                                                                             800
   Average Size


                   300         m=8                                                          m=8
                   200                                                          600                                                          600
                   100                                                          400                                                          400
                     0
                   100                                                          200                                                          200
                   200                                                            0                                                            0
                      0.80         0.85       0.90          0.95                   0.80         0.85       0.90          0.95                   0.80         0.85       0.90          0.95
                             Desired Coverage Rate (1   )                                 Desired Coverage Rate (1   )                                 Desired Coverage Rate (1   )
                               (a) Marginal                                             (b) PAC (δ = 0.1)                                              (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 17: Prediction set sizes for the 3-digit MNIST task (n = 200), with the baseline represented
by dashed lines, for (a) marginal guarantee, (b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c)
PAC guarantee with fixed m and varying δ.


                                                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               1.00                                                         1.000                                                         1.000
                                                                            0.975                                                         0.975
               0.95                                                         0.950                                                         0.950


   Coverage Rate


                                                                Coverage Rate


                                                                                                                              Coverage Rate
                                            m=1                             0.925                            m=1                          0.925
               0.90                                                         0.900                                                         0.900
                                            m=2                                                              m=2                                                            = 0.001
               0.85                         m=4                             0.875                            m=4                          0.875                             = 0.01
                                            m=8                             0.850                            m=8                          0.850                             = 0.1
                                            Model Acc.                      0.825                            Model Acc.                   0.825                           Model Acc.
               0.80                         Reference                                                        Reference                                                    Reference
                                                                            0.800                                                         0.800
                   0.80       0.85       0.90       0.95                         0.80          0.85       0.90       0.95                      0.80         0.85       0.90        0.95
                        Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                       Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                   Desired Coverage Rate (1 )

                            (a) Marginal                                            (b) PAC (δ = 0.01)                                              (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 18: Coverage rates for the ImageNet task with n = 200, for (a) marginal guarantee, (b) PAC
guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC guarantee with fixed m and varying δ.


               1.00                                                         1.000                                                         1.000
                                                                            0.975                                                         0.975
               0.95                                                         0.950                                                         0.950
   Coverage Rate


                                                                Coverage Rate


                                                                                                                              Coverage Rate
                                            m=1                             0.925                            m=1                          0.925
               0.90                                                         0.900                                                         0.900
                                            m=2                                                              m=2                                                            = 0.001
               0.85                         m=4                             0.875                            m=4                          0.875                             = 0.01
                                            m=8                             0.850                            m=8                          0.850                             = 0.1
                                            Model Acc.                      0.825                            Model Acc.                   0.825                           Model Acc.
               0.80                         Reference                                                        Reference                                                    Reference
                                                                            0.800                                                         0.800
                   0.80       0.85       0.90       0.95                         0.80          0.85       0.90       0.95                      0.80         0.85       0.90        0.95
                        Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                       Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                   Desired Coverage Rate (1 )

                            (a) Marginal                                            (b) PAC (δ = 0.01)                                              (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 19: Coverage rates for the ImageNet task using the baseline with n = 200, for (a) marginal
guarantee, (b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC guarantee with fixed m and
varying δ.


               350          m=1                                                           m=1                                             600           = 0.001
                                                                            500
               300          m=2                                                           m=2                                             500           = 0.01
               250          m=4                                             400           m=4                                                           = 0.1
                                                                                                                                          400
   Average Size


                                                                Average Size


                                                                                                                              Average Size


                            m=8                                                           m=8
               200                                                          300                                                           300
               150                                                          200
               100                                                                                                                        200
                50                                                          100                                                           100
                 0                                                              0                                                           0
                  0.80         0.85       0.90           0.95                    0.80         0.85       0.90          0.95                  0.80         0.85       0.90            0.95
                         Desired Coverage Rate (1    )                                  Desired Coverage Rate (1   )                                Desired Coverage Rate (1     )
                            (a) Marginal                                            (b) PAC (δ = 0.1)                                               (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 20: Prediction set sizes for the ImageNet task (n = 200), with the baseline represented by
dashed lines, for (a) marginal guarantee, (b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC
guarantee with fixed m and varying δ.


               1.000                                                        1.000                                                         1.000
               0.975                                                        0.975                                                         0.975
               0.950                                                        0.950                                                         0.950
                                                                                                                              Coverage Rate
   Coverage Rate


                                                                Coverage Rate


               0.925                                                        0.925                                                         0.925
               0.900                            m=1                         0.900                             m=1                         0.900
               0.875                            m=2                         0.875                             m=2                         0.875                              = 0.001
               0.850                            m=4                         0.850                             m=4                         0.850                              = 0.01
               0.825                            m=8                         0.825                             m=8                         0.825                              = 0.1
                                                Reference                                                     Reference                                                    Reference
               0.800                                                        0.800                                                         0.800
                    0.80         0.85       0.90       0.95                      0.80          0.85       0.90       0.95                      0.80         0.85       0.90        0.95
                           Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                    Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                   Desired Coverage Rate (1 )

                            (a) Marginal                                            (b) PAC (δ = 0.01)                                              (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 21: Coverage rates for the Python code generation task with n = 233, for (a) marginal
guarantee, (b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC guarantee with fixed m and
varying δ.


                                                                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               1.000                                                        1.000                                                        1.000
               0.975                                                        0.975                                                        0.975
               0.950                                                        0.950                                                        0.950


                                                                                                                             Coverage Rate
   Coverage Rate


                                                                Coverage Rate
               0.925                                                        0.925                                                        0.925
               0.900                            m=1                         0.900                            m=1                         0.900
               0.875                            m=2                         0.875                            m=2                         0.875                              = 0.001
               0.850                            m=4                         0.850                            m=4                         0.850                              = 0.01
               0.825                            m=8                         0.825                            m=8                         0.825                              = 0.1
               0.800                            Reference                                                    Reference                                                    Reference
                                                                            0.800                                                        0.800
                    0.80         0.85       0.90       0.95                      0.80         0.85       0.90       0.95                      0.80         0.85       0.90        0.95
                           Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                   Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                   Desired Coverage Rate (1 )

                            (a) Marginal                                           (b) PAC (δ = 0.01)                                               (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 22: Coverage rates for the Python code generation task using the baseline with n = 233,
for (a) marginal guarantee, (b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC guarantee
with fixed m and varying δ.


               4.5         m=1                                                           m=1                                             4.8           = 0.001
                           m=2                                              4.5          m=2                                                           = 0.01
               4.0         m=4                                                           m=4                                             4.6           = 0.1
   Average Size


                                                                Average Size


                                                                                                                             Average Size
               3.5         m=8                                              4.0          m=8                                             4.4
               3.0                                                          3.5                                                          4.2
               2.5                                                                                                                       4.0
                                                                            3.0
               2.0                                                                                                                       3.8
                  0.80         0.85       0.90           0.95                   0.80         0.85       0.90          0.95                  0.80         0.85       0.90            0.95
                         Desired Coverage Rate (1    )                                 Desired Coverage Rate (1   )                                Desired Coverage Rate (1     )
                            (a) Marginal                                               (b) PAC (δ = 0.1)                                            (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 23: Prediction set sizes for the Python code generation task (n = 233), with the baseline
represented by dashed lines, for (a) marginal guarantee, (b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying
m, and (c) PAC guarantee with fixed m and varying δ.


               1.00                                                         1.00                                                         1.00
               0.95                                                         0.95                                                         0.95
               0.90                                                         0.90                                                         0.90
                                                                Coverage Rate


                                                                                                                             Coverage Rate
   Coverage Rate


               0.85                           m=1                           0.85                           m=1                           0.85
               0.80                           m=2                           0.80                           m=2                           0.80                             = 0.001
               0.75                           m=4                           0.75                           m=4                           0.75                             = 0.01
               0.70                           m=8                           0.70                           m=8                           0.70                             = 0.1
               0.65                           Model Acc.                    0.65                           Model Acc.                    0.65                           Model Acc.
                                              Reference                     0.60                           Reference                     0.60                           Reference
               0.60
                   0.80         0.85       0.90       0.95                      0.80         0.85       0.90       0.95                      0.80         0.85       0.90        0.95
                          Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                   Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                   Desired Coverage Rate (1 )
                            (a) Marginal                                           (b) PAC (δ = 0.01)                                               (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 24: Coverage rates for the GoEmotions task with n = 200, for (a) marginal guarantee, (b)
PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC guarantee with fixed m and varying δ.


               1.00                                                         1.0                                                          1.00
               0.95                                                                                                                      0.95
               0.90                                                         0.9                                                          0.90
                                                                Coverage Rate


                                                                                                                             Coverage Rate
   Coverage Rate


               0.85                           m=1                                                       m=1                              0.85
               0.80                           m=2                           0.8                         m=2                              0.80                             = 0.001
               0.75                           m=4                                                       m=4                              0.75                             = 0.01
               0.70                           m=8                           0.7                         m=8                              0.70                             = 0.1
               0.65                           Model Acc.                                                Model Acc.                       0.65                           Model Acc.
                                              Reference                                                 Reference                        0.60                           Reference
               0.60                                                         0.6
                   0.80         0.85       0.90       0.95                     0.80       0.85       0.90       0.95                         0.80         0.85       0.90        0.95
                          Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                Desired Coverage Rate (1 )                                      Desired Coverage Rate (1 )
                            (a) Marginal                                           (b) PAC (δ = 0.01)                                               (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 25: Coverage rates for the GoEmotions task using the baseline with n = 200, for (a)
marginal guarantee, (b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c) PAC guarantee with
fixed m and varying δ.


                                                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              16         m=1                                            22.5         m=1                                            22.5          = 0.001
                         m=2                                            20.0         m=2                                            20.0          = 0.01
              14         m=4                                            17.5                                                        17.5
                                                                                     m=4                                                          = 0.1
              12

   Average Size


                                                             Average Size


                                                                                                                         Average Size
                         m=8                                            15.0         m=8                                            15.0
              10                                                        12.5                                                        12.5
               8                                                        10.0                                                        10.0
               6                                                         7.5                                                         7.5
               4                                                         5.0                                                         5.0
               2                                                         2.5                                                         2.5
                0.80         0.85       0.90          0.95                  0.80         0.85       0.90          0.95                  0.80         0.85       0.90          0.95
                       Desired Coverage Rate (1   )                                Desired Coverage Rate (1   )                                Desired Coverage Rate (1   )

                          (a) Marginal                                         (b) PAC (δ = 0.1)                                               (c) PAC (m = 4)

Figure 26: Prediction set sizes for the GoEmotions task (n = 200), with the baseline represented
by dashed lines, for (a) marginal guarantee, (b) PAC guarantee with fixed δ and varying m, and (c)
PAC guarantee with fixed m and varying δ.


                                                                                            21
