Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S EQ -VCR:P REVENTING C OLLAPSE IN I NTERMEDIATE
T RANSFORMER R EPRESENTATIONS FOR E NHANCED
R EASONING
    Md Rifat Arefin1,2,3∗ Gopeshh Subbaraj1,2 , Nicolas Gontier3 , Yann LeCun5,6 ,
    Irina Rish1,2 , Ravid Shwartz-Ziv6 , Christopher Pal3,4
    1
        Université de Montréal, 2 Mila, 3 ServiceNow, 4 Polytechnique Montreal, 5 Meta FAIR,
    6
        New York University



                                                            A BSTRACT

                   Decoder-only Transformers often struggle with complex reasoning tasks, particu-
                   larly arithmetic reasoning requiring multiple sequential operations. In this work,
                   we identify representation collapse in the model’s intermediate layers as a key fac-
                   tor limiting their reasoning capabilities. To address this, we propose Sequential
                   Variance-Covariance Regularization (Seq-VCR)1 , which enhances the entropy
                   of intermediate representations and prevents collapse. Combined with dummy
                   pause tokens as substitutes for chain-of-thought (CoT) tokens, our method signifi-
                   cantly improves performance in arithmetic reasoning problems. In the challenging
                   5 × 5 integer multiplication task, our approach achieves 99.5% exact match ac-
                   curacy, outperforming models of the same size (which yield 0% accuracy) and
                   GPT-4 with five-shot CoT prompting (44%). We also demonstrate superior re-
                   sults on arithmetic expression and longest increasing subsequence (LIS) datasets.
                   Our findings highlight the importance of preventing intermediate layer representa-
                   tion collapse to enhance the reasoning capabilities of Transformers and show that
                   Seq-VCR offers an effective solution without requiring explicit CoT supervision.


1           I NTRODUCTION
               6        7        8         9        0

1

2

3

4

5

Position       0    1   2   3    4    5    6    7   8   9
    Mult       1    2   3   4    5    5    4    3   2   1
    Sum        0    1   2   3    4    4    3    2   1   0
    Carry      1    2   3    4    5    4    3   2   1   0
    Total      2    5   8   11   14   13   10   7   4   1


Figure 1: Position-wise number of operations needed for 5x5 digits integer multiplication task.
Middle tokens in the output sequence need more operations than the peripheral ones, making their
prediction much harder (as shown in Figure 6). Example of 12345 x 67890 is shown here.

Large Language Models (LLMs) based on Transformer architectures have achieved remarkable suc-
cess across a wide range of tasks, positioning them as foundational models in artificial intelligence
(Bommasani et al., 2021). Despite their impressive capabilities, LLMs often struggle with tasks
        ∗
            rifat.arefin@mila.quebec, Work was completed during internship at ServiceNow.
        1
            https://github.com/rarefin/seq vcr


                                                                1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


requiring complex reasoning, particularly arithmetic reasoning that necessitates multiple sequen-
tial operations (Bubeck et al., 2023). These challenges are attributed to the models’ limitations in
handling tasks that involve deep cognitive abilities and multi-step reasoning processes.
One of the key obstacles is the representation collapse in the intermediate layers of Transformer
models. Representation collapse occurs when internal representation diversity diminishes, leading
to less informative features and hindering the model’s ability to solve complex tasks (Jing et al.,
2021). For arithmetic reasoning, transformers struggle with successive carryovers and storing inter-
mediate results Qiu et al. (2024), which are essential for solving complex sub-tasks, requiring more
computations (Figure 1). We hypothesize that representation collapse prevents the model from ef-
fectively performing sub-tasks by calculating successive carryovers and storing intermediate results,
which are essential for accurate prediction.
To address this limitation, we introduce Sequential Variance-Covariance Regularization (Seq-
VCR), a regularization technique designed to enhance the entropy of intermediate representa-
tions and prevent representation collapse. By increasing the diversity of representations within the
model’s layers, Seq-VCR enables the Transformer to maintain richer and more informative features
throughout the computation process.
Furthermore, we incorporate dummy pause tokens as substitutes for chain-of-thought (CoT) tokens.
While CoT prompting has been shown to improve reasoning by breaking down tasks into inter-
mediate steps (Wei et al., 2022), it often requires explicit supervision and can be computationally
expensive. Our approach leverages pause tokens to simulate the effect of CoT without the need for
explicit intermediate reasoning steps.
We validate our method on challenging arithmetic reasoning tasks. Notably, on the 5 × 5 integer
multiplication task, our approach achieves 99.5% exact match accuracy, surpassing models of the
same size (which yield 0% accuracy) and GPT-4 with five-shot CoT prompting (44%). We also
demonstrate significant improvements on arithmetic expression and longest increasing subsequence
(LIS) datasets.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

      • We identify representation collapse in intermediate layers as a key limitation affecting the
        reasoning capabilities of Transformer models.
      • We propose Seq-VCR, a regularization technique that enhances the diversity of intermedi-
        ate representations and prevents collapse.
      • We demonstrate that combining Seq-VCR with pause tokens enables models to solve com-
        plex arithmetic reasoning tasks without explicit CoT supervision.
      • We provide extensive experimental results showing significant improvements over baseline
        models and state-of-the-art LLMs like GPT-4.

The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews reasoning in large language models, represen-
tation collapse, and regularization. Section 3 presents our method, Sequential Variance-Covariance
Regularization (Seq-VCR), including its formulation and motivation. Section 4 describes the exper-
imental setup, datasets, models, and shows Seq-VCR’s effectiveness in arithmetic reasoning and its
impact on representations. Section 5 summarizes key findings and discusses future directions.


2   L ITERATURE R EVIEW

Transformer Reasoning Research in large language models (LLMs) has advanced significantly.
Models like BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and GPT (Radford & Narasimhan, 2018) demonstrated im-
provements in natural language understanding. However, challenges remain in tasks that require
deep cognitive abilities. Integrating external knowledge has shown promise in improving reasoning
capabilities (Bosselut et al., 2019). Recent advances include techniques such as chain-of-thought
(CoT) prompting, which allow models such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) to perform complex rea-
soning by breaking tasks into intermediate steps (Wei et al., 2022) with human supervision, called
process supervision (Lightman et al., 2023). Wang et al. (2022) shows that even incorrect but co-
herent intermediate steps can improve reasoning performance. Jin et al. (2024) found increasing the

                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


length of the reasoning steps in the prompts, even without adding new information to the prompt,
improves the reasoning abilities of LLMs.
Wang et al. (2024), investigated the addition of dummy tokens such as periods or hash symbols
to inputs at inference time. They found that this simple modification could improve performance
in arithmetic reasoning tasks. Some works show that these dummy tokens, commonly referred
to as filler tokens, do not extend transformers’ abilities beyond TC0 circuit complexity, but still
significantly enhance problem-solving within this class (Merrill & Sabharwal, 2023; Strobl et al.,
2023). Building on this idea, Goyal et al. (2023a) introduced a more comprehensive framework
called ”pause-training.” Their approach involves incorporating learnable < pause > tokens during
both pre-training and fine-tuning of language models. While there are differences between the pause
tokens and filler tokens approach, they share the goal of providing additional computation time
for transformers which extends the expressive power of transformers within the TC0 class without
changing the fundamental limitations of the model architecture. Chain-of-thought prompting can
potentially elevate transformers beyond the TC0 complexity class; However, it may not be necessary
for all problems. Furthermore, filler tokens have been demonstrated to enhance the expressivity
of transformers (Pfau et al., 2024), even in cases where traditional transformers, lacking chain-of-
thought mechanisms, exhibit insufficient expressive power (Sanford et al., 2024).

Representation Collapse Representation collapse in representation learning degrades model per-
formance by making features indistinguishable. It often occurs in unsupervised and self-supervised
learning tasks due to the lack of labeled data, leading to trivial solutions and a low-rank feature
space. Research by Jing et al. (2021) highlights that representation collapse is due to poor optimiza-
tion, loss function design, and improper regularization. Recent studies (Grill et al., 2020) suggest
the use of contrastive learning, such as SimCLR, to mitigate this by contrasting positive and nega-
tive samples. Additionally, Zbontar et al. (2021) introduced Barlow Twins to minimize redundancy
between learned representations. A further advancement is VICReg (Bardes et al., 2021; Zhu et al.,
2023) which employs variance, invariance, and covariance regularization to prevent collapse, en-
suring diverse and non-trivial representations. While these researches focus on images, it is less
explored in language models. Recently, Barbero et al. (2024) studied last-layer representations of
the next tokens and found representation collapse in pre-trained models.


3     M ETHODOLOGY

3.1   P RELIMINARIES

Consider a finite set of token vocabulary denoted by V = (1 . . . v), while x, y ∈ V constitutes a
sequence of these tokens representing the input x = [x1 , . . . , xK ] and the output y = [y1 , . . . , yT ],
where K and T indicate the respective sequence lengths of the input and output.
We covert the input x and output sequence y in an embedded sequence:
Eemb = [x̃1 , . . . , x̃K , ỹ1 , . . . , ỹT ] ∈ RT +K×d and Epos = [p1 , p2 , . . .] ∈ RT +K×d of dimension d.
We can get the language model layer-wise as: f = (fcls ◦ fL ◦ fL−1 . . . ◦ f0 )
where f0 = [x̃1 + p1 , . . . , x̃K + pK , ỹ1 + pK+1 , . . . , ỹT + pK+T ] and fcls ∈ R|V |×d is the final
linear classification layer. fl is the self-attention layer with MLP for layer l (Vaswani et al., 2017).

3.2   N EXT-T OKEN P REDICTION L OSS

Large language models like GPT (Radford et al., 2018) (Generative Pre-trained Transformer) are
trained to auto-regressively predict the next token in a sequence. This minimizes the difference
between predicted and actual tokens for coherent and contextually appropriate text. A loss function
like cross-entropy for next-token prediction is given by:

                                                      T
                                                      X
                               Lnext (y, f (x)) = −          yt⊤ log(f (x, y<t )),                           (1)
                                                       t=1


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where yt is the one-hot encoded true token at time step t and input tokens x, modeled by a language
model, f .

3.3    R EPRESENTATION C OLLAPSE IN T RANSFORMERS
                                       Vanilla               Pause            Seq-VCR                       Seq-VCR+Pause         Pretrained

                         0.8                                                                          0.5
       Average Entropy


                                                                                    Average Entropy
                         0.7                                                                          0.4

                         0.6                                                                          0.3

                         0.5                                                                          0.2

                                                                                                      0.1
                         0.4
                                                                                                      0.0
                               0   1             2           3            4     5                           0    2      4     6       8        10   12
                                                     Layer                                                                  Layer
(a) Training minGPT from scratch on Arithmetic Ex-                                                      (b) Fine-tuning GPT-2 Small on 5 × 5 digit Mul-
pression                                                                                                tiplication

Figure 2: Representation collapse across layers during (a) training (or fine-tuning(b)) for two
datasets. The x-axis represents the layer ID, while the y-axis shows the degree of collapse as mea-
sured by representation Matrix-Entropy. The results highlight how intermediate layers (shown by
the decline in Entropy) experience representation collapse for Pretrained GPT-2 Small on 5 × 5
digit Multiplication (b) and during Vanilla training or fine-tuning for both datasets, indicating po-
tential bottlenecks in information flow or feature learning. Tools like Pause Goyal et al. (2023b)
token-based tuning can’t fix it, but our proposed regularization Seq-VCR can improve collapse.

Representation collapse in Transformers manifests as a reduction in the diversity of internal repre-
sentations across layers, particularly in tasks requiring complex reasoning. This collapse hinders
the model’s ability to capture and process intricate patterns necessary for tasks like multi-digit mul-
tiplication. To illustrate this, we analyze the layer-wise representation entropy of a GPT-2 model
fine-tuned on the 5 × 5 digit multiplication task. As shown in Figure 2(b), there is a significant drop
in entropy in the intermediate layers, indicating a collapse in representation diversity. We hypoth-
esize that this representation collapse is the reason why it is very hard for the model to calculate
multiplication, carry, and store them, thus resulting in poorer performance, as shown in Figure 6 for
the output positions, which require more computation (Figure 1).
We quantify the phenomenon of representation collapse in token sequences by computing the
matrix-based entropy of representation vectors across transformer model layers. We specifically
explore the α-order matrix-based entropy (Skean et al., 2023; Giraldo et al., 2014) using a similarity
kernel κ applied to layer-wise token representations without assuming the underlying distribution.
We use a linear kernel defined as κ(a, b) = abT in our analysis as in (Skean et al., 2024). Assuming,
Z (l) = fl ∈ RT ×d be the lth layer representations of T tokens in a sequence with dimension
d, we compute the pairwise similarity of T token representations to form the Gram matrix K =
                             T
κ Z (l) , Z (l) = Z (l) Z (l) ∈ RT×T . Then, we determine the matrix-based entropy of order α > 0:
                                                                                   " T          #
                                                                            1       X λi (K)  α
                                                                 l

                                                     Sα Z                =     log                                                                       (2)
                                                                           1−α      i=1
                                                                                         tr(K)

Equation 2 is similar to the α-order Rényi entropy of eigenvalues of the Gram matrix 2 , providing
insights into their distribution and the underlying token structure. In particular, we employ limα→1 ,
which corresponds to the Shannon or Von Neumann entropy Bach (2022); Boes et al. (2019). Eigen-
                                                     PT
values are normalized by the matrix trace tr(K) = i=1 λi (K), then raised to the power α, forming
                           T                                 T
   2
     Z (l) Z (l) (Gram matrix) and Z (l) Z (l) (Covariance matrix) have identical nonzero eigenvalues, thus both
yield same matrix entropy. When d < T , the computation of the covariance matrix is generally more efficient.


                                                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a probability distribution over principal components. Each eigenvalue indicates how much variance
the corresponding principal component explains (Scholkopf & Smola, 2018). Low entropy results
in a heavy-tailed distribution, with a few components dominating, concentrating token information
and collapsing the representation space with a lack of representations diversity.

3.4   S EQUENTIAL VARIANCE C OVARIANCE R EGULARIZATION (S EQ -VCR)

To address representation collapse, we introduce Seq-VCR, a regularization technique that enforces
high variance and low covariance in intermediate representations of Transformer models. Adapted
for sequential data, Seq-VCR builds directly on the variance and covariance regularization principles
of VICReg (Bardes et al., 2021) and VCReg (Zhu et al., 2023), with Equation 3 re-purposing the
formulations from VICReg to tackle the challenges of sequence modeling.
Seq-VCR is implemented on the final output of the model (X = fcls )3 . The process involves
computing a covariance matrix and using a pre-trained model like GPT-2, leading to dimensions
such as fcls ∈ RT ∈×50,257 , which can be computationally challenging. So, for a model like GPT-2,
instead of applying regularization on the output of fcls , we apply a linear projection that projects
the representation of layer l into a more manageable space, expressed as X = fproj (fl ), with
fproj ∈ RT ×2048 . This projection layer is inserted over the representation just before the Seq-VCR
regularization loss calculation and is trained exclusively end-to-end with the Seq-VCR loss defined
below.
Now we can assume that we have N samples in the batch, so N number of X, denoted as X ∈
RN ×T ×d . We can calculate the covariance matrix across the batch dimension, C ∈ RT ×d×d .
                                                                                                 
                                                                                   
                            T   d
                       1 XX                       p              X
                                                                                  2
                                                                                    
          LSeq-VCR =               λ1 max(0, 1 − Ci,k,k + η) +λ2       (Ci,k,k̂ )                     (3)
                                   
                     T × d i=1      |             {z       }                       
                               k=1                               k̸=k̂
                                              Variance Term
                                                                                    
                                                                  |      {z       }
                                                                                Covariance Term
Where for each position in the sequence, covariance matrix can be calculated across the batch di-
mension when X:,i is the input for ith position,
                              N                                                            N
                         1 X                                                          1 X
        Ci (X:,i ) =             (Xj,i − X̄:,i )(Xj,i − X̄:,i )⊤ ,   where X̄:,i =          Xj,i        (4)
                       N − 1 j=1                                                      N j=1

where λ1 and λ2 are the coefficients of the variance and covariance regularization terms. η is a small
constant (set to 0.001 in our experiments), used for numerical stability. Detailed hyper-parameter
choices can be found in Appendix A.
The Variance Term encourages unit variance in each dimension, while the Covariance Term penal-
izes covariance between different dimensions, promoting de-correlation and diversity in representa-
tions.

3.5   I NCORPORATING PAUSE T OKENS

Increasing the model capacity brings significant accuracy boost for solving n×n digit multiplication
tasks (Qiu et al., 2024). While some previous work increases depth to increase the model capacity,
an alternative solution is to use pause tokens that serve as explicit indicators for the model to tem-
porarily pause on intermediate states in sequential tasks before proceeding to the next computation
step (Goyal et al., 2023b).
Similarly, we enhance the model’s reasoning capacity by introducing dummy pause tokens, which
act as placeholders for intermediate computation steps. This offers notable benefits over Chain-of-
Thought (CoT) reasoning tokens, particularly in reducing inference time (as there are often more
   3
     Initial tests indicated optimal performance when regularization was utilized on the final layer. Exper-
imentation revealed that additional layers can also be effective. For detailed information on layer-specific
regularization, refer to Appendix G.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CoT tokens to decode than pause tokens) and dependency on costly human-supervised data. With
pause tokens we can solve tasks like multiplication in a fraction of the time compared to CoT,
while performing at a similar accuracy (5 times faster and close to 100% in our experiments. See
Appendix E for further details). In all experiments, pause tokens were placed between input and
output tokens to emulate CoT reasoning. In particular, the input-output format looked like:

<question> </pause_start> <pause> <pause> </pause_end> <answer>.

We tried with 2, 4, 6, and 8 pause tokens on 4 × 4 and 5 × 5 digit multiplication tasks, and we did not
find any correlation with task complexity. As such, we used 2 pause tokens in all our experiments.
We believe that this may be due to the fact that all pause tokens share the same embedding. Future
work will explore the effect of having different embeddings per pause tokens.

3.6    T RAINING O BJECTIVE

The overall training objective combines the standard next-token prediction loss with the Seq-VCR
regularization. Our final loss L is:
                                        L = Lnext + LSeq-VCR                                            (5)

This encourages the model to not only predict the next token accurately, but also maintain diverse
and informative intermediate representations.

4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1    DATA


    (a) Arithmetic Expression                     (b) LIS                      (c) 5x5 Multiplication

Figure 3: Illustrations of Input, Output and CoT on the Arithmetic, LIS and mutliplication datasets

We conduct experiments on three tasks: we first consider the multi-digit multiplication task from
the BIG-bench benchmark (Srivastava et al., 2022), which is the most challenging among arithmetic
tasks (Yang et al., 2023). In particular, we use the four-digit (4 × 4) and five-digit (5 × 5) multipli-
cation problems, since these two tasks prove very challenging to solve under no CoT, utilizing the
training data generated by Deng et al. (2023).
Next, we focus on the Arithmetic Expressions Feng et al. (2024) dataset. This task focuses on
evaluating arithmetic expressions. The input sequence for this task is a sequence consisting of
numbers, mathematical operators such as addition (+), subtraction (-), multiplication (×), division
(÷) and brackets, followed by the equal sign. The goal of this task is to calculate the input arithmetic
expression and generate the correct result. This task is naturally well-suited for a Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) method, where each step does part of the calculation, slowly solving one operation at a time
while keeping the other parts the same.
Finally, we also conduct experiments in a more general setting outside arithmetic tasks, called Dy-
namic Programming (DP). Dynamic Programming is a framework for solving decision-making
problems. The core idea in this setting is to break down a complex task into a series of smaller
sub-tasks that can be solved sequentially. We chose a very popular problem in this setting called the


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Longest Increasing Sub-sequence (LIS) as described in the Introduction to Algorithms book (Cor-
men et al., 2022). For this task, the goal is to find the length of the longest increasing subsequence of
a given integer sequence. We generate datasets with different input sequence lengths ranging from
{50, 80, 100} as shown in Feng et al. (2024). Moreover, all input sequences, and answers in LIS
are bounded-range integers and can therefore be tokenized (similar to the multi-digit multiplication
task). The CoT tokens for this task consist of the dynamic programming array plus the final answer.
Figure 3 shows a working example for a sample problem in all the datasets considered.
Table 3 in Appendix D provides an overview of the different datasets i.e., Multiplication, Arithmetic
Expression and LIS, along with their respective input, chain-of-thought (CoT), and output token
details.

4.2        M ODELS AND T RAINING C ONFIGURATIONS

We conduct experiments using two models:

GPT-2 Small Fine-Tuning We fine-tune a pre-trained GPT-2 Small model on the multi-digit mul-
tiplication tasks. Fine-tuning is performed for 40 epochs with a learning rate of 5 × 10−4 and a batch
size of 32.

minGPT Training from Scratch We train a minGPT model from scratch on the Arithmetic Ex-
pressions and LIS datasets. Training is conducted for 100 epochs with a learning rate of 1 × 10−4
and a batch size of 128.
We compare five configurations:

              • Vanilla: Standard training/finetuning without CoT or pause tokens.
              • With CoT: Training/finetuning with explicit CoT supervision.
              • Pause: Inserting pause tokens in the input sequence.
              • Seq-VCR: Applying Seq-VCR regularisation.
              • Seq-VCR + Pause: Combining Seq-VCR with pause tokens.

4.3        R ESULTS

4.3.1              R EPRESENTATION D IVERSITY

                                                                                                  Vanilla                  Pause                              Seq-VCR                         Seq-VCR+Pause
                                                                  layer0                                                                                        layer1                                                                            layer2
                  100                                                                                                                                                                                        100
                                                                                                              100
                  50
                   0                                                                                           0                                                                                              0
                                0.50         0.52    0.54         0.56     0.58    0.60        0.62    0.64                 0.2               0.3               0.4               0.5          0.6                 0.30     0.35         0.40     0.45         0.50    0.55         0.60     0.65
                                                                  layer3                                                                                        layer4                                                                            layer5
                  100                                                                                         100                                                                                            100
                  50                                                                                          50                                                                                             50
                   0                                                                                           0                                                                                              0
                              0.1             0.2           0.3             0.4         0.5            0.6                0.1               0.2               0.3               0.4       0.5          0.6         0.1          0.2             0.3            0.4            0.5            0.6
                                                                  layer6                                                                                        layer7                                                                            layer8
      Frequency


                  100                                                                                         100                                                                                            100
                  50                                                                                          50                                                                                             50
                   0                                                                                           0                                                                                              0
                        0.1               0.2             0.3              0.4           0.5            0.6         0.1               0.2               0.3               0.4           0.5          0.6                  0.2             0.3            0.4           0.5             0.6
                                                                  layer9                                                                                       layer10                                                                            layer11
                  100                                                                                         100                                                                                            100
                  50                                                                                          50                                                                                             50
                   0                                                                                           0                                                                                              0
                                    0.2             0.3             0.4           0.5            0.6                            0.2               0.3               0.4           0.5          0.6                  0.2            0.3           0.4             0.5           0.6            0.7
                                                                layer12
                  100
                  50
                   0
                                       0.3            0.4                 0.5           0.6            0.7
                                                                                                                                                        Entropy

Figure 4: Layer-wise entropy distributions for different configurations on the 5 × 5 multiplication
task. Seq-VCR and Seq-VCR+Pause maintain higher entropy across layers, indicating greater repre-
sentation diversity.


                                                                                                                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Seq-VCR significantly enhances representation diversity, as evidenced by the layer-wise distribution
of representation entropy across different configurations. In Figure 4, we observe that the configura-
tions that employ our regularization technique, particularly Seq-VCR and Seq-VCR+Pause, exhibit
higher entropy values in the intermediate layers compared to the other configurations (Vanilla, and
Pause). This increased diversity in the representation entropy suggests that the model is able to cap-
ture a wider range of features and maintain distinct representations. The histograms also reveal that
while other configurations show peaks at lower entropy values, indicating potential representation
collapse and redundancy in the intermediate representations, our method fosters a more uniform dis-
tribution across the layers. This uniformity suggests that the model is using a richer feature space,
enabling it to better generalize to unseen data, thus improving performance in downstream tasks.


4.4   L EARNING DYNAMICS

                                                   Seq-VCR+Pause   Vanilla                                     Pause    Seq-VCR

                                    1.2                                                              3.0
       Next Token Prediction Loss


                                                                        Next Token Prediction Loss
                                    0.9                                                              2.4

                                                                                                     1.8
                                    0.6
                                                                                                     1.2
                                    0.3
                                                                                                     0.6
                                    0.0
                                          0   10      20      30   40                                      0      20   40    60   80     100
                                                   Epochs                                                              Epochs
(a) Fine-tuning GPT-2 Small on 5 × 5 digit Multipli-                                                  (b) Training minGPT from scratch on Arithmetic
cation                                                                                                Expression

Figure 5: Learning dynamics (curves for next token prediction loss) illustrating the phase transition
observed across datasets when applying our regularization methods. The x-axis represents training
epochs, and the y-axis denotes the model’s loss. The phase transition is characterized by a sharp
reduction in loss, marking a distinct shift in the learning regime when using Seq-VCR and Seq-VCR
+ Pause, compared to the gradual decline or saturating curves in other configurations.

Our regularization method, Seq-VCR or Seq-VCR+Pause cause a significant phase transition (im-
proving the next token prediction loss) in the performance of the model across datasets compared to
other configurations such as Vanilla, and Pause, which do not induce this phase transition as shown
in Figure 5. Specifically, this phase transition marks a distinct shift in the model’s ability to capture
and generalize representations during training or fine-tuning.
Without regularization, learning is difficult and training loss saturates. Seq-VCR improves the learn-
ing curve. Adding Seq-VCR with 2 Pause tokens causes a sharp phase transition (Figure 5 (a)) and
solves the 5 × 5 digit multiplication task. Figure 5 (b) shows similar improvements in the arithmetic
reasoning task that is learned from scratch.


4.5   R ESULTS ON 4 × 4 AND 5 × 5 DIGITS M ULTIPLICATION TASKS

Table 1 shows the results on 4 × 4 and 5 × 5 digits using a fine-tuned GPT-2 Small. Compared to no
CoT configurations like (Vanilla, Pause), our method enables solving tasks previously not solvable
without explicit CoT. We can see the effectiveness of the Seq-VCR on 4 × 4 digit multiplication task
where without pause token it improves performance from 25% to 52% and with 2 pause tokens Seq-
VCR + Pause achieves accuracy 99.2%, which is close to With CoT performance and significantly
better than other configuration without CoT. It even outperforms the 5-shot prompt(with or without
CoT) performance of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4.0.


                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Model          Configuration                          4x4 Mult           5x5 Mult
                                       With CoT                                0.43               0.05
                      GPT-3.5
                                         No CoT                                0.02               0.00
                                       With CoT                                0.77               0.44
                       GPT-4
                                         No CoT                                0.04               0.00
                                       With CoT                                 1.0                1.0
                                         Vanilla                               0.25                0.0
                    GPT-2 Small           Pause                                0.28                0.0
                                        Seq-VCR                                0.52                0.0
                                    Seq-VCR + Pause                           0.992              0.995

Table 1: Accuracy (exact match) on 4 × 4 and 5 × 5 digits Multiplication Tasks. GPT-3.5 and GPT-4
results are taken from Deng et al. (2024) which are produced by 5-shot prompt


We also see from Table 1 that GPT-4 with CoT 5-
shot prompts achieves 44.0% for 5 × 5 digit mul-                                  Vanilla       Pause          Seq-VCR       Seq-VCR+Pause
tiplication, while Vanilla, Seq-VCR, and Pause                         100
achieve 0% without CoT. Because, all configu-
rations struggle with predicting middle tokens in
the output sequence (shown in Figure 6). This                           80
happens because those middle tokens require
more computations to calculate successive carry
                                                        Accuracy (%)

and store them, since these tokens require more                         60
computation (as shown in Figure 1), thus making
them difficult sub-tasks than predicting the pe-
ripheral tokens which require less computations,                        40
thus easier to solve. However, Seq-VCR+Pause
with 2 Pause tokens solves the 5 × 5 digit multi-                       20
plication task, previously unsolved without CoT
tokens. Figure 2(b) shows our regularization
Seq-VCR increases intermediate layer entropy,                                 0       1     2    3      4      5    6    7     8    9
allowing more exploration in the representation                                                             Index
space. We hypothesize that along with better rep-
resentation by Seq-VCR, 2 Pause tokens increase         Figure 6: Position-wise accuracy of Multiplica-
the computational ability, allowing the model           tion of 5x5 digits with different configuration of
to carry the necessary multiplication values and        GPT-2 Small. We see that models fail on the mid-
solve the task. More results by training GPT-2          dle tokens as they require more compute.
from scratch are in the Appendix H.

4.6   R ESULTS ON A RITHMETIC E XPRESSION AND L ONGEST I NCREASING S UB - SEQUENCE
      (LIS) DATASETS

Figure 7 illustrates how the accuracy varies among different methods (represented by different bar
colors in the plot) and with changing levels of task complexity, such as the number of operators in
the Arithmetic Expressions Dataset or the input sequence length in the case of the LIS dataset.
We can observe that as the task complexity is low, i.e. in case of 4 operators in the arithmetic
expression and input sequence length of 50 in the LIS dataset, all the methods perform quite well.
But, as the number of operators or sequence length increases, the tasks become more complex,
which shows the need for models other than the vanilla baselines.
Seq-VCR demonstrates substantial improvement over vanilla models and achieved results compara-
ble to the chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting method as shown in Feng et al. (2024). Although CoT
outperforms the other methods, there is an increase in the serial computation due to its step-by-step
reasoning approach. On the other hand, Pause tokens and regularization primarily boost parallel
computation, enhancing the model’s expressivity for these types of problem without significantly
increasing serial computation. The results presented in Figure 7 are based on models with a 5-layer
configuration, optimized using the best-performing number of pause tokens. We find that the num-
ber of pause tokens that works best for a particular model and layer config vary a bit. For example,


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (a) Test accuracy on Arithmetic Expressions Dataset    (b) Test accuracy on LIS Dataset

               Figure 7: Performance of each method across tasks of varying difficulty


(a) Test accuracy on 6 operator Arithmetic Ex-             (b) Test accuracy on LIS Dataset with 100 In-
pression                                                   put Sequence Length

      Figure 8: Performance of each method on the complex task w/ varying number of layers


the best working Seq-VCR + Pause model uses 7 pause tokens in the case of the 5 operator task
in Arithmetic Expression, while 4 pause tokens work the best for the LIS task with 80 as input se-
quence length. In Figure 8 we show how the different models perform in the most complex task in
each dataset. We also clearly see that more depth of the model helps every method in solving the
task better. Another conclusion we can draw from Figures 7 and 8 is that although the combination
of Seq-VCR with Pause Tokens works best (almost close to the CoT method), Seq-VCR achieves a
similar test accuracy without the use of Pause Tokens in both datasets. All results in Figures 7 and 8
are over 3 seed runs. Detailed ablation studies, exploring variations in the number of pause tokens,
layers, and task complexities, can be found in the Appendices B and C.


5    C ONCLUSION
Despite the remarkable success of large transformer based language models, they exhibit deficien-
cies in multi-step reasoning tasks. One proposed remedy is the application of Chain-of-Thought
supervision, which, although effective, entails considerable cost. Conversely, there has been lim-
ited exploration into enhancing the capacity of the pre-trained model representation itself without
explicit supervision. Our analysis indicates that intermediate layer representation collapse detrimen-
tally affects the computation of intermediate information essential for solving arithmetic reasoning
tasks. Our proposed regularization technique enhances the model’s representation capacity, thereby
improving its ability to solve these tasks. We think that further research is required to enhance the
capability of pre-training as well, where improved representation learning will enhance the model
with greater capabilities.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the support of the Canada CIFAR AI Chair Program and IVADO. We thank Mila
and Compute Canada for providing computational resources.

R EFERENCES
Francis Bach. Information theory with kernel methods. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
  69(2):752–775, 2022.

Federico Barbero, Andrea Banino, Steven Kapturowski, Dharshan Kumaran, João GM Araújo, Alex
  Vitvitskyi, Razvan Pascanu, and Petar Veličković. Transformers need glasses! information over-
  squashing in language tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04267, 2024.

Adrien Bardes, Jean Ponce, and Yann LeCun. Vicreg: Variance-invariance-covariance regularization
  for self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04906, 2021.

Paul Boes, Jens Eisert, Rodrigo Gallego, Markus P Müller, and Henrik Wilming. Von neumann
  entropy from unitarity. Physical review letters, 122(21):210402, 2019.

Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.

Antoine Bosselut, Hannah Rashkin, Maarten Sap, Chaitanya Malaviya, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Yejin
  Choi. Comet: Commonsense transformers for automatic knowledge graph construction. In ACL,
  2019.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeff Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. ArXiv, abs/2005.14165, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:218971783.

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, John A. Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Ka-
   mar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuan-Fang Li, Scott M. Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi,
   Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments
   with gpt-4. ArXiv, abs/2303.12712, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
   CorpusID:257663729.

Thomas H Cormen, Charles E Leiserson, Ronald L Rivest, and Clifford Stein. Introduction to
  algorithms. MIT press, 2022.

Yuntian Deng, Kiran Prasad, Roland Fernandez, Paul Smolensky, Vishrav Chaudhary, and Stu-
  art Shieber. Implicit chain of thought reasoning via knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.01460, 2023.

Yuntian Deng, Yejin Choi, and Stuart Shieber. From explicit cot to implicit cot: Learning to inter-
  nalize cot step by step. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14838, 2024.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In North American Chapter of the Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics, 2019. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:52967399.

Guhao Feng, Bohang Zhang, Yuntian Gu, Haotian Ye, Di He, and Liwei Wang. Towards revealing
  the mystery behind chain of thought: a theoretical perspective. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Luis Gonzalo Sanchez Giraldo, Murali Rao, and Jose C Principe. Measures of entropy from data
  using infinitely divisible kernels. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 61(1):535–548,
  2014.
Sachin Goyal, Ziwei Ji, Ankit Singh Rawat, Aditya Krishna Menon, Sanjiv Kumar, and Vaish-
  navh Nagarajan. Think before you speak: Training language models with pause tokens. ArXiv,
  abs/2310.02226, 2023a.     URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  263608983.
Sachin Goyal, Ziwei Ji, Ankit Singh Rawat, Aditya Krishna Menon, Sanjiv Kumar, and Vaishnavh
  Nagarajan. Think before you speak: Training language models with pause tokens. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.02226, 2023b.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:21271–21284, 2020.
Mingyu Jin, Qinkai Yu, Haiyan Zhao, Wenyue Hua, Yanda Meng, Yongfeng Zhang, Mengnan
 Du, et al. The impact of reasoning step length on large language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2401.04925, 2024.
Li Jing, Pascal Vincent, Yann LeCun, and Yuandong Tian. Understanding dimensional collapse in
  contrastive self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.09348, 2021.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.20050, 2023.
William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The parallelism tradeoff: Limitations of log-precision trans-
 formers. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:531–545, 2023.
Jacob Pfau, William Merrill, and Samuel R Bowman. Let’s think dot by dot: Hidden computation
  in transformer language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15758, 2024.
Luyu Qiu, Jianing Li, Chi Su, Chen Jason Zhang, and Lei Chen. Dissecting multiplication in trans-
  formers: Insights into llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15360, 2024.
Alec Radford and Karthik Narasimhan. Improving language understanding by generative pre-
  training. 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:49313245.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training. 2018.
Clayton Sanford, Daniel J Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. Representational strengths and limitations of
  transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Bernhard Scholkopf and Alexander J Smola. Learning with kernels: support vector machines,
  regularization, optimization, and beyond. MIT press, 2018.
Oscar Skean, Jhoan Keider Hoyos Osorio, Austin J Brockmeier, and Luis Gonzalo Sanchez Giraldo.
  Dime: Maximizing mutual information by a difference of matrix-based entropies. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.08164, 2023.
Oscar Skean, Md Rifat Arefin, and Ravid Shwartz-Ziv. Does representation matter? exploring inter-
  mediate layers in large language models. In Workshop on Machine Learning and Compression,
  NeurIPS 2024, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=FN0tZ9pVLz.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka Kluska,
  Aitor Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power, Alex Ray, Alex Warstadt, Alexander W. Ko-
  curek, Ali Safaya, Ali Tazarv, Alice Xiang, Alicia Parrish, Allen Nie, Aman Hussain, Amanda
  Askell, Amanda Dsouza, Ambrose Slone, Ameet Annasaheb Rahane, Anantharaman S. Iyer,
  Anders Andreassen, Andrea Madotto, Andrea Santilli, Andreas Stuhlmuller, Andrew M. Dai,


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Andrew La, Andrew Kyle Lampinen, Andy Zou, Angela Jiang, Angelica Chen, Anh Vuong,
  Animesh Gupta, Anna Gottardi, Antonio Norelli, Anu Venkatesh, Arash Gholamidavoodi, Arfa
  Tabassum, Arul Menezes, Arun Kirubarajan, Asher Mullokandov, Ashish Sabharwal, Austin Her-
  rick, Avia Efrat, Aykut Erdem, Ayla Karakacs, B. Ryan Roberts, Bao Sheng Loe, Barret Zoph,
  Bartlomiej Bojanowski, Batuhan Ozyurt, Behnam Hedayatnia, Behnam Neyshabur, Benjamin
  Inden, Benno Stein, Berk Ekmekci, Bill Yuchen Lin, Blake Stephen Howald, Bryan Orinion,
  Cameron Diao, Cameron Dour, Catherine Stinson, Cedrick Argueta, C’esar Ferri Ram’irez, Chan-
  dan Singh, Charles Rathkopf, Chenlin Meng, Chitta Baral, Chiyu Wu, Chris Callison-Burch,
  Chris Waites, Christian Voigt, Christopher D. Manning, Christopher Potts, Cindy Ramirez, Clara
  Rivera, Clemencia Siro, Colin Raffel, Courtney Ashcraft, Cristina Garbacea, Damien Sileo,
  Daniel H Garrette, Dan Hendrycks, Dan Kilman, Dan Roth, Daniel Freeman, Daniel Khashabi,
  Daniel Levy, Daniel Mosegu’i Gonz’alez, Danielle R. Perszyk, Danny Hernandez, Danqi Chen,
  Daphne Ippolito, Dar Gilboa, David Dohan, David Drakard, David Jurgens, Debajyoti Datta,
  Deep Ganguli, Denis Emelin, Denis Kleyko, Deniz Yuret, Derek Chen, Derek Tam, Dieuwke
  Hupkes, Diganta Misra, Dilyar Buzan, Dimitri Coelho Mollo, Diyi Yang, Dong-Ho Lee, Dy-
  lan Schrader, Ekaterina Shutova, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Elad Segal, Eleanor Hagerman, Elizabeth
  Barnes, Elizabeth P. Donoway, Ellie Pavlick, Emanuele Rodolà, Emma Lam, Eric Chu, Eric Tang,
  Erkut Erdem, Ernie Chang, Ethan A. Chi, Ethan Dyer, Ethan J. Jerzak, Ethan Kim, Eunice En-
  gefu Manyasi, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Fanyue Xia, Fatemeh Siar, Fernando Mart’inez-Plumed,
  Francesca Happ’e, François Chollet, Frieda Rong, Gaurav Mishra, Genta Indra Winata, Ger-
  ard de Melo, Germán Kruszewski, Giambattista Parascandolo, Giorgio Mariani, Gloria Wang,
  Gonzalo Jaimovitch-L’opez, Gregor Betz, Guy Gur-Ari, Hana Galijasevic, Hannah Kim, Hannah
  Rashkin, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Harsh Mehta, Hayden Bogar, Henry Shevlin, Hinrich Schutze,
  Hiromu Yakura, Hongming Zhang, Hugh Mee Wong, Ian Ng, Isaac Noble, Jaap Jumelet, Jack
  Geissinger, John Kernion, Jacob Hilton, Jaehoon Lee, Jaime Fernández Fisac, James B. Simon,
  James Koppel, James Zheng, James Zou, Jan Koco’n, Jana Thompson, Janelle Wingfield, Jared
  Kaplan, Jarema Radom, Jascha Narain Sohl-Dickstein, Jason Phang, Jason Wei, Jason Yosin-
  ski, Jekaterina Novikova, Jelle Bosscher, Jennifer Marsh, Jeremy Kim, Jeroen Taal, Jesse En-
  gel, Jesujoba Oluwadara Alabi, Jiacheng Xu, Jiaming Song, Jillian Tang, Jane W Waweru, John
  Burden, John Miller, John U. Balis, Jonathan Batchelder, Jonathan Berant, Jorg Frohberg, Jos
  Rozen, José Hernández-Orallo, Joseph Boudeman, Joseph Guerr, Joseph Jones, Joshua Tenen-
  baum, Joshua S. Rule, Joyce Chua, Kamil Kanclerz, Karen Livescu, Karl Krauth, Karthik
  Gopalakrishnan, Katerina Ignatyeva, Katja Markert, Kaustubh D. Dhole, Kevin Gimpel, Kevin
  Omondi, Kory Wallace Mathewson, Kristen Chiafullo, Ksenia Shkaruta, Kumar Shridhar, Kyle
  McDonell, Kyle Richardson, Laria Reynolds, Leo Gao, Li Zhang, Liam Dugan, Lianhui Qin,
  Lidia Contreras-Ochando, Louis-Philippe Morency, Luca Moschella, Luca Lam, Lucy Noble,
  Ludwig Schmidt, Luheng He, Luis Oliveros Col’on, Luke Metz, Lutfi Kerem cSenel, Maarten
  Bosma, Maarten Sap, Maartje ter Hoeve, Maheen Farooqi, Manaal Faruqui, Mantas Mazeika,
  Marco Baturan, Marco Marelli, Marco Maru, Maria Jose Ram’irez Quintana, Marie Tolkiehn,
  Mario Giulianelli, Martha Lewis, Martin Potthast, Matthew L. Leavitt, Matthias Hagen, M’aty’as
  Schubert, Medina Baitemirova, Melody Arnaud, Melvin Andrew McElrath, Michael A. Yee,
  Michael Cohen, Michael Gu, Michael Igorevich Ivanitskiy, Michael Starritt, Michael Strube,
  Michal Swkedrowski, Michele Bevilacqua, Michihiro Yasunaga, Mihir Kale, Mike Cain, Mimee
  Xu, Mirac Suzgun, Mitch Walker, Monica Tiwari, Mohit Bansal, Moin Aminnaseri, Mor Geva,
  Mozhdeh Gheini, T MukundVarma, Nanyun Peng, Nathan A. Chi, Nayeon Lee, Neta Gur-Ari
  Krakover, Nicholas Cameron, Nicholas Roberts, Nick Doiron, Nicole Martinez, Nikita Nangia,
  Niklas Deckers, Niklas Muennighoff, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Niveditha Iyer, Noah Constant, Noah
  Fiedel, Nuan Wen, Oliver Zhang, Omar Agha, Omar Elbaghdadi, Omer Levy, Owain Evans,
  Pablo Antonio Moreno Casares, Parth Doshi, Pascale Fung, Paul Pu Liang, Paul Vicol, Pegah
  Alipoormolabashi, Peiyuan Liao, Percy Liang, Peter Chang, Peter Eckersley, Phu Mon Htut, Pi-
  Bei Hwang, P. Milkowski, Piyush S. Patil, Pouya Pezeshkpour, Priti Oli, Qiaozhu Mei, Qing
  Lyu, Qinlang Chen, Rabin Banjade, Rachel Etta Rudolph, Raefer Gabriel, Rahel Habacker, Ra-
  mon Risco, Raphael Milliere, Rhythm Garg, Richard Barnes, Rif A. Saurous, Riku Arakawa,
  Robbe Raymaekers, Robert Frank, Rohan Sikand, Roman Novak, Roman Sitelew, Ronan Le-
  bras, Rosanne Liu, Rowan Jacobs, Rui Zhang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Ryan Chi, Ryan Lee,
  Ryan Stovall, Ryan Teehan, Rylan Yang, Sahib Singh, Saif M. Mohammad, Sajant Anand, Sam
  Dillavou, Sam Shleifer, Sam Wiseman, Samuel Gruetter, Samuel R. Bowman, Samuel S. Schoen-
  holz, Sanghyun Han, Sanjeev Kwatra, Sarah A. Rous, Sarik Ghazarian, Sayan Ghosh, Sean
  Casey, Sebastian Bischoff, Sebastian Gehrmann, Sebastian Schuster, Sepideh Sadeghi, Shadi S.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Hamdan, Sharon Zhou, Shashank Srivastava, Sherry Shi, Shikhar Singh, Shima Asaadi, Shix-
  iang Shane Gu, Shubh Pachchigar, Shubham Toshniwal, Shyam Upadhyay, Shyamolima Deb-
  nath, Siamak Shakeri, Simon Thormeyer, Simone Melzi, Siva Reddy, Sneha Priscilla Makini,
  Soo-Hwan Lee, Spencer Torene, Sriharsha Hatwar, Stanislas Dehaene, Stefan Divic, Stefano Er-
  mon, Stella Biderman, Stephanie Lin, Stephen Prasad, Steven T Piantadosi, Stuart M. Shieber,
  Summer Misherghi, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Swaroop Mishra, Tal Linzen, Tal Schuster, Tao Li,
  Tao Yu, Tariq Ali, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Te-Lin Wu, Theo Desbordes, Theodore Rothschild,
  Thomas Phan, Tianle Wang, Tiberius Nkinyili, Timo Schick, Timofei Kornev, Titus Tunduny,
  Tobias Gerstenberg, Trenton Chang, Trishala Neeraj, Tushar Khot, Tyler Shultz, Uri Shaham,
  Vedant Misra, Vera Demberg, Victoria Nyamai, Vikas Raunak, Vinay Venkatesh Ramasesh,
  Vinay Uday Prabhu, Vishakh Padmakumar, Vivek Srikumar, William Fedus, William Saunders,
  William Zhang, Wout Vossen, Xiang Ren, Xiaoyu Tong, Xinran Zhao, Xinyi Wu, Xudong Shen,
  Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh, Yair Lakretz, Yangqiu Song, Yasaman Bahri, Yejin Choi, Yichi Yang,
  Yiding Hao, Yifu Chen, Yonatan Belinkov, Yu Hou, Yu Hou, Yuntao Bai, Zachary Seid, Zhuoye
  Zhao, Zijian Wang, Zijie J. Wang, Zirui Wang, and Ziyi Wu. Beyond the imitation game: Quanti-
  fying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. ArXiv, abs/2206.04615, 2022. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263625818.
Lena Strobl, William Merrill, Gail Weiss, David Chiang, and Dana Angluin. Transformers as rec-
  ognizers of formal languages: A survey on expressivity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00208, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Weizhi Wang, Li Dong, Hao Cheng, Xiaodong Liu, Xifeng Yan, Jianfeng Gao, and Furu Wei. Aug-
 menting language models with long-term memory. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 36, 2024.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Huai hsin Chi, F. Xia, Quoc
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language mod-
  els. ArXiv, abs/2201.11903, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:246411621.
Zhen Yang, Ming Ding, Qingsong Lv, Zhihuan Jiang, Zehai He, Yuyi Guo, Jinfeng Bai, and Jie Tang.
  Gpt can solve mathematical problems without a calculator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03241,
  2023.
Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and Stephane Deny. Barlow twins: Self-
  supervised learning via redundancy reduction. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 12310–12320. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v139/zbontar21a.html.
Jiachen Zhu, Katrina Evtimova, Yubei Chen, Ravid Shwartz-Ziv, and Yann LeCun. Variance-
   covariance regularization improves representation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13292,
   2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     H YPERPARAMETERS

                   Parameter                                Value/Details
                   Learning Rate                               0.0001
                   Batch Size                                    128
                   Optimizer                                  AdamW
                   Dropout                                       0.1
                   Attn. Heads                                    4
                   Epochs                                        100
                   Number of Layers                            4, 5, 6
                   Input Sequence Length                     50, 80, 100
                   # of Operators                              4, 5, 6
                   Total Compute Resources          1 32GB GPU, 6CPU, 32 GB RAM
                   Total Job Time                            max 24 Hrs

Table 2: Summary of Hyper-parameters, Compute Resources, and Time for Experiments. Each
experiment was run on same configurations of GPUs, with the total time dependent on the number
of layers and input parameters such as Dataset, task complexity.

We manually searched for hyperparameters, we did not do exhaustive searches such as grid search or
random search. We found this was enough to find good hyperparameters for our tasks. For the two
coefficients λ1 and λ2 in Equation ??, we keep their proportion similar to(Bardes et al., 2021). For
multiplication tasks λ1 = 1.0 and λ2 = 0.004 and for other tasks we use λ1 = 0.1 and λ2 = 0.5.
For computing the covariance matrix, we use a batch size of 32 for multiplication tasks and 128 for
others. Other hyperparams like learning rate and batch size values are similar to other related works
(Deng et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2024).
Regarding the number of pause tokens, we tried 2, 4, 6, 8 pause tokens on 4x4 and 5x5 digit multi-
plication tasks, and we did not find any correlation with task complexity. We believe it may be due
to the fact that all the pause tokens share the same embedding.

B     M ODEL C OMPLEXITY VS TASK D IFFICULTY


    (a) Test accuracy on Arithmetic Expressions Dataset     (b) Test accuracy on LIS Dataset

Figure 9: Seq-VCR + Pause Accuracy Vs Number of Layers for tasks of different complexity in
Arithmetic Expressions and LIS

Both plots in Figure9 demonstrate the trade-offs between model complexity (in terms of layers)
and the complexity of the input (number of operators or sequence length). The model performs
best when handling simpler configurations, such as fewer operators or shorter sequences, and tends
to struggle with more complex setups as the number of operators or sequence length increases.
Moreover, Increasing the number of layers seems to mitigate performance drops to some extent,
especially in simpler cases, but it cannot fully offset the challenges posed by more complex inputs.
All results in figure 9 are over 3 seed runs.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    N UMBER OF PAUSE T OKENS VS TASK C OMPLEXITY


Figure 10: Ablation of Varying Pause Tokens and Comparing Vanilla Vs Seq-VCR + Pause Tokens
for different Task Complexities in the arithmetic dataset. Low, High, Medium refer to 4, 5, 6 arith-
metic Operators respectively, when number of layers is fixed to 5.

Figure10 shows that Seq-VCR + Pause model consistently achieves high accuracy (around 0.8 or
higher) across all numbers of pause tokens, indicating that the addition of pause tokens does not
affect its performance. The Vanilla model, in contrast, exhibits much lower accuracy across all
settings except for the low-complexity task with four operators. We hypothesize that this is because
five layers are likely sufficient to solve such a simple task.
For this task, where the Vanilla model performs better, we observe a notable drop in accuracy when
pause tokens are added. We speculate that this occurs because, in scenarios where the model has suf-
ficient capacity to solve the task, pause tokens introduce distractions that hinder performance rather
than enhancing it. However, in tasks with insufficient depth, such as the 5x5 digit multiplication task
on GPT2-Small, pause tokens prove beneficial, as shown in Table 1.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    DATA S TATISTICS

                                                          # Input   # CoT      # Output
                Dataset             Task          Size
                                                          Tokens    Tokens      Tokens
                                 4 x 4 Mult      808k        9        47          8
             Multiplication      5 x 5 Mult      808k       11        75          10
                                4 Operators       1M        19        24          1
              Arithmetic
              Expression        5 Operators       1M        23        40          1
                                6 Operators       1M        27        60          1
                               Seq Length 50      1M        50        50          1
                  LIS          Seq Length 80      1M        80        80          1
                              Seq Length 100      1M       100        100         1

Table 3: Dataset statistics. Size refers to the training set. The number of input, output, and inter-
mediate chain of thought tokens are median values on the validation set. The number of tokens are
based on the GPT-2 tokenizer, and a special ending symbol is counted for both intermediate tokens
and output tokens.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    S PEEDUP AND ACCURACY TRADE - OFF FOR PAUSE AND C OT TOKENS
Seq-VCR offers notable benefits over Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning, particularly in reducing
inference time and dependency on costly human-supervised data. Unlike CoT, which requires exten-
sive labeled data for multi-step reasoning, Seq-VCR uses a few dummy pause tokens to solve tasks
like multiplication in a fraction of the time (5 times faster), while performing at a similar accuracy
close to 100% in our experiments (see table below). Seq-VCR’s efficiency in both inference time,
data requirements, and accuracy makes it a more scalable and robust approach compared to CoT.
To compute the normalized throughput for inference, we use the following equation, as in the Deng
et al. (2024) paper:
                                                 Ttarget
                                        Tnorm =
                                                 Tbase
Here:

        • Tnorm is the normalized throughput, which represents the relative inference speed.
        • Ttarget is the throughput (number of examples processed per second) when using target
          method.
        • Tbase is the throughput (number of examples processed per second) for the baseline model
          without Chain of Thought or Pause tokens.

                                               Tnorm                  Accuracy
                     Method             4x4 Mult 5x5 Mult        4x4 Mult 5x5 Mult
               No CoT                      1.0        1.0          0.25       0.0
               With CoT                   0.17       0.14          1.0        1.0
               Seq-VCR + Pause (2)        0.95       0.91         0.992      0.995

Table 4: Normalized Throughput (the higher the better) and Accuracy measures on 4 × 4 and 5 × 5
digit multiplication without CoT tokens, with CoT tokens, and with 2 pause tokens.

Note, that it is expected that models with CoT tokens perform the best as CoT tokens carry more
useful information than simple dummy pause tokens. However, they are more expensive to get
(human labor) and require more compute to generate at inference time (since there are more of
them). In that sense, Seq-VCR will always scale better than CoT, no matter the model size.

F    C OMPUTATION OF THE COVARIANCE MATRIX ACROSS BOTH THE BATCH
     AND LENGTH DIMENSIONS

Here we present an ablation study done by fine-tuning GPT2-small on the 5 × 5 digit multiplication.
We compared the performance of calculating the covariance matrix across the batch dimension vs
both the batch and the length dimensions and present results in the Table below.

                GPT2-small (fine-tuned)          Accuracy      Compute Complexity
                baseline                         0             0
                Seq-VCR - batch dim              0.99          O(b · d2 )
                Seq-VCR - batch+length dim       0.98          O(b · n · d2 )

Table 5: Accuracy and compute complexity (when b, n and d are batch size, # tokens and feature
dimension respectively) difference between computing the covariance matrix across the batch vs
length+batch dimensions.

We find that there are no significant differences (between 98 and 99% accuracy on 5x5 digit multi-
plication). However the computation time is n times larger on average when using both the batch
and length dimensions, which grows with the increase of sequence lengths.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    A BALATION OF L AYERS
We apply Seq-VCR to all layers while fine-tuning GPT-2-small on a 5x5 multiplication task. The
results indicate improved performance when Seq-VCR is applied to the last layer.

                                    Layer        L0      L11    L12
                                   Accuracy     0.97     0.98   0.99

                 Table 6: Performance of Seq-VCR + Pause across different layers.

With λ1 = 1.0, λ2 = 0.004, and pause = 2, we achieve these results, where applying Seq-VCR on
the first and last two layers almost solves the task, but for the rest of the layers it does not work.
However, hyperparameter tuning may be required for other layers.

H    P RE - TRAINED MODELS VS TRAINING FROM SCRATCH
Here, we run more experiments to emphasize the advantage of fine-tuning pre-trained models. We
train a GPT2-small model from scratch on 5 × 5 digit multiplication tasks over multiple hyperpa-
rameter settings and present the results in the table below:

                  GPT2-small                            From Scratch     Fine-Tuned
                  Layer                                 L12     L0       L12    L0
                  Baseline                               0       0        0      0
                  Seq-VCR - batch dim                   0.03   0.97      0.99 0.97
                  Seq-VCR - batch+length dim            0.87   0.99      0.98   1.0

Table 7: Accuracy of pre-trained and training from scratch by computing the covariance matrix
across the batch vs. length+batch dimensions, applying Seq-VCR on 1st (L0) and last (L12) layers

Training models from scratch is more sensitive to hyperparameter choices, such as batch size, and
performs poorly when Seq-VCR is applied to the last layer. However, computing covariance across
both the batch and length dimensions significantly improves performance. In contrast, fine-tuning
GPT-2 proves to be more stable than training from scratch. Interestingly, as shown in Table 7,
applying regularization to the 1st(L0) layer is effective for both fine-tuning and training from scratch.
This is likely because Seq-VCR at the 1st(L0) layer enhances collapse prevention, as shown in
Figure 15.

I   E XPERIMENTS WITH L ARGER MODEL
To test the effectiveness of our approach on larger, more recent models we applied our Sec-VCR
regularization method during fine-tuning of a Llama3.2-1B model with LoRA(r = 64) adapters on
the challenging 5x5 digit multiplication task.
We measure the representation collapse across layers for the finetuned model with and without our
regularization and report results in Figure 11 below.

                                     LLama 3.2-1B         Accuracy
                                     Vanilla              0
                                     Seq-VCR              0.974

       Table 8: Accuracy of finetuning Llama3.2-1B model on 5x5 digit multiplication task

We find that the model trained with Sec-VCR has a higher average entropy (reduced collapse) by
10-20% compared to the baseline llama model and achieving 97.4% (Table 8) accuracy. This exper-
iment highlights that collapse is not an isolated case and is still an issue in more recent models.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 Vanilla                Seq-VCR            Pretrained
                                         0.7
                                         0.6


                       Average Entropy
                                         0.5
                                         0.4
                                         0.3
                                         0.2
                                         0.1
                                         0.0
                                                            0        2         4    6        8       10   12    14        16
                                                                                         Layer
Figure 11: Representation collapse across llama3.2-1B layers on the 5 × 5 digit multiplication task.


J       C OLLAPSE AT S CALE

                                                Llama-3.2-1B                       Llama-3.2-3B           Meta-Llama-3-8B
                                                           0.6

                                                           0.5
                                         Average Entropy


                                                           0.4

                                                           0.3

                                                           0.2

                                                           0.1

                                                           0.0
                                                                 0         5       10        15      20    25        30
                                                                                             Layer
    Figure 12: Representation collapse across scale (1B, 3B and 8B) of LLama pretrained models

We tested pre-trained Llama models of varying scales on the 5x5 digit multiplication dataset and
observed consistent representation collapse across all model sizes (Figure 12). This highlights that
the issue persists regardless of scale, emphasizing the need for effective regularization techniques
like Seq-VCR to mitigate collapse and improve intermediate reasoning capabilities.


K        C OLLAPSE M ITIGATION IN OTHER B ENCHMARKS

To test the effectiveness of our method to other domains, we finetuned a Code-GPT-2 Small model
on the CodeXGLUE-text-to-code benchmark4 . We measure the representation collapse across layers
for the finetuned model with and without our regularization and report results in Figure 13 below.
We find that the model trained with Sec-VCR has a higher average entropy (reduced collapse) than
the baseline pre-trained llama model by 3-4%. This experiment showcases that our method also
reduces collapse in other domains.

    4
        https://github.com/microsoft/CodeXGLUE/tree/main/Text-Code/text-to-code


                                                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Vanilla         Seq-VCR           Pretrained
                                                   0.31

                                                   0.30


                                 Average Entropy
                                                   0.29

                                                   0.28

                                                   0.27

                                                   0.26

                                                           0       2     4          6      8       10           12
                                                                                 Layer
Figure 13: Representation collapse across Code-GPT-2 Small layers on the CodeXGLUE-text-to-
code task.



L    C OLLAPSE M ITIGATION D URING P RE - TRAINING

To evaluate the effectiveness of our method in mitigating representation collapse during pre-training,
we trained GPT-2-small from scratch on the C4 dataset. The regularizer was applied either to the
last layer (L12) or the first layer (L0). As shown in Figure 14, the validation perplexity achieved by
our method is similar to the baseline Vanilla validation perplexity. For L0, λ1 = 1.0 and λ2 = 0.01
and for L12, λ1 = 0.5 and λ2 = 0.1



                           120                                                                                       Seq-VCR: L0
                                                                                                                     Vanilla
                                                                                                                     Seq-VCR: L12


                           100
          Val Perplexity


                           80



                           60



                           40

                                                    5000        10000        15000       20000          25000           30000
                                                                                 Steps

                       Figure 14: Validation Perplexity of GPT-2 Small trained on the C4 dataset.


However, Figure 15 demonstrates that Seq-VCR effectively mitigates collapse across layers. We find
that the model trained with Sec-VCR has a higher average entropy (reduced collapse) than the vanila
trained model by 3-5%. This experiment showcases that our method also reduces collapse in other
domains. Notably, applying the regularizer to the first layer resulted in a more stable prevention of
collapse in intermediate layers.


                                                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Vanilla       Seq-VCR: L12             Seq-VCR: L0        Random
                            0.9


                            0.8
          Average Entropy
                            0.7


                            0.6


                            0.5
                                  0     2       4      6         8        10       12
                                                     Layer
      Figure 15: Representation collapse across GPT-2 Small layers after the C4 pretraining.


M    R ESULTS ON GSM8K
We performed further experiments to fine-tune the GPT-2 Small model using an enhanced version
of the GSM8K dataset[1], incorporating and excluding Seq-VCR, Pause (2), and CoT. The findings
are presented below.

                                                  Method             Accuracy
                                                  Vanilla             0.191
                                                   CoT                0.437
                                                 Pause(2)             0.197
                                                 Seq-VCR              0.198
                                            Seq-VCR + Pause(2)        0.202

  Table 9: Comparison of Various Methods by Fine-tuning GPT-2 Small on the GSM8K Dataset.

For this dataset, performance improves slightly compared to Vanilla fine-tuning when using Seq-
VCR without pauses, and even more when applying pauses with Seq-VCR.


                                                           22
