Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


W ORKFLOW LLM: E NHANCING W ORKFLOW O RCHES -
TRATION C APABILITY OF L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Shengda Fan1∗ , Xin Cong2∗† , Yuepeng Fu2 , Zhong Zhang2 , Shuyan Zhang3 , Yuanwei Liu4 ,
  Yesai Wu2 , Yankai Lin1† , Zhiyuan Liu2 , Maosong Sun2
 1
   Renmin University of China 2 Tsinghua University 3 The University of Manchester
 4
   Wuhan University
 fanshengda,yankailin@ruc.edu.cn, congxin1995@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn



                                              A BSTRACT

            Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have driven a revolution-
            ary paradigm shift in process automation from Robotic Process Automation to
            Agentic Process Automation by automating the workflow orchestration procedure
            based on LLMs. However, existing LLMs (even the advanced OpenAI GPT-4o)
            are confined to achieving satisfactory capability in workflow orchestration. To
            address this limitation, we present WorkflowLLM, a data-centric framework elab-
            orately designed to enhance the capability of LLMs in workflow orchestration.
            It first constructs a large-scale fine-tuning dataset WorkflowBench with 106, 763
            samples, covering 1, 503 APIs from 83 applications across 28 categories. Specif-
            ically, the construction process can be divided into three phases: (1) Data Collec-
            tion: we collect real-world workflow data from Apple Shortcuts and RoutineHub,
            transcribing them into Python-style code. We further equip them with generated
            hierarchical thought via GPT-4o-mini. (2) Query Expansion: we prompt GPT-4o-
            mini to generate more task queries to enrich the diversity and complexity of work-
            flows. (3) Workflow Generation: we leverage an annotator model trained on col-
            lected data to generate workflows for synthesized queries. Finally, we merge the
            synthetic samples that pass quality confirmation with the collected samples to ob-
            tain the WorkflowBench. Based on WorkflowBench, we fine-tune Llama-3.1-8B
            to obtain WorkflowLlama. Our experiments show that WorkflowLlama demon-
            strates a strong capacity to orchestrate complex workflows, while also achiev-
            ing notable generalization performance on previously unseen APIs. Additionally,
            WorkflowBench exhibits robust zero-shot generalization capabilities on an out-
            of-distribution task planning dataset, T-Eval. Our data and code are available at
            https://github.com/OpenBMB/WorkflowLLM.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Process Automation (PA) (Cichocki et al., 1997), as a long-standing pursuit of the human race, aims
to automate repetitive tasks to minimize human labor and improve efficiency. Robotic Process Au-
tomation (RPA), the current predominant PA technique, abstracts the repetitive task into a workflow
(i.e., a program that can execute automatically) by orchestrating various actions (e.g., functions or
APIs) (Ivančić et al., 2019; Hofmann et al., 2020; Wewerka & Reichert, 2020; Agostinelli et al.,
2020; Ferreira et al., 2020). While RPA successfully reduces the human labor via automated work-
flow execution, the process of orchestrating workflows still requires substantial manual effort. Re-
cently, large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2022; 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Dubey et al.,
2024) have achieved remarkable performance beyond natural language processing (Ahn et al., 2022;
Cheng et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2024). The emergence of LLMs has unveiled a paradigm shift trend,
moving from Robotic Process Automation to Agentic Process Automation (APA) (Ye et al., 2023;
Zeng et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024; Wornow et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024) which automates the
workflow orchestration process by utilizing LLMs to build the workflow.
    ∗
        Indicates equal contribution.
    †
        Corresponding author.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Data Collection                Query Expansion           Workflow Generation



                                                                                                                          Map     Notification
                                              ChatGPT


                                                                                                                                   Location      Map   Uber   Email
        Shortcuts     RoutineHub                                      WorkflowBench
                                          Annotator Model                                     Calendar   Loop   Branch   Branch                                       End Loop

                                                                                                                                     Skip

                    Help me to develop a workflow
                                                            Sure!
                     to manage my appointment                                                                             Skip

      Human                                                           WorkflowLlama



Figure 1: Overview of WorkflowLLM. It first constructs WorkflowBench through a three-phase
pipeline and fine-tunes WorkflowLlama, which can generate workflows based on the user’s query
(appointment management in this case).


The paradigm shift is hindered by LLMs’ limited ability to orchestrate complex workflows, lead-
ing to two main limitations in current APA methods: (1) Limited Action Scale: LLMs, even ad-
vanced models like GPT-4, can only orchestrate workflows with an average of 6.1 actions, falling
short of real-world complexity requirements (Ye et al., 2023). In contrast, Apple Shortcuts typically
involves 70.4 actions. (2) Simple Logical Structure: Most current methods focus on sequential
actions (Yao et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024), while real-world workflows require
more complex structures, including nested branches/loops, as seen in Apple Shortcuts’ average of
2.6 nested logical structures. Thus, there is an urgent need to unlock the workflow orchestration
capability of LLMs to expedite the paradigm shift in process automation.
To address these challenges, we propose WorkflowLLM, a data-centric framework including
dataset construction, model training, and evaluation to enhance LLMs’ workflow orchestration ca-
pabilities (shown in Figure 1). Specifically, we first construct WorkflowBench, the first dataset
explicitly designed for workflow generation. WorkflowBench consists of 106, 763 instances, en-
compassing 1, 503 APIs across 83 applications, structured through three primary phases:
• Data Collection: We select shortcuts from RoutineHub as high-quality data sources because they
  represent a robust RPA application with numerous expert-developed workflows available. We
  curate 14, 771 human-annotated, high-quality shortcuts spanning 28 diverse categories, alongside
  associated metadata including titles, functionality descriptions, and API documentations. As the
  raw shortcuts are not suitable for LLMs to process, and considering that Python allows convenient
  parameter passing and control logic (Wang et al., 2024b), we transcribe the shortcuts into Python
  code. Subsequently, we prompt GPT-4o-mini to generate comments, task plans, and task queries
  at varying levels of granularity—from fine-grained to coarse-grained—to enrich the data with
  detailed thought processes and enhance the learning efficacy of LLMs (Wei et al., 2023).
• Query Expansion: To enrich the diversity and complexity of workflows, we utilize GPT-4o-
  mini to generate additional task queries. Specifically, we first sample applications with diverse
  functionalities and select their APIs, along with built-in APIs, to prompt GPT-4o-mini to generate
  task queries that leverage these sampled APIs to accomplish specific tasks. To further ensure
  workflow complexity, we also sample real-world workflow examples as demonstrations to guide
  GPT-4o-mini in generating similar workflows.
• Workflow Generation: Since existing LLMs, including GPT-4o, struggle with workflow gener-
  ation, we first train a workflow annotator model on real-world shortcuts. We then use the trained
  annotator to generate workflows for expanded task queries. To maintain dataset quality, we per-
  form a quality confirmation step. Specifically, GPT-4o-mini refines the workflows to fix minor
  bugs, followed by rule-based filtering to remove workflows with logical errors.
To evaluate the capability of LLMs in workflow orchestration, we employ two metrics: the
reference-code-based metric CodeBLEU and the model-based metric Pass Rate. Experimental
results demonstrate that WorkflowLlama consistently and significantly outperforms all baselines,
including GPT-4o even with the in-context learning technique, across both metrics under unseen in-
structions and unseen APIs settings. Furthermore, WorkflowBench demonstrates strong generaliza-
tion capabilities in out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios, particularly on the T-Eval benchmark (Chen
et al., 2024), where it achieves an F1 plan score of 77.5%.


                                                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      Data Collection                                                                        Query Expansion
                                                                                                                       Workflow Examples

    Shortcuts Collection
                                    Crawl & Filter         Transcription      Thought Generation                                                Query Expansion

                                                                                                                            API Docs
                                                                                                    Real-World Data                                                 Queries

                                                                                                                       Workflow Categories
       API Collection


                        Supervised Fine-tuning                             Workflow Generation                            Annotator Training
                                                                                                                                                  Annotator Model


                                                     Fine-tuning                              Quality Confirmation                                    Workflow Generation


          Workflow            WorkflowLlama                                WorkflowBench                              Generated Workflows



Figure 2: Illustration of our WorkflowLLM which contains three phases to construct Workflow-
Bench, followed by the supervised fine-tuning phase to derive WorkflowLlama.


2        R ELATED W ORK

Process Automation RPA has gained considerable attention for automating repetitive tasks in var-
ious productivity scenarios (Ivančić et al., 2019; Hofmann et al., 2020; Wewerka & Reichert, 2020;
Agostinelli et al., 2020; Ferreira et al., 2020). RPA predominantly relies on handcrafted workflows
(e.g., programming, recording human behavior), making them highly suitable for automating well-
structured, routine processes (Herm et al., 2020). However, such approaches require substantial
efforts and in-depth domain expertise, resulting in high setup costs and limited adaptability. Re-
cent advancements in LLMs have spurred interest in integrating these models into RPA to enhance
flexibility and reduce dependency on manual workflow creation. Ye et al. (2023) introduced the
concept of APA, which utilizes LLMs to autonomously orchestrate workflows based on human in-
structions. Subsequently, several studies have sought to apply APA in various domains, including
travel planning (Xie et al., 2024), smartphone applications (Huang et al., 2024), enterprise automa-
tion (Wornow et al., 2024), financial question answering (Zeng et al., 2023), and data analysis (Li
et al., 2024). Despite relying on advanced LLMs (e.g., GPT-4), these approaches have often ex-
hibited suboptimal performance, highlighting challenges faced by existing LLMs in workflow or-
chestration. While Li et al. (2024) made an effort to fine-tune Mixtral-8×7B (Jiang et al., 2024),
it could only orchestrate sequential workflows with an average of 15.6 actions, remaining insuffi-
cient for real-world requirements. This work addresses a critical gap by proposing WorkflowLLM
framework to enhance the workflow orchestration capabilities of LLMs to meet real-world demands.

Tool Learning Workflow orchestration driven by LLMs frequently depends on external tools to
extend their operational capabilities. Recent studies show that LLMs can acquire and utilize tools
by learning from documentation, enabling them to tackle complex tasks beyond their native abili-
ties (Wu et al., 2023; Schick et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2023b; 2024). This integration allows LLMs
to access real-time knowledge and perform specialized operations, particularly for intricate pro-
cesses (Yang et al., 2023; Nakano et al., 2021; Qin et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2024c; Gao et al.,
2023). To further enhance this capability, several efforts have introduced datasets to fine-tune LLMs
for tool interaction (Zhuang et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a). However, they
have a limited action scope and lack complex logic control, focusing primarily on dynamically se-
lecting APIs and filling parameters. Compared to tool learning scenarios, orchestrating workflows
demands more sophisticated planning and reasoning that current LLMs have yet to fully realize. In
response to these limitations, we present WorkflowLLM to significantly improve LLMs’ capabili-
ties in workflow orchestration. Besides, Shen et al. (2024) also used Apple’s Shortcuts but aimed
to assess LLMs’ tool utilization ability. In contrast, we emphasize a different scenario, workflow
orchestration and aim to enhance the workflow orchestration ability rather than evaluation alone.


3        W ORKFLOW LLM

As Figure 2 shows, WorkflowLLM introduces a data-centric framework to enhance the capability
of LLMs in workflow orchestration by constructing a high-quality supervised fine-tuning dataset


                                                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


WorkflowBench. In this section, we outline the dataset construction process, which is carried out in
three distinct phases: Data Collection, Query Expansion, and Workflow Generation.

3.1    DATA C OLLECTION

We first introduce Apple Shortcuts and RoutineHub, and describe how we crawl and filter to get
high-quality data. We then convert the shortcuts into Python-style workflow code. Finally, we
prompt GPT-4o-mini 1 to generate hierarchical thoughts for each shortcut.

Apple Shortcuts and RoutineHub Apple Shortcuts, as a representative application of RPA, is
developed by Apple Inc. This tool facilitates the automation of a series of actions, enabling users
to efficiently perform a diverse range of tasks. The actions within Shortcuts are APIs provided
by both built-in Apple applications, such as Safari, and third-party applications like OpenAI. Each
application may provide multiple actions. For instance, OpenAI provides APIs that facilitate voice
conversations and text interactions with ChatGPT. Through a simple drag-and-drop interface, users
can construct complex workflows, such as navigating to the nearest coffee shop or downloading
watermark-free images from TikTok.
RoutineHub2 is a prominent community for sharing shortcuts, with a collection of thousands of
shortcuts across both iOS and macOS platforms. All shortcuts on RoutineHub are categorized into
28 workflow categories (e.g., Business, Health & Fitness, Productivity, etc). RoutineHub records
the metadata of each shortcut (e.g., title, description, iCloud URL), providing valuable information.

Crawling and Filtering For each shortcut, we crawl the title, developer-provided description, and
iCloud URL linked to Apple. As RoutineHub does not provide the source code for these shortcuts,
we further crawl it from their iCloud URLs. Besides, we merge shortcuts collected by Shortcuts-
Bench (Shen et al., 2024), sourced from platforms like ShareShortcuts3 and MacStories4 , to further
expand the scale of our dataset. However, the source code of these shortcuts lacks detailed infor-
mation about the involved actions, such as API metadata. Inspired by ShortcutsBench (Shen et al.,
2024), we extract action information from macOS’s built-in definition files and third-party appli-
cation interface definition files. For each API, we record its name, description, parameter names,
parameter types, default values, return value types, and return value name, which provides a valuable
resource for LLMs to efficiently interpret and utilize these APIs, even in zero-shot scenarios.
To ensure compatibility between the crawled shortcuts and the action interfaces, we implement a
stringent filtering mechanism to verify that all API calls are executed correctly. During this process,
we identify that some shortcuts contain non-interpretable binary sequences as API parameters, po-
tentially disrupting the training process of language models. To maintain data quality, we remove
these samples from the dataset. As a result, we curate a final set of 14, 771 high-quality shortcuts,
ensuring the reliability of the dataset for subsequent data expansion and model training.

Shortcuts Transcription The original shortcut source codes are written in property lists for-
mat (Hummert & Humphries, 2022), which sequentially encodes logical constructs like branches
and loops. This encoding is notably different from the types of data commonly used in the pre-
training of LLMs. To address this gap, we convert the shortcuts into abstract syntax trees (ASTs),
apply pre-order traversal to transform them into Python code, with further algorithmic details pro-
vided in Appendix A. Furthermore, the original shortcuts use hexadecimal strings as variable names,
leading to reduced semantic clarity. To improve interpretability, we use GPT-4o-mini to automat-
ically reassign these variables with more contextually meaningful names, thereby enhancing the
overall readability and utility of the code for further language model training. A typical comparison
between property lists and Python code can be found in Appendix E.

Thought Generation To provide informative guidance for LLMs in orchestrating workflows, we
design a three-level thought hierarchy from fine-grained to coarse-grained: (1) Low-level comments
   1
     We selected gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 due to its balanced performance and cost efficiency.
   2
     https://routinehub.co/
   3
     https://shareshortcuts.com
   4
     https://www.macstories.net/shortcuts


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       API Docs                                                                                                       Workflow Code
      def is_workflow_actions_getclipboard() -> object:            Task Query                                      # Retrieves the current content from the clipboard and assigns it to the variable
                                                                 How can I automatically extract and copy
        """                                                                                                        'clipboard_content'.
                                                                 the BibTeX entry from an arXiv paper link
        Passes the contents of the clipboard to the next         that I have copied to my clipboard,               clipboard_content = is_workflow_actions_getclipboard()
      action.                                                    ensuring it's ready for my citations?             # Uses a regular expression pattern to search for an arXiv ID in the clipboard content;
        Key Words: text, clipboard, copy, paste, contents, of                                                      result is stored in 'arxiv_id_match_found'.
        Parameters:                                                API Docs                                        arxiv_id_match_found = is_workflow_actions_text_match(
                                                                                      ...
           - None                                                                                                     WFMatchTextPattern='''(\d{4}\.\d{5})''', WFMatchTextCaseSensitive=False)
        Returns:                                                                                                   # Extracts the matched arXiv ID from the previous search results, naming it 'arxiv_id'.
           - object: Clipboard.                                   Task Plan                                        arxiv_id = is_workflow_actions_text_match_getgroup(
        ""”                                                       1. Start                                            WFGetGroupType='''All Groups''', CustomOutputName='''arxiv_id''',
      def is_workflow_actions_gethtmlfromrichtext(                   · Begin the process.                          WFGroupIndex=1.0)
        WFMakeFullDocument: bool,                                 2. Retrieve Clipboard Content                    # Constructs a URL for querying bibliographic data from the Harvard ADS using the
                                                                     · Call the function to retrieve the current   arXiv ID and assigns it to 'bib_query_url'.
        WFInput: str = "Rich Text") -> str:
                                                                  content from the clipboard and assign it         bib_query_url = is_workflow_actions_url(
        """                                                       to the variable `clipboard_content`.
        Converts the rich text passed as input to HTML text.                                                          WFURLActionURL=f'''http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-
                                                                  3. Search for arXiv ID
        Key Words: page, source, web, get                                                                          bin/bib_query?arXiv:{arxiv_id}'’’
                                                                     · Use a regular expression to search for
        Parameters:                                               an arXiv ID in `clipboard_content`.              )
           - WFMakeFullDocument (bool): Make Full                 ......                                           # Downloads the content from the constructed bibliographic query URL, saving the
      Document                                                                                                     result in 'info_page_content'.
           - WFInput (str): Rich Text, Default is "Rich Text".    19. End                                          info_page_content = is_workflow_actions_downloadurl(
        Returns:                                                                                                      Advanced=False, ShowHeaders=False, CustomOutputName='''info_page'‘’,
           - str: HTML from Rich Text.                                                                                WFURL=bib_query_url
                                                                   Workflow Code                                   )
        “”“                                                                         ...
                                  …                                                                                                                            ...


Figure 3: Illustration of data field composition in WorkflowBench comprising Task Query, API
documentations, Task Plan, and Workflow code with Comments.


are intended to clarify the purpose of each action within the workflow. (2) Median-level plans repre-
sent an abstraction over a sequence of actions, outlining the collective goal of these steps. (3) High-
level queries reflect the user’s requirements, specifying the intended outcome without prescribing
specific methods to achieve it. These three levels of thought are generated through a bottom-up ap-
proach. Specifically, given the transcribed workflow w, let the set of actions within the workflow be
denoted as A, where each action ai ∈ A corresponds to a Python function call. The documentation
di ∈ D associated with each action includes key information such as the function name, input and
output parameters, and a description of its functionality. For each action ai , we generate a corre-
sponding comment ci by prompting GPT-4o-mini. Subsequently, given the action set A = {ai } and
comments C = {ci } of workflow w, we prompt GPT-4o-mini to generate the corresponding task
plan P. We combine the task plan P, the comments C, and the action set A of the workflow w to
generate the high-level task query Q. This bottom-up approach, resembling the summarization task,
may contribute to content reliability and potentially reduce the risk of hallucination.
Finally, as Figure 3 shows, each workflow w is represented as: w = {Q, D, P, A}, where the
workflow w consists of the task query Q, action documentation D for all involved actions, the task
plan P, and all actions represented as annotated Python code A. A detailed example can be found
in Appendix F.

3.2   Q UERY E XPANSION

After performing a comprehensive statistical analysis on the collected data, we find that the data
exhibits significant complexity, with an average of 70.4 actions and 12 branches, surpassing the
complexity of existing workflow-related benchmarks. However, the diversity of the data is relatively
low. Specifically, 40.3% of the workflows fall under the Utilities category, and over 99% of the
APIs used are Apple’s built-in APIs (i.e., those classified as is workflow actions APP).
Therefore, we intend to expand the dataset by focusing on two key aspects: (1) Diversity: making
up for the lack of diversity in real data and covering a broad range of APIs and workflow categories
to enhance the model’s utility and robustness; (2) Complexity: matching the action scale and logical
complexity of the real-world data to ensure that they can effectively represent real-world problems
and orchestrate nodes accordingly. To this end, we sample APIs from diverse applications and
multiple workflows with representative logical structures (e.g., whether they contain branches or
loops) to synthesize additional queries.
To ensure that the number of APIs in the synthesized dataset aligns with real-world usage, we sample
n APIs based on real-world distributions. Approximately ⌊n/2⌋ are drawn from Apple’s built-in API
set (e.g., openurl or sendemail), with the remainder from third-party applications (e.g., OpenAI). The
total number of built-in and external APIs is thus n.
To ensure that the sampled APIs can interact coherently, we do not sample directly from the entire
API set. Instead, we first randomly select 1-5 applications and then choose all APIs from these
selected applications. This method ensures that the selected APIs are functionally compatible and
capable of representing real-world workflows.


                                                                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 (a) Distributions of the number of actions   (b) Distributions of workflow categories   (c) Distributions of applications
               of collected data                          of collected data                      of collected data


(d) Distributions of the number of actions    (e) Distributions of workflow categories    (f) Distributions of applications
                of final data                                of final data                           of final data


Figure 4: Comparison of the distributions across workflow categories, APPs, and action counts in the
collected data and the final dataset. The upper section shows the original data collected from Apple
Shortcuts and RoutineHub, while the lower section presents the expanded dataset distributions.


The prompt used for GPT-4o-mini to synthesize queries consists of four components: (1) a general
prompt to describe the task query generation task, (2) documentations for the sampled APIs, (3)
in-context examples from the collected data for reference, and (4) the workflow category to which
the query belongs to. By controlling the workflow category and in-context examples, we can ensure
the diversity and complexity of the generated data. As seen from Figure 4, the synthesized query has
a more balanced category distribution and uses more third-party APIs. Although most of the APIs
used are still built-in APIs, this is reasonable considering that they carry necessary operations.

3.3      W ORKFLOW G ENERATION

To annotate the corresponding workflows of the                  Table 1: Detailed statistics of WorkflowBench.
synthesized queries effectively, we train an an-                Seed. refers to the collected data from Shortcuts.
notator model based on the collected shortcuts                  Train. and Test. refers to the training set and the
data to support more diverse applications and                   test set of WorkflowBench respectively.
categories, while ensuring consistency with the
real-world data as much as possible.                               Statistics            Seed.           Train.          Test.
                                                    Num. of Instances    14,771 105,573 1,190
Annotator Training First, we construct the
                                                    Num. of APPs             71         83      31
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) dataset based on
                                                    Num. of APIs            584      1,503     324
the collected human-labeled shortcuts. Specif-
                                                    Num. of Categories       28         28      28
ically, each workflow data point comprises a
                                                    Avg. Action            70.4       78.5    41.7
query Q, the corresponding action documenta-
                                                    Avg. IF                12.0        7.4     7.9
tion D, the task plan P, and the workflow rep-
                                                    Avg. LOOP                0.7       0.5     0.5
resented as annotated Python code Acommented .
                                                    Avg. Nested Depth        2.6       2.7     2.1
During the SFT process, as shown in Figure
3, we take the query Q, the corresponding ac-
tion documentation D as the input to guide the
model to generate a task plan P, followed by the step-by-step generation of the current thought (i.e.,
the comment ci ) and the corresponding action ai , which includes the action name and its associated
parameters. We use the trained annotator to generate workflows A′ from synthesized queries.

Quality Confirmation Due to the limited accuracy of the annotator model, the generated work-
flows may contain errors to some extent. For example, we manually identify issues in A′ (e.g.,
extraneous branches not relevant to the query and incorrect function call formats). To enhance the
overall quality, we prompt GPT-4o-mini with in-context samples to refine both A′ commented and P ′ .


                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then, we use rule-based filtering to remove workflows with fundamental errors. Specifically, we
remove samples that don’t incorporate code, don’t utilize the given APIs, or violate parameter con-
straints of APIs. More details of quality control protocol can be found in Appendix C.
Finally, we derive a synthesized dataset of 91, 992 instances, which is combined with the initially
collected data to form the final WorkflowBench. It contains 106, 763 instances with 1, 503 APIs
across 83 applications, which are used to train WorkflowLlama. The statistics of WorkflowBench
are listed in Table 1 and the distribution comparisons of workflow categories, APPs, and the number
of actions between the collected data and final data are demonstrated in Figure 4. From the statistical
results, we can see that the synthetic data maintains complexity while expanding diversity.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Training Details We fine-tune the annotator and WorkflowLlama on LLaMA-3.1-8B (Dubey
et al., 2024) for 3 epochs using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019). A linear learning
rate scheduler is used with a peak learning rate of 2 × 10−5 and a warm-up ratio of 0.1. Each mini-
batch contains 32 examples, and the maximum sequence length is set as 8, 192 tokens.
Baselines To provide a comprehensive comparison, we select several representative LLMs as
baselines for our experiments. These baselines include proprietary models such as GPT-4o-mini and
GPT-4o, as well as open-source models like Qwen2-7B (qwe, 2024), Llama-3.1-8B, and Llama-3.1-
70B (Dubey et al., 2024). Additionally, we apply in-context learning (ICL) (Dong et al., 2022) with
one random-sampled instance to these baselines to better adapt them for workflow orchestration.
Metrics In the main experiments, we use both reference-code-based metrics and a model-based
evaluation to comprehensively evaluate the quality of the generated workflows. For reference-based
metrics, we apply CodeBLEU (Ren et al., 2020) with four components:
• BLEU measures N-gram overlap for token-level similarity.
• Weighted N-Gram Match assigns higher weights to critical code tokens like keywords.
• Syntactic AST Match compares the Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs) to assess syntactic accuracy.
• Semantic Data-Flow Match evaluates logical correctness by comparing data-flow relationships
  between variables.
Together, these components provide a comprehensive evaluation of both syntactic and semantic
aspects of the workflows. We follow Ren et al. (2020), setting the four components to 0.1, 0.1, 0.4,
and 0.4, respectively, and calculate a weighted sum to obtain the CodeBLEU score. For model-based
evaluation, we elaborately prompt GPT-4o-mini as the automatic evaluator to evaluate generated
workflows’ Pass Rate, which indicates the proportion of functionally correct workflows generated
using only the provided APIs thus is format irrelevant. The evaluation prompt is in Appendix B.2.

4.2   E FFECTIVENESS OF E VALUATOR

To validate the reliability of the GPT-4o-mini evaluator in terms of Pass Rate, we sample 30 task
queries and workflow code pairs for each model in Table 2, forming a human-evaluated dataset of
330 instances (30 × 11 = 330). First, we use GPT-4o-mini to label whether each instance could
complete the given tasks only using the provided APIs. Then, human evaluators re-label the sampled
data according to the same criteria specified in Appendix B.2. Ultimately, 268 instances are labeled
consistently by both the GPT-4o-mini evaluator and human evaluators, achieving an agreement rate
of 81.2%, demonstrating the reliability and effectiveness of the evaluator.

4.3   M AIN E XPERIMENTS

Settings The main experiments are conducted on the test set of WorkflowBench. Ideally, by
scaling both the quantity and diversity of instructions and unique tools within the training data,
WorkflowLlama is expected to generalize to novel instructions and APIs that are not seen during
training. This is particularly important because it enables users to define custom APIs and allows
WorkflowLlama to adapt based solely on the provided documentation. To evaluate this capability,


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Performance comparison of various models on the test set of WorkflowBench under the
unseen instructions (ID) and unseen APIs (OOD) settings (%).

                                          CodeBLEU
                                                                      Pass Rate
 Model
                       BLEU Weighted N-Gram    AST  Data-Flow Overall
                      ID OOD ID      OOD     ID OOD ID OOD ID OOD ID OOD
                                          Proprietary Models
 GPT-4o-mini          0.4   0.4    1.5       1.6       29.5   29.5   37.0   36.3   26.8   26.5   54.8   47.5
   w/ ICL             0.5   0.5    1.7       1.8       35.3   34.4   35.1   34.2   28.3   27.7   66.0   57.7
 GPT-4o               0.5   0.4    1.8       1.7       33.5   31.8   37.3   36.9   28.5   27.7   56.6   47.5
   w/ ICL             0.5   0.5    1.8       1.8       37.1   35.3   38.0   36.6   30.2   30.0   67.5   57.6
                                          Open-Source Models
 Qwen2-7B             0.4   0.4    1.2       1.3       27.2   27.7   33.2   33.1   24.4   24.5   25.6   22.6
   w/ ICL             0.5   0.5    1.2       1.3       30.2   29.8   32.4   32.9   25.2   25.3   28.2   26.4
 Llama-3.1-8B         0.6   0.7    1.2       1.4       31.0   29.6   30.0   30.8   24.6   24.3   33.0   24.5
   w/ ICL             0.7   0.7    1.3       1.4       34.0   32.4   32.6   32.4   25.3   25.2   40.2   32.7
 Llama-3.1-70B        0.4   0.4    1.4       1.5       29.9   30.0   37.8   37.6   27.3   27.2   55.4   42.3
   w/ ICL             0.4   0.4    1.6       1.5       34.1   32.9   39.1   38.4   29.5   28.7   67.6   61.4
 WorkflowLlama (8B) 9.4     7.0   11.09      8.3       55.1 48.8 38.0 35.3 39.3 35.1 76.9 70.4


we assess WorkflowLlama’s generalization performance at two levels: (1) Unseen Instructions,
considers an In-Distribution (ID) setting, which involves using the same set of APIs as those in the
training data, and (2) Unseen APIs, considers an Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) setting, involving
only 50 common APIs required to construct workflows and APIs that are absent from the training
data. To minimize API retrieval errors, we use queries and golden APIs as inputs in both ID and
OOD settings to assess the workflow orchestration capabilities of different models 5 .
Main Results     The results are placed in Table 2, from which we derive that:
1. Although multiple workflows can successfully complete a query, there is a positive correlation
   between the reference-free Pass Rate metric and the reference-based CodeBLEU metric. Given
   that the Pass Rate metric derived from GPT-4o-mini aligns with human evaluations over 80% of
   the time, CodeBLEU serves as a reliable proxy for evaluating workflow orchestration capabilities.
2. All models demonstrate a certain capacity for workflow orchestration. This may stem from their
   inherent instruction-following and code-generation capabilities. We find that models like GPT-4o
   and Llama-3.1-70B, which perform better on generic tasks, also excel in workflow orchestration.
   In addition, prompting with in-context samples significantly enhances the models’ performance.
3. We find that scores on text overlap metrics such as BLEU and weighted N-gram are low for all
   models. This is because these metrics only measure the degree of overlap between the candidate
   and reference texts, and are highly sensitive to implementation details.
4. The workflow orchestrate performance of WorkflowLlama even outperforms powerful closed-
   source models GPT-4o with ICL by a large margin 6 . Specifically, WorkflowLlama achieves a
   39.3% score on CodeBLEU and a 76.9% Pass Rate under ID settings, demonstrating the validity
   of our proposed WorkflowLLM framework and WorkflowBench dataset.
5. WorkflowLlama demonstrates strong generalization capabilities. Even though it has not been
   trained on the same instructions or APIs, it still significantly outperforms the vanilla Llama-3.1
   on all metrics, ahead of or close to the more powerful foundation models. Notably, our method
   achieves 35.1% in CodeBLEU and 70.4% in Pass Rate, outperforming all strong baselines.

4.4    A NALYSIS OF W ORKFLOW C OMPLEXITY

To evaluate the models’ ability to generate workflows of varying complexity, we break down the per-
formance of CodeBLEU according to the total number of actions, the number of branches and loops,
   5
    Additional experimental results and analysis using an LLM retriever are provided in Appendix D.
   6
    Additional human-annotated evaluations demonstrate that WorkflowLlama achieves a human pass rate of
71.1%, surpassing GPT-4o with ICL, which attains a human pass rate of 65.9%.


                                                   8
          Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             45
                                                                                                                            40


                                                                                               Average CodeBLEU Score (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                              Average CodeBLEU Score (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40



Average CodeBLEU Score (%)
                             40
                                                                                                                            35                                                                                             35
                             35
                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           30
                             30                                                                                             25
                             25                                                                                                      GPT-4o-mini                                                                           25       GPT-4o-mini
                                         GPT-4o-mini                                                                        20
                                         GPT-4o                                                                                      GPT-4o                                                                                         GPT-4o
                                         Qwen2-7B                                                                                    Qwen2-7B                                                                              20       Qwen2-7B
                             20          Llama-3.1-8B                                                                       15       Llama-3.1-8B                                                                                   Llama-3.1-8B
                                         Llama-3.1-70B                                                                               Llama-3.1-70B                                                                                  Llama-3.1-70B
                             15          WorkflowLlama                                                                               WorkflowLlama                                                                                  WorkflowLlama
                                                                                                                            10                                                                                             15
                                  0-10         11-20     21-30   31-40   41-50   51-60   60+                                     0          1-2       3-5     6-10   11-20      21-30   30+                                     1           2         3       4       5          6   7+
                                                          Number of Actions                                                                       Number of Branches or Loops                                                                   Nested Depth of Reference Code

          Figure 5: Performance comparisons based on the number of actions, the number of Branch & Loop,
          and the nested depth of the reference code.


          and the nested depth of the reference code. As shown in Figure 5, the performance of all models
          deteriorates as the number of actions or the logical complexity increases, indicating the challenge
          of orchestrating complex workflows. However, across all levels of complexity, WorkflowLlama
          significantly outperforms all other models. Moreover, the relative performance of WorkflowLlama
          improves as the complexity of the workflow increases, which demonstrates fine-tuning with Work-
          flowBench significantly enhances the model’s ability to handle more complex workflows.

           4.5                              O UT- OF - DISTRIBUTION G ENERALIZATION TO T-E VAL (C HEN ET AL ., 2024)

          Settings To further evaluate the generaliza- Table 3: Comparisons of F1 scores on the PLAN
          tion capability of WorkflowLlama, we conduct task of T-Eval. (Bold denotes the best score
          experiments using an OOD benchmark, T-Eval, among models of the same category.)
          a widely-used benchmark to evaluate the multi-
          step decision-making capability of LLMs to uti-   Model                        F1
          lize APIs. The original data format in T-Eval
          is based on JSON or strings, which differ sig-              Proprietary Models
          nificantly from the Python-based format em-       Claude2                      84.9
          ployed in WorkflowBench. To ensure the evalu-     GPT-3.5                      86.6
          ation metrics’ consistency between ours and the   GPT-4                        86.7
          original paper, we convert WorkflowBench into              Open-Source Models
          JSON format while preserving the metadata of
                                                            Qwen-7B                      63.1
          workflows and the specifics of queries. Sub-
                                                            Mistral-7B                   64.9
          sequently, we retrain WorkflowLlama on the        Llama-3.1-8B                 68.2
          transformed dataset. We employ the F1 Score
          proposed in the original paper to measure the     Qwen-14B                     69.7
          alignment with the reference API sequences.       Llama-2-13B                  65.1
                                                                                                                                                                       Vicuna-13B                                                                                 54.0
          Results The results are shown in Table 3. As       Baichuan2-13B              52.1
          observed, WorkflowLlama demonstrates strong        WizardLM-70B               42.7
          OOD generalization performance on the T-Eval       Llama-2-70B                63.1
          benchmark, despite being trained on differ-        Qwen-72B                   73.4
          ent domains and tasks using different APIs.
                                                             WorkflowLlama (8B)         77.5
          Notably, WorkflowLlama significantly outper-
          forms the vanilla Llama3.1-8B as well as
          larger open-source models like Llama-2-70B
          and Qwen-72B, highlighting that fine-tuning with WorkflowBench enhances the model’s out-of-
          distribution planning ability.

           4.6                              A BLATION S TUDY

          Settings To assess the efficacy of WorflowBench’s components, we conduct an ablation study
          under the settings of unseen instructions (i.e., the ID setting).
          Results Table 4 presents the performance results when the model is trained under different condi-
          tions: without synthetic data, without the task plan P, without action-level comments C, and without
          both C and P. The experimental results reveal two key findings. First, the two types of natural lan-
          guage thoughts enhance the reasoning capabilities of the model. Removing either type of thought


                                                                                                                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Table 4: Ablation study results of Natural Language Thoughts on Workflow Orchestration (%).

                                                                                                                CodeBLEU
    Model
                                                              BLEU                Weighted N-Gram                            AST              Data-Flow                   Overall
    WorkflowLlama                                                9.4                           11.1                          55.1                   38.0                     39.3
      w/o Task Plan                                              9.1                           10.7                          53.9                   36.6                     38.2
      w/o Comment                                                9.1                           10.8                          54.9                   35.3                     38.1
      w/o Task Plan & Comment                                    8.8                           10.2                          53.7                   35.1                     37.4
      w/o Synthetic Data                                         7.8                            9.4                          53.5                   35.4                     37.3


                                     Query
                                  What steps can I take to streamline a process that involves using a phone number from my clipboard to make a call,setting a 30-minute timer
                                  for that call,activating airplane mode afterward,and ensuring a smooth exit from the process once everything is completed?
 Hallucination
     APIs                         Before Training            After Training
                                                           # Calls a function that detects a phone number based on user input and stores the result in the variable phone_number_input.
     import time                                           phone_number_input = is_workflow_actions_detect_phonenumber(WFInput=f'''input("Please enter the value:")''')
     clipboard = is_workflow_actions_getclipboard()        ...
     phone_number =                                        # Checks if a phone number was detected from the clipboard content.                                          Redundant
     is_workflow_actions_detect_phonenumber(clipboard)     if not detected_phone_number:
     com_apple_mobilephone_call(phone_number)                  # Starts a nested conditional that checks again if no phone number was detected.
                                                                                                                                                                        Conditions
     print("Call in progress. Timer started.")                 if not detected_phone_number:
     time.sleep(1800)                                              # Retrieves the clipboard content again and stores it in clipboard_content_retrieval for processing.
     is_workflow_actions_alert( WFAlertActionTitle="A              clipboard_content_retrieval = is_workflow_actions_getclipboard()
     irplane Mode",WFAlertActionMessage="Do you want               ...
     to activate airplane                                      # If a phone number was detected previously, this else block is executed.
     mode?",WFAlertActionCancelButtonShown=True)               else:
                                                                   # Calls a function to allow the user to select a phone number from contacts if no number was detected.
     if                                                            selected_phone_number = is_workflow_actions_selectcontacts()
     is_workflow_actions_alert(WFAlertActionTitle="Co      ...
     nfirmation",WFAlertActionMessage="Airplane mode       # Stores a string representing the delay time in seconds (1800 seconds = 30 minutes) in the variable delay_time.
     activated. Exiting                                    delay_time = '''1800'''
     process.",WFAlertActionCancelButtonShown=False        # Calls a function to impose a delay in the execution of the subsequent code, using the delay_time variable converted to a
     ):                                                    float.
                                                           is_workflow_actions_delay(WFDelayTime=float(delay_time))
                                                           ...
     is_workflow_actions_exit()                            # Calls the function to set airplane mode again but without changing the value, effectively keeping it enabled.
                                   Action                  is_workflow_actions_airplanemode_set(OnValue=1)
                                                           # Calls a function to exit the script or workflow gracefully.
                                  Omission                 is_workflow_actions_exit()


      Figure 6: Case study of generated code between vanilla Llama-3.1-8B and WorkflowLlama.


leads to a decline in CodeBLEU performance. Second, training on large-scale synthetic data further
improves performance, highlighting the effectiveness of the WorkflowBench expansion process.

4.7       C ASE S TUDY

To further illustrate the effect of fine-tuning on WorkflowBench, we present a typical example in
Figure 6. In this case, the vanilla Llama-3.1 model exhibits two types of errors. First, the model
does not adhere to the given instructions for workflow orchestration, using APIs outside the pro-
vided list, i.e., hallucination APIs. Specifically, it uses the time.sleep() function instead of
is workflow actions delay() to set a timer. Second, due to its relatively weak workflow
orchestration capabilities, the model fails to complete all user instructions. Specifically, it does
not activate airplane mode using the is workflow actions airplanemode set() func-
tion. Fine-tuning on WorkflowBench effectively alleviates these two issues. However, we observe
that fine-tuning also introduces redundant actions. For instance, WorkflowLlama repeats the parsing
check of the clipboard’s content. We will address this redundancy problem in future work. To fur-
ther demonstrate the large-scale node structure and complex logical framework of WorkflowBench,
we also include a generated workflow code with long sequences in Appendix G.


5      C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we present WorkflowBench to enhance the capability of large language models in
workflow orchestration. By fine-tuning Llama-3.1-8B on WorkflowBench, we derive WorkflowL-
lama which can achieve superior performance on the workflow orchestration task exceeding all
comparable baselines. Moreover, we adapt our WorkflowLlama on the T-Eval dataset and the ex-
perimental results reveal the generalization ability of our constructed WorkflowBench. However,
WorkflowBench has some limitations, including the use of APIs limited to shortcuts and the ab-
sence of evaluation through actual execution (refer to Appendix H). Nevertheless, we believe that
the dataset we have constructed holds significant potential to contribute to advancements in APA.


                                                                                          10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We sincerely thank all the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and constructive sug-
gestions. This work was supported by The National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
62376273), Beijing Nova Program (No. 20240484568), the Postdoctoral Fellowship Program of
CPSF (Grant No. GZB20230343) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No.
2023M741945).

R EFERENCES
Qwen2 technical report. 2024.
Simone Agostinelli, Andrea Marrella, and Massimo Mecella. Towards intelligent robotic process
  automation for bpmers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.00804, 2020.
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Zehui Chen, Weihua Du, Wenwei Zhang, Kuikun Liu, Jiangning Liu, Miao Zheng, Jingming Zhuo,
  Songyang Zhang, Dahua Lin, Kai Chen, et al. T-eval: Evaluating the tool utilization capability of
  large language models step by step. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 9510–9529, 2024.
Liying Cheng, Xingxuan Li, and Lidong Bing. Is gpt-4 a good data analyst?           arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.15038, 2023.
Andrzej Cichocki, Helal A Ansari, Marek Rusinkiewicz, and Darrell Woelk. Workflow and process
  automation: concepts and technology, volume 432. Springer Science & Business Media, 1997.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu,
  and Zhifang Sui. A survey on in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00234, 2022.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Deborah Ferreira, Julia Rozanova, Krishna Dubba, Dell Zhang, and Andre Freitas. On the evaluation
  of intelligent process automation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.02639, 2020.
Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. PAL: program-aided language models. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill,
  Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, vol-
  ume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 10764–10799. PMLR, 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/gao23f.html.
Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. Simcse: Simple contrastive learning of sentence
  embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 6894–6910, 2021.
Lukas-Valentin Herm, Christian Janiesch, Alexander Helm, Florian Imgrund, Kevin Fuchs, Adrian
  Hofmann, and Axel Winkelmann. A consolidated framework for implementing robotic process
  automation projects. In Business Process Management: 18th International Conference, BPM
  2020, Seville, Spain, September 13–18, 2020, Proceedings 18, pp. 471–488. Springer, 2020.
Peter Hofmann, Caroline Samp, and Nils Urbach. Robotic process automation. Electronic markets,
  30(1):99–106, 2020.
Tian Huang, Chun Yu, Weinan Shi, Zijian Peng, David Yang, Weiqi Sun, and Yuanchun Shi.
  Promptrpa: Generating robotic process automation on smartphones from textual prompts. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2404.02475, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Christian Hummert and Georgina Louise Humphries. Property Lists, pp. 157–165. Springer Interna-
  tional Publishing, Cham, 2022. ISBN 978-3-030-98467-0. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-98467-0 6.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-98467-0_6.
Lucija Ivančić, Dalia Suša Vugec, and Vesna Bosilj Vukšić. Robotic process automation: system-
  atic literature review. In Business Process Management: Blockchain and Central and Eastern
  Europe Forum: BPM 2019 Blockchain and CEE Forum, Vienna, Austria, September 1–6, 2019,
  Proceedings 17, pp. 280–295. Springer, 2019.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bam-
  ford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, et al.
  Mixtral of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088, 2024.
Zelong Li, Shuyuan Xu, Kai Mei, Wenyue Hua, Balaji Rama, Om Raheja, Hao Wang, He Zhu, and
  Yongfeng Zhang. Autoflow: Automated workflow generation for large language model agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.12821, 2024.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In 7th International
   Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019.
   OpenReview.net, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bkg6RiCqY7.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-
  pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
  question-answering with human feedback. ArXiv preprint, abs/2112.09332, 2021.
OpenAI.  OpenAI: Introducing ChatGPT, 2022.             URL https://openai.com/blog/
  chatgpt.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize
  Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, Juyuan Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Chat-
  dev: Communicative agents for software development. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and
  Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2024, Bangkok, Thailand, August 11-
  16, 2024, pp. 15174–15186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.810.
Yujia Qin, Zihan Cai, Dian Jin, Lan Yan, Shihao Liang, Kunlun Zhu, Yankai Lin, Xu Han, Ning
  Ding, Huadong Wang, et al. Webcpm: Interactive web search for chinese long-form question
  answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06849, 2023a.
Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, Weize Chen, Ning Ding, Ganqu Cui, Zheni Zeng, Yufei
  Huang, Chaojun Xiao, Chi Han, et al. Tool learning with foundation models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.08354, 2023b.
Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xi-
  angru Tang, Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark
  Gerstein, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Toolllm: Facilitating large language mod-
  els to master 16000+ real-world apis. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=dHng2O0Jjr.
Shuo Ren, Daya Guo, Shuai Lu, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Duyu Tang, Neel Sundaresan, Ming Zhou,
  Ambrosio Blanco, and Shuai Ma. Codebleu: a method for automatic evaluation of code synthesis.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.10297, 2020.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can
  teach themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Haiyang Shen, Yue Li, Desong Meng, Dongqi Cai, Sheng Qi, Li Zhang, Mengwei Xu, and Yun
  Ma. Shortcutsbench: A large-scale real-world benchmark for api-based agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.00132, 2024.

                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Qwen Team. Qwen2.5: A party of foundation models, September 2024. URL https://qwenlm.
 github.io/blog/qwen2.5/.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Li Dong, Hangbo Bao, Nan Yang, and Ming Zhou. Minilm: Deep self-
 attention distillation for task-agnostic compression of pre-trained transformers. Advances in Neu-
 ral Information Processing Systems, 33:5776–5788, 2020.
Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Ex-
  ecutable code actions elicit better LLM agents. CoRR, abs/2402.01030, 2024a. doi: 10.48550/
  ARXIV.2402.01030. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.01030.
Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Exe-
  cutable code actions elicit better llm agents. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2024b.
Zilong Wang, Yuedong Cui, Li Zhong, Zimin Zhang, Da Yin, Bill Yuchen Lin, and Jingbo Shang.
  Officebench: Benchmarking language agents across multiple applications for office automation.
  CoRR, abs/2407.19056, 2024c. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2407.19056. URL https://doi.org/
  10.48550/arXiv.2407.19056.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,
  2023.
Judith Wewerka and Manfred Reichert. Robotic process automation–a systematic literature review
  and assessment framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.11951, 2020.
Michael Wornow, Avanika Narayan, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Quinn McIntyre, Nigam H Shah,
 and Christopher Re. Automating the enterprise with foundation models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2405.03710, 2024.
Chenfei Wu, Shengming Yin, Weizhen Qi, Xiaodong Wang, Zecheng Tang, and Nan Duan. Vi-
  sual chatgpt: Talking, drawing and editing with visual foundation models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.04671, 2023.
Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Tinghui Zhu, Renze Lou, Yuandong Tian, Yanghua Xiao, and
   Yu Su. Travelplanner: A benchmark for real-world planning with language agents. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2402.01622, 2024.
Linyao Yang, Hongyang Chen, Zhao Li, Xiao Ding, and Xindong Wu. Chatgpt is not enough: En-
  hancing large language models with knowledge graphs for fact-aware language modeling. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.11489, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. ArXiv preprint, abs/2210.03629,
  2022.
Yining Ye, Xin Cong, Shizuo Tian, Jiannan Cao, Hao Wang, Yujia Qin, Yaxi Lu, Heyang Yu,
  Huadong Wang, Yankai Lin, et al. Proagent: From robotic process automation to agentic pro-
  cess automation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10751, 2023.
Zhen Zeng, William Watson, Nicole Cho, Saba Rahimi, Shayleen Reynolds, Tucker Balch, and
  Manuela Veloso. Flowmind: automatic workflow generation with llms. In Proceedings of the
  Fourth ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, pp. 73–81, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuchen Zhuang, Yue Yu, Kuan Wang, Haotian Sun, and Chao Zhang. Toolqa: A dataset for llm
  question answering with external tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2024.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    A LGORITHM OF T RANSCRIBING S HORTCUTS

Algorithm 1: Recursive Parsing of Property List to Construct Abstract Syntax Tree
Data: Shortcut file to be transcribed
Result: Abstract syntax tree of the actions
Initialize an empty tree with a root node and set current node to root
foreach action in action list do
     Determine action type and mode from action
     if action type is Conditional then
         HandleConditional(mode, action)
     else if action type is RepeatEach then
         HandleLoop(mode, action)
     else if action type is RepeatCount then
         HandleLoop(mode, action)
     else if action type is ChooseFromMenu then
         HandleMatchCase(mode, action)
     else
         HandleDefault(action)
Function HandleConditional(mode, action):
   if mode == 0 (start if) then
       AddNode(action)
       Set current node to new node
   else if mode == 1 (else) then
       Move current node to parent node
       AddNode(action)
       Set current node to new node
   else if mode == 2 (end if) then
       Move current node to parent node
Function HandleLoop(mode, action):
   if mode == 0 (start loop) then
       AddNode(action)
       Set current node to new node
   else if mode == 2 (end loop) then
       Move current node to parent node
Function HandleMatchCase(mode, action):
   if mode == 0 (start match) then
       AddNode(action)
       Set current node to new node
   else if mode == 1 (start case) then
       if current node is match node then
            AddNode(action)
            Set current node to new node
       else
            Move current node to parent match node
            AddNode(action)
            Set current node to new node
   else if mode == 2 (end match) then
       Move current node to parent node
Function HandleDefault(action):
   AddNode(action)
Function AddNode(action):
   Create new node with action
   Append new node to current node.children
   Set parent of new node to current node


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     P ROMPT D ESIGN
All of our prompts were manually designed and iteratively refined during early experiments.

B.1   W ORKFLOW O RCHESTRATION P ROMPT

You are a very helpful AI assistant who can write corresponding
   Python main code based on user's query and usable Python
   function interface.

Please generate python main code based on the following query :
 {query}
You can start by using natural language to plan your tool call
   strategy, and then generate the complete code. For example, `
   Thought:
<tool call strategy>

Code:
```python
<main code>
````.
Note that your output should always include `Code:
```python
<main code>
````, formatted accordingly.
Here are some useful function interface you may use:
 {apis_docs}


B.2   E VALUATOR P ROMPT

You are a kindly code reviewer, I will provide you with a query, a
    list of allowed apis and a piece of code to be reviewed, you
   help me to check if the code to be reviewed is compliant with
   our specifications.
The requirements are as follows:
1. You **should return True even if the code implements additional
    functionality not required in the query**, as long as it
   roughly implements the requirements in the query.
2. We don't impose any requirements on code readability or naming
   conventions. You **should return True as long as the reviewed
   code doesn't use disallowed functions and reasonably
   accomplishes what is asked in the query in general terms**.
   There's no need to get strictly hung up on the details.
3. Return False if the code fails to fulfill the requirement in
   the query. e.g. if it is proposed in the query to turn down
   the battery level of the phone and the brightness of the
   screen, it is a failure to fulfill only any one of the
   functions.
4. Built-in python syntax such as `if`, `loop`, `input()`, and `
   print()` are allowed. Return False if the code uses **any
   external functions or apis** not in allowed apis list and not
   a built-in function such as input(), print(). For example, if
   I provide the is_workflow_openurl function, this should be
   used. Any use of any other library like requests etc. is a
   False.
query:{query}
list of allowed apis: {apis}
code to review: {code}


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Your answer: [True or False with interpretation]


B.3   C OMMENT G ENERATION P ROMPT

A Shortcut is a sequence of actons, where each action is an API
   call, to execute user-provided queries.
As a user-friendly and patient assistant, your task is to provide
   a set of description of each line of the code scrippet. To
   save time, I have retrieved all the lines exclusive of blank
   lines of the code snippet and listed as a dictionary below the
    code.

Your answer should be in the json format as follows:
```json
{
     "line x": "<description-of-line-x>",
     "line x+1": "<description-of-line-x+1>",
     "...": "...",
     "line x+n": "<description-of-line-x+n>"
}```

The code is :
{code}
The lines are {lines}


B.4   TASK P LAN G ENERATION P ROMPT

Based on this line by line description of the code, generate a
   flowchart of a workflow by natural language.
This is the code:
{code}


B.5   TASK Q UERY G ENERATION P ROMPT

As a helpful assistant, please help me craft a query. This query,
   formatted as a question, should describe the task a user wants
    to complete and adhere to the following criteria:
1. One of the solution to the task described in the query could be
    the python code below.
2. It should be close to real-world problems or requests.
3. It should include major parts of the code.
4. The query should not specify python.

For example, the code is:
{ICL_code}
And the expected output query should be similar to:
{ICL_query}

Please craft a query based on the examples and the following code:
{code}


B.6   Q UERY E XPANSION P ROMPT



                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


You are exceptionally skilled at crafting real-world user queries
    given some apis. Here are examples:{examples}. Please gain
    inspiration from the following api docs to create a high-
    quality realworld query.
Api docs for inspiration:
```python
{apis_string}
```
Please refer to the above examples and craft a new one!
Requirements: API name is strictly prohibited from appearing in
    the generated query. Each query should be complicated enough
    and can be solved using all apis above. The query **should be
    centered around {category} theme** and should not be spread
    out into unrelated pieces.


B.7   Q UALITY C ONFIRMATION P ROMPT

You are exceptionally skilled at polishing tool calling plan (i.e
   ., thought) and python code given a task.

Given task:
{query}


Old tool calling plan:
{thought}

 Old code:
{code}

 Used API doc:
{apis}

Here are examples for you to refer:{ICL_context}.
Please make sure the code is logically correct and operational.

Requirements:
[1] Ensure that both plan and code respond correctly to the task
   and that code calls match the plan, which you can do by
   tweaking, embellishing, and modifying both plan and code.
Plan does not have to be one-to-one correspondence of code; plan
   can be abbreviated.
[2] Please ensure that the code conforms to python syntax. Ensure
   that all python code is complete and runnable. You can add
   code when necessary.
[3] Every line of code should be preceded by a comment marked with
    a "#". When modifying the code, please modify the in-line
   comments accordingly.
[4] Ensure that all function parameter calls are correct and you
   can change the code in case of errors.
[5] Thought and code should be as concise while keeping the
   meaning intact.
[6] If there are cases including invalid binary code, replace them
    with reasonable text, delete them, or replace them with a
   reading operation on a file (especially when the binary code
   is an encoded image).
Respond strictly with JSON.



                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.8   VARIABLE R ENAME P ROMPT

You are a helpful assistant for renaming variable names in a code
   snippet.
The following code snippet is a part of a program, and variables
   are named in format 'variablex_'.
Your task is to rename these variables so that they conform to the
    programming specification and have some semantic meaning,
   which can be infered by relative function calls
And your output should only be a dictionary containing the old
   name-new name key value pair
The definition of some functions are not included, and you shouldn
   't modify them.
Following the code, there's a dictionary that contains short
   description of the uuid-named variable. And you can take it as
    reference.
Note that while the description might be the same, but the actual
   meaning is different across different variables. So you should
    not just copy the short description. Instead you'd better
   conprehensively consider the description, names of called
   functions, and the general logic.
The code is as follows:
{code}
The dictionary is as follows:
{description}
To save time, I have retrieved all the variables that requires to
   be renamed:
{variables}


C     Q UALITY C ONTROL P ROCESS

The quality control process consists of three key steps aimed at ensuring the integrity and consis-
tency of the generated code samples. First, GPT-4o-mini with in-context learning is employed to
refine the workflows generated by the annotator. The primary objectives of this refinement are to
minimize Python syntax errors, ensure that each line of code is accompanied by an explanatory com-
ment, and eliminate meaningless binary encoding strings. Manual sampling was conducted to assess
the effectiveness of this refinement, with results showing that 94.2% of the samples demonstrated
improvements in at least one area, such as Python syntax, code clarity, and the correspondence
between the code and the associated queries. The second step addresses the issue of empty code
outputs, which arise when the input or output task plan is excessively lengthy. These instances are
identified and excluded from the dataset, leading to the removal of approximately 3% of the total
samples. The final step involves ensuring consistency with expected function and API definitions
by using the Python interpreter to automatically detect syntax errors. Test functions are constructed
according to the API specifications, and any samples that fail to execute correctly due to violations
of parameter constraints are discarded. This step results in the exclusion of approximately 18% of
the samples from the dataset.


D     A NALYSIS OF API R ETRIEVER

In our main experiments, the primary objective is to demonstrate that WorkflowLlama can generalize
effectively when faced with Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) APIs, i.e., APIs that were not seen during
training. To further validate the robustness of WorkflowLlama, we conduct experiments in which
golden APIs are not provided during inference. In the workflow orchestration task, a single query
may correspond to dozens of APIs. Selecting the correct APIs for a given task requires advanced
reasoning capabilities, and simple models such as dual-tower semantic matchers (Gao et al., 2021)
may fail to capture the nuances necessary for accurate API selection. Therefore, we use in-context


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


learning (ICL) to prompt large language models (LLMs) to extract the appropriate APIs for a query.
The specific prompt used for API retrieval is as follows:
You are an API retriever capable of identifying the APIs required
   to complete a query, based on both the user query and an API
   list.

API list:
\{APIs with descriptions\}

Here are some examples:
\{example queries and API mappings\}

For the following query, which APIs are needed to complete the
   task? Please return a list of required APIs without any
   explanations.

query: \{query\}
APIs:

To enhance the capabilities of API Retriever, we select the most 50 similar queries from the training
set using the MiniLM-L6-v2 model (Wang et al., 2020) to generate appropriate ICL samples. The
performance of the API retriever is evaluated based on precision and recall, and the results are listed
in Tabel 5. Although the retriever’s precision and recall are not particularly high, manual inspection
of 50 randomly selected cases revealed that 84% of the retrieved APIs successfully fulfilled the tasks
specified in the queries.

                                                              API Retriever      Pass Rate
       API Retriever    Precision    Recall
                                                              Golden               70.4%
       GPT-4o-mini        42.5%      36.4%
                                                              GPT-4o-mini          66.7%
       Qwen2.5-72B        40.6%      40.7%
                                                              Qwen2.5-72B          69.0%
    Table 5: Precision and Recall for different
                                                       Table 6: Pass Rate of WorkflowLlama with
    API retrievers.
                                                       different API retrievers.

To further validate this insight, we conduct workflow orchestration experiments using APIs retrieved
by LLMs in the OOD setting. The results of these experiments, comparing the pass rates of Work-
flowLlama using different API sources, are summarized in Table 6. The results show that Work-
flowLlama, trained with golden APIs, experiences only a minor performance decrease when using
APIs retrieved by LLMs. Notably, even when APIs are retrieved by the open-source model Qwen2.5
(Team, 2024), WorkflowLlama achieves comparable or better performance than GPT-4o-mini.
In conclusion, the main takeaway from these additional experiments is that WorkflowLlama remains
effective in OOD settings, even in the absence of golden APIs during inference. This emphasizes
the flexibility and robustness of our framework for automating workflow orchestration in real-world
scenarios, where APIs may not always be available at training time.

E     C ASE S TUDY OF S HORTCUTS
We provide a real-world shortcut example, which includes the following three presentation forms:
the raw property list configuration file, the Python code after transcription and variable renaming,
and the visual interface on MacOS.
The raw property list configuration file is presented below. For the sake of brevity, we have omitted
the middle portion containing the actions.

{
    "WFWorkflowClientVersion": "1050.19",
    "WFWorkflowInputContentItemClasses": [


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    "WFContactContentItem",
    "WFPhoneNumberContentItem",
    "WFRichTextContentItem",
    "WFStringContentItem"
  ],
  "WFWorkflowClientRelease": "3.0",
  "WFWorkflowMinimumClientVersion": 900,
  "WFWorkflowIcon": {
    "WFWorkflowIconStartColor": 4292093695,
    "WFWorkflowIconGlyphNumber": 59814
  },
  "WFWorkflowImportQuestions": [
    {
      "ParameterKey": "WFCallContact",
      "Category": "Parameter",
      "ActionIndex": 12,
      "Text": "PreSetup CallNumber for FastStart.\n\n"
    },
    {
      "ParameterKey": "WFTextActionText",
      "Category": "Parameter",
      "ActionIndex": 13,
      "Text": "The call will be Ended after 30min! (1800 sec
       ,→   )\n\n\n",
      "DefaultValue": "1800"
    }
  ],
  "WFWorkflowActions": [
    {
      "WFWorkflowActionIdentifier":
       ,→   "is.workflow.actions.detect.phonenumber",
      "WFWorkflowActionParameters": {
          "WFInput": {
            "Value": {
              "string": " ",
              "attachmentsByRange": {
                "{0, 1}": {
                  "Type": "ExtensionInput"
                }
              }
            },
            "WFSerializationType": "WFTextTokenString"
          },
          "UUID": "ECAE88CB-B8C3-4E5C-9781-4BC35F89AB0C"
      }
    },
    {
      "WFWorkflowActionIdentifier":
       ,→   "is.workflow.actions.getclipboard",
      "WFWorkflowActionParameters": {
          "UUID": "7379BE67-847D-4F9F-8810-A6371C6CEF79"
      }
    },
    {
      "WFWorkflowActionIdentifier":
       ,→   "is.workflow.actions.detect.phonenumber",
      "WFWorkflowActionParameters": {
          "WFInput": {
            "Value": {


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               "string": " ",
               "attachmentsByRange": {
                 "{0, 1}": {
                   "OutputUUID":
                    ,→ "7379BE67-847D-4F9F-8810-A6371C6CEF79",
                   "Type": "ActionOutput",
                   "OutputName": "Zwischenablage"
                 }
               }
             },
             "WFSerializationType": "WFTextTokenString"
           },
           "UUID": "F3E902F4-1A98-43C8-9D60-C4E52B372E27"
        }
      },
      {
        "WFWorkflowActionIdentifier":
          ,→     "is.workflow.actions.conditional",
        "WFWorkflowActionParameters": {
             "WFInput": {
                 "Type": "Variable",
                 "Variable": {
                   "Value": {
                     "OutputUUID":
                      ,→ "F3E902F4-1A98-43C8-9D60-C4E52B372E27",
                     "Type": "ActionOutput",
                     "OutputName": "Telefonnummern"
                   },
                   "WFSerializationType": "WFTextTokenAttachment"
                 }
             },
             "WFControlFlowMode": 0,
             "GroupingIdentifier":
              ,→   "CF250547-0705-4916-A3E6-C7DB85FD8C7B",
             "WFCondition": 101
         }
      }, ...
      {
         "WFWorkflowActionIdentifier": "is.workflow.actions.exit",
         "WFWorkflowActionParameters": {}
      }
    ],
    "WFWorkflowMinimumClientVersionString": "900",
    "WFWorkflowTypes": [
      "WatchKit",
      "ActionExtension",
      "NCWidget"
    ]
}

It can be observed that this configuration file employs non-semantic hexadecimal strings to rep-
resent variables and uses keywords such as is.workflow.actions.conditional and
GroupingIdentifier to implement logic controls like conditions, making it inherently dif-
ficult to read and comprehend. Consequently, we have converted it into a Python-like code format.
The Python code, after transcription, variable renaming, and commenting, is shown as follows:
# Calls a function that detects a phone number based on user input and
,→  stores the result in the variable phone_number_input.
phone_number_input = is_workflow_actions_detect_phonenumber(
,→  WFInput=f'''input("Please enter the value: ")''')


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


# Calls a function to retrieve the current content from the clipboard and
,→  stores it in the variable clipboard_content.
clipboard_content = is_workflow_actions_getclipboard()
# Detects a phone number from the clipboard content and assigns the
,→  result to detected_phone_number.
detected_phone_number = is_workflow_actions_detect_phonenumber(
,→  WFInput=f'''{clipboard_content}''')
# Checks if a phone number was detected from the clipboard content.
if not detected_phone_number:
    # Starts a nested conditional that checks again if no phone number
    ,→  was detected.
    if not detected_phone_number:
        # Retrieves the clipboard content again and stores it in
        ,→  clipboard_content_retrieval for processing.
        clipboard_content_retrieval = is_workflow_actions_getclipboard()
        # Calls a function to convert the retrieved clipboard content
        ,→  into a phone number and assigns it to selected_phone_number.
        selected_phone_number = is_workflow_actions_phonenumber(
        ,→  WFPhoneNumber=clipboard_content_retrieval)
    # If a phone number was detected previously, this else block is
    ,→  executed.
    else:
        # Calls a function to allow the user to select a phone number
        ,→  from contacts if no number was detected.
        selected_phone_number = is_workflow_actions_selectcontacts()
# Displays an alert message to the user indicating that the call will end
,→  after 30 minutes.
is_workflow_actions_alert( WFAlertActionMessage='''
# Sets the title of the alert to inform the user they are starting a call
,→  to the selected phone number.
The Call ends after 30 min''', WFAlertActionTitle=f'''Start calling
,→  "{coerce_variable(value=selected_phone_number,
,→  coercion_class="WFPhoneNumberContentItem")}"''')
# Initiates a call to the selected phone number using a specific function
,→  to handle mobile phone calls.
com_apple_mobilephone_call( WFCallContact=selected_phone_number)
# Stores a string representing the delay time in seconds (1800 seconds =
,→  30 minutes) in the variable delay_time.
delay_time = '''1800'''
# Calls a function to impose a delay in the execution of the subsequent
,→  code, using the delay_time variable converted to a float.
is_workflow_actions_delay( WFDelayTime=float(delay_time))
# Activates airplane mode by calling a function with OnValue set to 1 to
,→  enable it, and operation set indicating that it should be set.
is_workflow_actions_airplanemode_set( OnValue=1, operation='''set''')
# Calls a delay function again with a specified delay time of 3 seconds
,→  before proceeding.
is_workflow_actions_delay( WFDelayTime=3.0)
# Calls the function to set airplane mode again but without changing the
,→  value, effectively keeping it enabled.
is_workflow_actions_airplanemode_set( OnValue=1)
# Calls a function to exit the script or workflow gracefully.
is_workflow_actions_exit()


We can clearly see that the transcribed Python code is of high quality, with strong readability, making
it well-suited for training LLMs that have been pre-trained on extensive Python code.
For easy understanding, we also present the visual interface of this shortcut in Figure 7, which
corresponds to the transcribed Python code on a line-by-line basis.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    C ASE S TUDY OF W ORKFLOW B ENCH
In this section, we provide a workflow example of WorkflowBench based on the shortcut listed in
Appendix E. We omit the annotated workflow code that has been shown in Appendix E.
The query Q is:
What steps can I take to streamline a process that involves using
   a phone number from my clipboard to make a call, setting a 30-
   minute timer for that call, activating airplane mode afterward
   , and ensuring a smooth exit from the process once everything
   is completed?

The list of provided APIs is:
[
      "is.workflow.actions.selectcontacts",
      "com.apple.mobilephone.call",
      "is.workflow.actions.exit",
      "is.workflow.actions.delay",
      "is.workflow.actions.alert",
      "is.workflow.actions.phonenumber",
      "is.workflow.actions.detect.phonenumber",
      "is.workflow.actions.airplanemode.set",
      "is.workflow.actions.getclipboard"
]

The task plan P is:
1. **Start**
   - Begin the process.
2. **Get User Input**
   - Prompt the user: "Please enter the value:"
   - Call function `is_workflow_actions_detect_phonenumber` to
      detect a phone number from input.
   - Store the result in `phone_number_input`.
3. **Get Clipboard Content**
   - Call function `is_workflow_actions_getclipboard` to retrieve
      current clipboard content.
   - Store it in `clipboard_content`.
4. **Detect Phone Number from Clipboard**
   - Call `is_workflow_actions_detect_phonenumber` with `
      clipboard_content` to detect a phone number.
   - Store the result in `detected_phone_number`.
5. **Check if Phone Number Detected**
   - If `detected_phone_number` is not found:
     1. **Retrieve Clipboard Again**
        - Call `is_workflow_actions_getclipboard` and store result
             in `clipboard_content_retrieval`.
     2. **Convert Clipboard to Phone Number**
        - Call `is_workflow_actions_phonenumber` with `
           clipboard_content_retrieval`.
        - Store the result in `selected_phone_number`.
   - Else:
     1. **Select from Contacts**
        - Call `is_workflow_actions_selectcontacts` to select a
           phone number.
        - Store it in `selected_phone_number`.
6. **Alert User**
   - Call `is_workflow_actions_alert` to display an alert
      indicating the call will end after 30 minutes.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     1. **Set Alert Message**
        - Alert message: "The Call ends after 30 min".
        - Alert title: "Start calling [selected_phone_number]".
7. **Initiate Call**
   - Call `com_apple_mobilephone_call` with `selected_phone_number
      ` to start the call.
8. **Set Delay Time**
   - Store "1800" in `delay_time`.
   - Call `is_workflow_actions_delay` with `float(delay_time)` to
      impose a 30-minute delay.
9. **Enable Airplane Mode**
   - Call `is_workflow_actions_airplanemode_set` with `OnValue=1`
      (to enable).
   - Call `is_workflow_actions_delay` with a delay of 3 seconds.
10. **Keep Airplane Mode Enabled**
    - Call `is_workflow_actions_airplanemode_set` with `OnValue=1`
        to maintain airplane mode.
11. **Exit Workflow**
    - Call `is_workflow_actions_exit` to terminate the script
       gracefully.
12. **End**
    - The process completes.


G    C ASE S TUDY OF G ENERATED W ORKFLOWS B Y W ORKFLOW L LAMA
Task query:
What steps would I need to take to develop an automated messaging
   system that alerts users when their message bank is depleted
   and enables them to dispatch pre-defined messages?
   Additionally, how can this system monitor for updates to its
   automation script and notify users accordingly?

The list of provided APIs is:
[
      "is_workflow_actions_notification",
      "is_workflow_actions_setvariable",
      "is_workflow_actions_delay",
      "is_workflow_actions_sendmessage",
      "is_workflow_actions_openurl",
      "is_workflow_actions_downloadurl",
      "is_workflow_actions_contacts",
      "is_workflow_actions_alert",
      "is_workflow_actions_text_split",
      "is_workflow_actions_count",
      "is_workflow_actions_nothing",
      "is_workflow_actions_comment",
      "is_workflow_actions_getwebpagecontents",
      "is_workflow_actions_exit",
      "is_workflow_actions_documentpicker_open",
      "is_workflow_actions_getipaddress",
      "is_workflow_actions_documentpicker_save",
      "is_workflow_actions_getitemfromlist",
      "is_workflow_actions_math",
      "is_workflow_actions_url"
]

The generated task plan P is:


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1. **Start**
    - Initialize the process.
2. **Define Metadata**
    - Create a dictionary named `message_bank_metadata` containing:
      - Name: "Message Bank"
      - Author: "@ar0512"
      - Version: "1.0"
      - Last Updated: "01/17/2020"
      - Change Log: "Initial release"
      - RoutineHub ID: "3967"
3. **Assign Metadata to Variable**
    - Set `Info` equal to `message_bank_metadata`.
4. **Retrieve Contacts**
    - Call `is_workflow_actions_contacts()` to get a list of
       contacts and store it in `contacts_list`.
...
11. **End**
     - Complete the workflow.

The generated workflow code A is:

# Defines a dictionary named message_bank_metadata that contains
   metadata about the message bank including its name, author,
   version, last updated date, change log, and RoutineHub ID.
message_bank_metadata = {'''Name''': '''Message Bank''', '''Author
   ''': '''@ar0512''', '''Version''': '''1.0''', '''Last Updated
   ''': '''01/17/2020''', '''Change Log''': {01/17/2020: Initial
   release}, '''RoutineHub ID''': '''3967'''}
# Assigns the message_bank_metadata dictionary to a variable named
    Info for easier reference later in the code.
Info = message_bank_metadata
# Calls a function is_workflow_actions_contacts() that retrieves a
    list of contacts and assigns it to contacts_list.
contacts_list = is_workflow_actions_contacts()
# Prompts the user for input and stores the value entered in
   user_input_value.
user_input_value = f'''input("Please enter the value: ")'''
# Counts the number of items in user_input_value using the
   is_workflow_actions_count function and stores the result in
   item_count.
item_count = is_workflow_actions_count( WFCountType='''Items''',
   Input=user_input_value)
# Checks if item_count is greater than 0 to proceed with further
   actions.
if item_count > 0.0:
    # If the condition is true, prompts the user for input again
       and stores the value in user_input_value_2.
    user_input_value_2 = f'''input("Please enter the value: ")'''
    # Counts the number of items in user_input_value_2 and stores
       the result in item_count_2.
    item_count_2 = is_workflow_actions_count( WFCountType='''Items
       ''', Input=user_input_value_2)
    # Checks if item_count_2 is greater than 1 to determine if the
        user has entered multiple values.
    if item_count_2 > 1.0:
        # If the condition is true, prompts the user for input
            again and stores the value in user_input_value_3.
        user_input_value_3 = f'''input("Please enter the value: ")
            '''


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            # Counts the number of items in user_input_value_3 and
               stores the result in item_count_3.
            item_count_3 = is_workflow_actions_count( WFCountType='''
               Items''', Input=user_input_value_3)
            # Checks if item_count_3 is greater than 2 to confirm the
               user has entered enough values for processing.
            if item_count_3 > 2.0:
                # Displays an alert to the user indicating the maximum
                    number of messages that can be sent at a time.
                is_workflow_actions_alert( WFAlertActionMessage='''You
                    may send a maximum of 10 messages at a time.
                   Please choose your message.''', WFAlertActionTitle
                   ='''Maximum Number of Messages''',
                   WFAlertActionCancelButtonShown=False)
                # Prompts the user to choose a message from the
                   contacts list and stores the chosen message in
                   user_input_message.
                user_input_message = f'''input("Please choose your
                   message: ")'''
                # Splits the text of the chosen message into parts and
                    stores the result in split_text.
                split_text = is_workflow_actions_text_split( text=
                   user_input_message)
                # Retrieves the message to send based on the user's
                   choice from split_text and stores it in
                   message_to_send.
                message_to_send = is_workflow_actions_getitemfromlist(
                    WFInput=split_text, WFItemIndex='''2''',
                   WFItemSpecifier='''Item At Index''')

... (134 lines of code)


H    L IMITATIONS
While the framework proposed in this paper represents notable progress in workflow orchestration,
it also has certain limitations that warrant discussion. First, the APIs used in our work are exclu-
sively derived from Apple Shortcuts application, resulting in a lack of coverage across more diverse
fields and potentially limiting the generalizability of the dataset to broader application contexts.
Second, our approach lacks evaluation through actual execution. This limitation arises due to the
complexities involved in executing workflows, such as the need for intricate user registration and
permission acquisition. Moreover, the APIs are subject to frequent changes as applications continue
to evolve, making it challenging to implement a consistent executable evaluation. Consequently, our
evaluation is limited to static analysis.

I   E THICAL S TATEMENT
In this study, the dataset construction process was fully automated using LLMs and algorithms for
data annotation, eliminating the need for human annotators and thereby avoiding concerns related
to annotator compensation and working conditions. The data utilized was collected through web
scraping from publicly accessible sources, with strict adherence to the Terms of Service (ToS) of
the respective websites. Scraping was avoided on platforms where such activity is explicitly pro-
hibited, ensuring compliance with ethical standards. Additionally, no personally identifiable infor-
mation (PII) or private user data was collected at any stage of the research process. All data was
anonymized to protect privacy and mitigate any potential ethical concerns related to user informa-
tion.


                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Figure 7: The visual interface of the shortcut RoutineHub • CallDuration Limite.


                                               28
