Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E FFICIENT AUTOMATED C IRCUIT D ISCOVERY IN
T RANSFORMERS USING C ONTEXTUAL D ECOMPOSI -
TION

 Aliyah R. Hsu                             Georgia Zhou                 Yeshwanth Cherapanamjeri
 Department of EECS                        Department of EECS           CSAIL, MIT
 UC Berkeley                               UC Berkeley
 aliyahhsu@berkeley.edu

 Yaxuan Huang                                Anobel Y. Odisho & Peter R. Carroll
 Department of Statistics                    Department of Urology, Epidemiology and Biostatistics
 UC Berkeley                                 UC San Francisco

 Bin Yu
 Department of Statistics, EECS
 Center for Computational Biology
 UC Berkeley



                                              A BSTRACT
           Automated mechanistic interpretation research has attracted great interest due to
           its potential to scale explanations of neural network internals to large models.
           Existing automated circuit discovery work relies on activation patching or its ap-
           proximations to identify subgraphs in models for specific tasks (circuits). They
           often suffer from slow runtime, approximation errors, and specific requirements
           of metrics, such as non-zero gradients. In this work, we introduce contextual
           decomposition for transformers (CD-T) to build interpretable circuits in large lan-
           guage models. CD-T can produce circuits at any level of abstraction and is the
           first to efficiently produce circuits as fine-grained as attention heads at specific
           sequence positions. CD-T is compatible to all transformer types, and requires no
           training or manually-crafted examples. CD-T consists of a set of mathematical
           equations to isolate contribution of model features. Through recursively comput-
           ing contribution of all nodes in a computational graph of a model using CD-T
           followed by pruning, we are able to reduce circuit discovery runtime from hours
           to seconds compared to state-of-the-art baselines. On three standard circuit eval-
           uation datasets (indirect object identification, greater-than comparisons, and doc-
           string completion), we demonstrate that CD-T outperforms ACDC and EAP by
           better recovering the manual circuits with an average of 97% ROC AUC under
           low runtimes. In addition, we provide evidence that faithfulness of CD-T circuits
           is not due to random chance by showing our circuits are 80% more faithful than
           random circuits of up to 60% of the original model size. Finally, we show CD-T
           circuits are able to perfectly replicate original models’ behavior (faithfulness = 1)
           using fewer nodes than the baselines for all tasks. Our results underscore the great
           promise of CD-T for efficient automated mechanistic interpretability, paving the
           way for new insights into the workings of large language models. All code for
           using CD-T and reproducing results is made available on Github. 1


1       I NTRODUCTION
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have recently demonstrated impressive predictive capabili-
ties (Brown et al., 2020b) by learning intricate nonlinear relationships between features. How-
    1
        https://github.com/adelaidehsu/CD_Circuit


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ever, the challenge of comprehending these relationships has resulted in transformers largely being
thought of as black boxes. Despite this, transformers are increasingly utilized in high-stakes do-
mains such as medicine (e.g. medical image analysis (He et al., 2023)) and science (e.g. protein
structure prediction aiding drug discovery (Jumper et al., 2021)). This highlights the necessity of
understanding model behaviors. Mechanistic interpretability, a study to explain behaviors of neural
networks in terms of their internal components, is at the frontier of interpretability research (Geiger
et al., 2021; Geva et al., 2020; Räuker et al., 2023), as it uniquely provides an avenue for guiding
manual modifications (Elhage et al., 2021; Vig et al., 2020b) and reverse-engineering solutions (El-
hage et al., 2022; Meng et al., 2023).
One main direction in mechanistic interpretability research is circuit discovery, where researchers
aim to identify a computational subgraph (circuit) in neural networks responsible for solving a spe-
cific task (Olah et al., 2020). Prior circuit discovery work in language models has found subgraphs
of attention heads and multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) that partially or fully explain model behav-
iors on tasks such as indirect object identification, docstring completion, and greater-than compar-
isons (Wang et al., 2023; Hanna et al., 2023; Nanda et al., 2023; Heimersheim & Janiak, 2023).
However, most of them require tedious manual inspection, and are thus limited to smaller mod-
els (Lindner et al., 2023). Automated Circuit DisCovery (ACDC) (Conmy et al., 2023) has been
proposed as a scalable end-to-end technique to identify circuits in models of arbitrary sizes by au-
tomating the pruning of unimportant edges via activation patching. Although effective, ACDC suf-
fers from slow runtimes. More recent work has focused on improving the efficiency, for example,
through linear approximating activation patching with attribution patching (Syed et al., 2023; Hanna
et al., 2024), or training sparse autoencoders (SAEs) to learn attention head output patterns (O’Neill
& Bui, 2024). While faster variants have been leveraged with some success, they still suffer from
several drawbacks, such as approximation errors (Syed et al., 2023; Hanna et al., 2024), and the
need of model training and carefully designed examples by human (O’Neill & Bui, 2024).
Our main contribution in this work is the introduction of contextual decomposition for transform-
ers (CD-T), a mathematical or analytical method to efficiently compute the contribution of model
features to other model features within a transformer. This work builds on CD methods for CNNs
and RNNs to examine local importance proposed in prior work (Murdoch et al., 2018; Singh et al.,
2018; Jumelet et al., 2019). We significantly extend CD by defining novel mathematical decom-
position principles which can be applied to transformers of all types (e.g., decoder-based, encoder-
based), because these principles are indispensable for CD to scale to modern state-of-the-art (SOTA)
deep learning models as they are mostly based on transformers.
We are also the first, to our knowledge, to show the utility of CD methods for mechanistic inter-
pretability by proposing an automated circuit discovery algorithm utilizing CD-T. That is, CD-T is
able to discover circuits with finer granularity by further splitting into sequence positions while at the
same time reduce runtime from hours to seconds, when it is compared with prior work (Syed et al.,
2023; Conmy et al., 2023). CD-T is automatic or does not require any training or manually-crafted
examples by humans. CD-T is fundamentally compatible with all common transformer architec-
tures: in particular, CD-T supports circuit discovery in both BERT-like (Devlin et al., 2019) and
GPT-like (Brown et al., 2020a) architectures.
Specifically, for evaluation, we use three standard circuit evaluation datasets: indirect object identi-
fication (IOI), greater-than comparisons (Greater-than), and docstring completion (Docstring). We
compare recovered circuits by CD-T on these datasets with two SOTA baselines, ACDC (Conmy
et al., 2023) and EAP (Syed et al., 2023). We demonstrate that CD-T outperforms the baselines by
better identifying attention heads in the manual circuits with an average of 97% ROC AUC due to
its outstanding ability in recovering negative and supporting heads efficiently. EAP obtains similar
runtime as CD-T but performs slightly worse in ROC AUC for Greater-than and IOI. ACDC is the
least efficient as it often takes hours to identify a circuit, yet with no better ROC AUC on all tasks
compared to other methods. In addition, we demonstrate faithfulness of CD-T circuits is not due to
random chance by showing our circuits are 80% more faithful than random circuits of up to 60%
of the original model size. Finally, we show CD-T circuits are able to perfectly replicate original
models’ behavior (faithfulness = 1) using fewer nodes 2 than the baselines for all tasks.


    2
      In our experiments, ”nodes” refers to attention heads or attention heads’ output at a specific sequence. See
the general definition in Section 3.3.1.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     R ELATED WORK
2.1   C AUSAL I NTERPRETATION

Previous efforts to interpret neural networks have frequently drawn on ideas from causal infer-
ence (Pearl, 2009). Much of this work emphasizes counterfactual reasoning or enforcing causal
constraints on computations to explain model outputs (Pearl, 2009; Feder et al., 2020; Geiger et al.,
2021; Wu et al., 2021; Kaddour et al., 2022). A related line of research (Vig et al., 2020a; Stolfo
et al., 2023; Feng & Steinhardt, 2023) takes a different approach by treating internal components (or
nodes, if the model is viewed as a computational graph) as mediators and conducting causal media-
tion analysis, also called activation patching. In these studies, the contribution of nodes is assessed
by ablating subsets of them and measuring direct and indirect effects, with the direct effects serving
as proxies for their overall contribution. In contrast to viewing nodes as mediators, Goldowsky-Dill
et al. (2023) and Wang et al. (2023) propose treating input-to-output paths as more expressive me-
diators. They introduce the technique of path patching to explore how different edge subsets in a
model’s computational graph affect its behavior.

2.2   C IRCUIT DISCOVERY METHODS

Ablation-based methods are essential for identifying key components within models. Through ac-
tivation patching, prior research on circuit discovery in language models has uncovered subgraphs
of attention heads and MLPs that explain model behavior (Wang et al., 2023; Hanna et al., 2023;
Heimersheim & Janiak, 2023). However, most of these methods require multiple iterations of man-
ual inspection and ad-hoc analysis which is specific to the model and task, limiting their application
to small numbers of circuits in smaller models (Lindner et al., 2023). To address this, Conmy et al.
(2023) introduced Automated Circuit Discovery (ACDC), which scales to models of any size by
automatically calculating edge importance between attention heads and MLPs based on model per-
formance on a chosen metric via activation patching. While ACDC is effective, it suffers from slow
runtimes and fails to recover certain attention head subsets within the manual circuits. Syed et al.
(2023) introduced Edge Attribution Patching (EAP, or ACDC++ as later renamed), which improves
ACDC’s efficiency by using a linear approximation of activation patching. However, this reliance
on linear approximations can lead to overestimation of edge importance and a weaker correlation
with true causal effects. EAP also struggles when the gradient of the performance metric is zero.
To resolve these issues, Hanna et al. (2024) proposed Edge Attribution Patching with Integrated
Gradients (EAP-IG) for more faithful circuit recovery, although it increases runtime by a constant
factor. Another approach trains sparse autoencoders (SAEs) on attention head outputs and uses the
SAE-learned features to map attention head contributions to identified circuits. However, SAE-
based methods either require carefully crafted human-generated examples (O’Neill & Bui, 2024)
or require an impractical amount of compute to train an SAE (He et al., 2024; Marks et al., 2024).
Another common limitation of prior methods is the limited level of granularity of the circuits they
discover, because most work either doesn’t support further attention head splitting at specific se-
quence positions (Syed et al., 2023; Hanna et al., 2024; O’Neill & Bui, 2024), or it is fundamentally
feasible but requires a prohibitive amount of time to do so (Conmy et al., 2023), which drastically
hinders more fine-grained mechanistic interpretability analysis. Our method CD-T addresses the
limitations of previous circuit discovery approaches by significantly reducing runtime, using mathe-
matical decomposition equations with no approximations, allowing for arbitrary level of abstraction
of circuits, and avoiding both model training and manually crafted examples (i.e. CD-T achieves all
the above in an automated manner).

2.3   C ONTEXTUAL D ECOMPOSITION IN N EURAL N ETWORKS

Contextual Decomposition (CD), introduced by Murdoch et al. (2018), attributes local importance to
input features in LSTMs by analytically decomposing the output without any changes to the under-
lying model. For each word in a sentence, a forward pass computes activations for all cells and gates
while partitioning each neuron’s activation into parts influenced by a selected token or phrase (de-
noted as the relevant) and those that are not (denoted as the irrelevant), using a factorization of
the update equations for hidden states and cell states. Jumelet et al. (2019) propose Generalized
Contextual Decomposition (GCD) for unidirectional LSTMs, applying it to phenomena like num-
ber agreement and pronoun resolution. Singh et al. (2018) extend CD from LSTMs to RNNs and


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CNNs and introduce hierarchical interpretation with feature clustering for improved input feature
attributions. A distantly related work, contextual explainability (Bertolini et al., 2022), focuses on
feature attributions for each convolutional layer of CNNs by utilizing gradients as the feature impor-
tance measure. We further extend CD to transformers (CD-T) and we argue that our development of
CD-T is a significant advance with two novel contributions. First, we carefully design mathematical
decomposition principles tailored for transformers of all types (e.g., decoder-based, encoder-based),
which makes it able to scale to larger models. Second, given prior work on CD only involves input
feature attribution, to our knowledge, we are the first to demonstrate the utility of CD for mechanistic
interpretability by proposing an automated circuit discovery algorithm that leverages CD-T.


3     O UR METHOD : CD-T AND MECHANISTIC INTERPRETABILITY

In this section, we first recall the basic operations of transformers (Section 3.1). We then provide
technical details on contextual decomposition and its application to transformers (section 3.2). Fi-
nally, we conclude with a circuit discovery algorithm based on CD-T (section 3.3).

3.1   T RANSFORMERS

The main technical element unifying transformer-based architectures is the attention mechanism.
This mechanism allows contextually useful information to be transmitted from one position in the
sequence to any other position. We start by describing the operation of a general attention mech-
anism before discussing the modifications needed to specialize it for generation, exemplified by
models such as GPT (Brown et al., 2020a), and for sequence-to-sequence transformation models
such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019). Formally, the attention mechanism computes a vector of con-
tributions from a series of vectors {xi }li=1 to a target vector x at position p with xi , x ∈ Rd . An
attention layer typically consists of a small number of heads, with each head parameterized by three
functions, the key function fk , value function fv , and query function fq . The output of the attention
head to x is computed as follows where dk denotes the output dimension of fk :
                           ∀i ∈ [l] : ki = fk (xi ), qx = fq (x), vi = fv (xi )                     (1)
                                                                 √
                                                     exp(qx⊤ ki / dk )
                              ∀i ∈ [l] : αi = P                ⊤
                                                                     √                              (2)
                                                   j∈[l] exp(qx kj / dk )
                                                   l
                                                   X
                                            yx =         αi vi .                                    (3)
                                                   j=1

The functions fk , fv , fq are commonly simple learnable transformations such as linear transfor-
mations or one hidden-layer MLPs. An attention layer is composed of a series of attention heads
applied to every position in the sequence such that the concatenation of their outputs equals the
input dimension d. As the output of an attention layer is a series of vectors of the same length and
dimensionality as its input, this allows for stacking of these layers to build increasingly complex
representations of the input so far.
The two classes of transformer models we consider in this work, sequence-to-sequence models
such as BERT and generative models such as GPT mainly differ in the set of positions that the
attention mechanism operates on. Concretely, BERT maps a fully specified input sequence to an
output sequence of the sample length while generative models produce increasingly larger sequences
autoregressively with the (t + 1)th token generated based on the previous t tokens. Since all the
input tokens are specified for BERT-based models, the computation of the attention vector at position
t utilizes representations at every position of the sequence. On the other hand, when generating
the (t + 1)th , the positions at t + 1 and beyond are not determined. As a consequence, only the
representations for tokens before t are used to compute the attention vectors.

3.2   C ONTEXTUAL DECOMPOSITION FOR TRANSFORMERS (CD-T)

We will now describe the general method of contextual decomposition (CD), as well as our extension
to the transformer architecture and applications to mechanistic interpretability.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CD (Murdoch et al., 2018) was first proposed to compute contributions of input tokens to the output
of LSTMs as a local interpretation method. CD divides each cell and hidden state into a sum of two
parts: a β part (said to be relevant), which contains the part of this particular state that stems from
the input tokens of interest, and a γ part (said to be irrelevant), which contains information coming
from tokens outside of the list of interest. β is often initialized with masked input embeddings (1’s
specify where token positions of interest are, and 0’s the opposite), and γ the complement of β.
Given a decomposition of a vector x ∈ Rd into relevant and irrelevant constituents β + γ = x
(here we use the word constituents instead of “components” to avoid name collision with the “com-
ponents of a neural network”), and a module f : Rd → Rk , CD consists of a set of mathemati-
cal equations to determine the decomposition of the output of a module f when given x as input:
f (x) ∈ Rk = βo + γo . The general principle is to find a symbolic expression for f (x) in terms
of β and γ, and group the terms in the expression according to whether they are solely a func-
tion of β or not: the sum of terms solely relying on β becomes βo , and the sum of the remaining
terms becomes γo . We refer interested readers to Murdoch et al. (2018) and Singh et al. (2019)
for further examples of decomposition formulas of various modules. These decomposition rules
can be composed through multiple modules (i.e, if f (β1 , γ1 ) = β2 , γ2 , and g(β2 , γ2 ) = β3 , γ3 ,
then g(f (β1 , γ1 )) = β3 , γ3 ) in order to define decomposition rules for larger computational blocks,
including entire neural networks.
Other authors have heuristically adjusted the decomposition rules for a module to reflect specific
mechanisms by which (the relevance term in an earlier layer i − 1) can affect (the relevance term
in a later layer i) that are unaccounted for by this rule. For example, Singh et al. (2019) adjust the
decomposition rule for affine transformations f (x) = W x + b, so that the bias term does not affect
the relative magnitudes of β and γ:
                                                 |W βi−1 |
                              βi = W βi−1 +                       · b,                              (4)
                                            |W βi−1 | + |W γi−1 |
                                                 |W γi−1 |
                              γi = W γi−1 +                       · b.                              (5)
                                            |W βi−1 | + |W γi−1 |
We succinctly represent the above equations as βi , γi = LinearDecomp(βi−1 , γi−1 ), where W
and b are understood to be tunable parameters of a neural network module.
Given the query, key, and value functions mentioned in Section 3.1 are linear transformations, the
only module not accounted for in the context of transformers is the self-attention module. We handle
the decomposition of the attention equations as follows:
              βquery , γquery = LinearDecomp(βin , γin )                                            (6)
                  βkey , γkey = LinearDecomp(βin , γin )                                            (7)
              βvalue , γvalue = LinearDecomp(βin , γin )                                            (8)
                                            p
                                 T
                  βattention = βkey βquery / dk                                                     (9)
                                                                     p
                  γattention = ((βkey + γkey )T (βquery + γquery )/ dk ) − βattention              (10)
                       βprobs = Sof tmax(M ask(βattention ))                                       (11)
                       γprobs = Sof tmax(M ask(βattention + γattention )) − βprobs                 (12)
                           βz = βprobs ∗ βvalue                                                    (13)
                           γz = (βprobs + γprobs ) ∗ (βvalue + γvalue ) − βz                       (14)
            βoutput , γoutput = LinearDecomp(βz , γz )                                             (15)
where above M ask represents a causal mask in appropriate architectures and Sof tmax is the soft-
max along the same dimension as in a standard implementation of self-attention.
Although in the original setting of CD, “input” and “output” refer to an input sequence x and a
model’s output logits, the method generalizes to arbitrary source and target activations in the model.
Furthermore, in the original context, the “relevant” portion of the decomposition was equal to 1 on
a subsequence of the input and 0 elsewhere, but in a mechanistic interpretability context, the CD
framework allows us to decompose activations into any choice of β, γ. Thinking of the network
again as a computational graph, this gives us a method of calculating the effect of an arbitrary
constituent of the activations of an arbitrary node on the activations of another node.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2.1    C HOOSING A DECOMPOSITION OF SOURCE NODES FOR MECHANISTIC
         INTERPRETABILITY

In a manner analogous to the choice of ablation method elsewhere in mechanistic interpretability,
the correct choice of starting decomposition can be subtle, and sometimes specific to the task. A
general principle is that the relevant constituent of the activations at some node is the constituent
that we hypothesize has a counterfactual effect on the task; often, this means the deviation from the
mean activations over some distribution. (It follows that the irrelevant constituent of the activation at
this node is the mean activation, which matches intuitions about mean-ablation.) We provide details
on the evaluation tasks and name the distributions used for ablation in Appendix A.

3.3     AUTOMATING CIRCUIT DISCOVERY

3.3.1    D EFINITIONS OF CIRCUIT DISCOVERY
Before delving into our method, we first formally define a circuit. To maintain consistency in no-
tations with prior work (Shi et al., 2024; Elhage et al., 2021), we view a model as a computational
graph M , where nodes are activations of the model components in its forward pass (e.g. attention
heads and MLPs) and edges are the interactions between those components, and a circuit C is a sub-
graph of M responsible for certain behavior of interest. Naturally, the first step of circuit discovery
is to define a task of interest to investigate. This requires specifying a dataset and a task-specific
metric to measure the performance of M and C, typically, by maximization of the task metric.
Given an input x, similarly as to how the entire model defines a function M (x) from inputs to logits,
we also associate each circuit C with a function C(x), defined by ablating away the effect of all
components in M \C (i.e. the components not included in C). Circuit discovery may be performed
on a single input example or, likelier, the result may be averaged over multiple input examples to
reduce variance. Typically we find averaging across 10-100 samples, depending on the tasks being
studied, can yield stable performance. Detailed information about which models are studied, in-
put sample counts, and how the task metrics are defined is found in Appendix A. Finally, note that
our method finds the circuit of interest but does not automatically generate an interpretation of it,
however, known interpretability techniques (Wang et al., 2023) can be used to do so.

3.3.2    M ETHOD
Here we present our algorithm for discovering circuits with CD-T. Although it is possible to
perform CD at arbitrary granularity and on arbitrary components of a transformer (e.g., MLPs,
query/key/value vectors), in this paper we focus solely on finding circuits consisting of attention
heads in a transformer to be comparable to prior work, and our unit of analysis is either the output of
an attention head or the output of an attention head at a specific sequence position. For clarity, our
method focuses on including or excluding specific nodes from a computational graph, rather than
edges; CD-T at once implicitly models both direct and indirect effects of one node to another, and
our algorithm does not make a distinction between the two.
In each iteration, we search over potential source nodes to find the ones with highest relevance to
a set of target nodes (initialized to the task objective). Once we find the set of nodes which are
most relevant to the task, we prune them by some simple heuristic (in our experiments, simply
greedily removing the nodes with the least magnitude of impact was often sufficient, or sometimes
pruning was not necessary), and designate these most important nodes the target nodes for the next
iteration of the algorithm. We halt when the collection of nodes achieves adequate performance (e.g,
comparable to the whole network), or has not improved from the previous iteration.
We need to specify how “highest relevance to a set of target nodes” is determined. As described
above, we start with a decomposition βs , γs of the output of a source attention head s, and we
are interested in its relevance R(s, T ) to a set of target nodes T . Starting from s, we propagate
the decomposition forward through the network using the CD-T equations for each module in the
computational graph between s and T ; again, if there is some series of functions fn , ...f1 , so that
T = fn (fn−1 (...f1 (s))), and f1 (βs +γs ) = β1 +γ1 , f2 (β1 +γ1 ) = β2 +γ2 , ..., fn (βn−1 +γn−1 ) =
βT + γT , we can straightforwardly apply the modules in order to obtain βT , γT . In the case that T
is the output of the network, βT will have matching dimensions, and it is usually appropriate to let
R(s, T ) be the task-specific objective as evaluated on βT . (One intuitive instance of this is the case


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Building a circuit using CD-T for a specified task
  Input: datapoint x, precomputed mean activations µ
  Denote ax (s) as the activation of s on input x
  Denote µ(s) as the precomputed mean activations of s on an appropriate distribution
  Initialize C to store the circuit
  Initialize T to be the output of the model
  repeat
     for each attention head s upstream of T :
        Run the model from x to s, and compute βs = ax (s) − µ(s), γs = µ(s)
        Propagate decomposition to target nodes with CD-T, obtaining βT , γT
        Use βT , γT to compute the relevance of s to T , R(s, T ) using equation 16
     end for
     Heuristically pick the source nodes s with the highest values of R(s, T ); define this set as S
     C ←C ∪S
     {# Refinement: Greedily prune away the unnecessary nodes}
     repeat
        for each
             ′
                 node n in C:
           C ← C\n
               ′                       ′
           If C (x) > C(x): C ← C
        end for
     until C has not changed since the last iteration
     If |C(x) − M (x)| < ϵ, return C {# Circuit performs close to the full model}
     If C(x) is not greater than last iteration, return C
     T ←S
  until no upstream attention heads to T are available
  return C


where T is a single “score” whose value we care about, so that βT is the contribution of s to that
score.) However, when T is an arbitrary set of nodes in the network’s internals, we must define a
proxy metric for the relevance of s to T ; in this case, we define the relevance of a source node to a
set of target nodes to be the sum of the relevances to the target nodes t ∈ T , and in this paper for
R(s, t) we choose a quick-to-compute measure of the size of βt :


                                             X                 X ∥βt ∥l
                                                                           1
                               R(s, T ) :=         R(s, t) =                   .                  (16)
                                                                     ∥γt ∥l1
                                             t∈T               t∈T


Careful readers may have noticed that this particular metric measures the magnitude of one node’s
contribution to another, but not the “direction”, so that nodes which maximize this metric may actu-
ally contribute negatively to the task under investigation. We found in our experiments that this does
not preclude us from finding functioning circuits. On the contrary, this allows us to straightforwardly
find nodes which have significant negative contribution to a task metric, such as the “Negative Name
Mover Heads” in the IOI task. In principle, it is possible that different choices of target relevance
metric can be developed to adjust the behavior of the circuit discovery algorithm to avoid (or ac-
centuate) this behavior; we do not explore this in the paper but identify it as a possible avenue for
further investigation. Our complete algorithm is described in Algorithm 1, presented in the specific
case where we have chosen to decompose our source nodes s so that βs is the activation’s deviation
from the mean over some distribution. More details on the heuristics used and a complexity analysis
of the algorithm is found in Appendix B.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Coarse Nodel-level Runtime vs ROC AUC                                                                            CD-T
                                                                                             1.0
          0.975

          0.950                                                                              0.8


                                                                (C more faithful than C r)
          0.925
                                                                                             0.6
ROC AUC


          0.900

          0.875      Method                                                                  0.4
                     CD-T
          0.850      EAP
                     ACDC w/ KL Div Metric
          0.825      Task                                                                    0.2
                     Docstring                                                                           IOI
          0.800      Greater-than                                                                        Docstring
                     IOI                                                                     0.0         Greater-than
                     0           2           4      6   8                                          0.0          0.2            0.4          0.6           0.8   1.0
                                     Log(Runtime (s))                                                                   Size |C r| as a fraction of |M|


Figure 1: Left: Log algorithm runtime and ROC AUC comparison. Each dot represents an aver-
age measurement on one task with specific methods differentiated by colors.; Right: The relative
faithfulness of CD-T circuits compared to random circuits from the reference distribution of varying
sizes (x-axis). Dotted vertical lines indicate the actual size of the circuits. C denotes a CD-T circuit.
C r denotes a random circuit. M denotes the full model.


4             E VALUATING CIRCUIT DISCOVERY ALGORITHMS

4.1               E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

We compare the performance of circuits recovered by CD-T with those obtained by two SOTA base-
lines: ACDC (Conmy et al., 2023) 3 and EAP (Syed et al., 2023) 4 . SAE-based methods (O’Neill &
Bui, 2024; Marks et al., 2024; He et al., 2024) and classic neural network pruning methods are not
considered here because they either require model training or focus more on compressing neural net-
works for faster inference to reduce storage requirements. Furthermore, pruning for interpretability
is also shown to be outperformed by ACDC (Conmy et al., 2023). We evaluate the circuit perfor-
mance on three tasks: indirect object identification (IOI) (Wang et al., 2023), greater-than (Greater-
than) (Hanna et al., 2023), and docstring completion (Docstring) (Heimersheim & Janiak, 2023) (see
Appendix A for details). They are three standard evaluation tasks to benchmark circuit discovery
methods as prior work (Hanna et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Heimersheim & Janiak, 2023) has
manually found circuits in language models explaining for those tasks, which often serve as an im-
perfect reference standard for circuit discovery work (Conmy et al., 2023; Syed et al., 2023; O’Neill
& Bui, 2024) due to the lack of ground-truth circuits. For both baselines, we perform node-level
patching to be comparable since CD-T is a node-level patching technique. All experiments are
conducted on an NVIDIA A100 GPU.

4.2               CD-T EXCELS IN IDENTIFYING THE CIRCUIT RESPONSIBLE FOR THE UNDERLYING
                  ALGORITHM EFFICIENTLY

4.2.1              RUNTIME AND THE RECOVERY OF MANUAL CIRCUITS
Leveraging the manually discovered circuits as a reference standard, we measure how much over-
lap there is between the recovered circuits and the reference circuits using ROC AUC. Specifically,
we measure the ROC AUC by sweeping through a range of thresholds that determine cutoff scores
to keep nodes in a circuit. For CD-T, we test by varying the percentile of top nodes to extract in
every iteration, in the range of [90, 99]. At the same time, we also compute the average algorithm
runtime across runs when sweeping through the thresholds for each method. Although CD-T sup-
ports arbitrary granular representations of the circuit, the runtime is measured by building a “coarse
node-level” circuits by not splitting into sequence positions to be comparable with EAP and ACDC
          3
      We adopt the ACDC optimized for KL diveregence instead of task-specific metrics because it’s shown to
perform better in Conmy et al. (2023).
    4
      We consider EAP but not EAP-IG because EAP-IG performs comparably to EAP on the tasks we evalu-
ate (Hanna et al., 2024), but with a runtime increase by a constant factor in theory.


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


because EAP doesn’t support measuring node importance at sequence positions, and ACDC takes
an impractical amount of time to achieve sequence-position splitting. To demonstrate CD-T’s capa-
bility to identify circuits responsible for underlying algorithm for tasks with great efficiency, we plot
the algorithm runtime against the ROC AUC and report the result in Figure 1-Left. From Figure 1-
Left we can see CD-T outperforms the baselines by achieving high ROC AUC and low runtime
at the same time. EAP obtains similar runtime as CD-T but performs slightly worse in recovering
manual circuits for Greater-than and IOI. Even under this coarse nodel-level abstraction, ACDC is
the least efficient as it often takes hours to identify a circuit, yet with no better ROC AUC on all
tasks compared to other methods. To explain the better ROC AUC performance of CD-T, we find
that CD-T is especially good at identifying negative heads and supporting heads, such as the neg-
ative name-mover heads and backup name-mover heads in IOI, which other algorithms struggle to
do (more discussion in Appendix A).

4.2.2    P ROBABILITY OF IDENTIFIED CIRCUITS TO BE MORE FAITHFUL THAN RANDOM
         CIRCUITS

Given a circuit and a task, one can evaluate how well the circuit performs on the task by measuring
the task-specific metric, such as the logit difference on IOI. However, in mechanistic interpretability,
instead of aiming to identify the best-performing circuits on the task-specific metric, an ideal circuit
should be able to faithfully replicate the full model behavior. Following prior work (O’Neill & Bui,
2024; Marks et al., 2024), faithfulness is defined as the proportion of the full model’s performance
that a circuit explains, relative to the baseline performance when no specific input information is
                                                          m(C)−m(∅)
provided. Given a task, faithfulness is computed as m(M       )−m(∅) , where m(C), m(∅), and m(M )
are the average of the task-specific metric performance over the dataset for the circuit, the corrupted
model with all heads ablated, and the full model, respectively. To complement the imperfect nature
of the manual circuits, leveraging faithfulness, here we provide another evidence to validate CD-T’s
mechanism perservation of the original model. We adopt a circuit hypothesis testing framework
proposed in Shi et al. (2024) to test whether a circuit preserves the original model’s performance by
measuring the probability of a circuit C to be more faithful to the original model M , compared to
random circuits C r of the same size sampling from a reference distribution. This test verifies that the
circuit is not a simple lucky draw from the distribution of random circuits, and ensures that it is better
than at least a fraction q ∗ of random circuits. In our experiment, we sample random circuits from all
possible nodes in the full model, and we repeat the process for 10 times. Figure 1-Right shows the
results of the best CD-T circuits (as measured by faithfulness and among different granularity) on
the 3 tasks. Our best circuit for IOI is from attention heads at specific sequence positions, while for
Greater-than and Docstring, they are from attention heads at a coarse level without the splitting. The
results show CD-T circuits are 80% (q ∗ = 0.8) more faithful than random circuits of up to around
60% of the original model’s size for IOI and Greater-than, and even those of up to 80% of the original
model’s size for Docstring, with just a small percentage of nodes in the CD-T circuits (0.4% of full
model size for IOI, 5.5% for Greater-than, and 31.3% for Docstring). This finding suggests the
faithfulness of CD-T circuits is not due to random chance, and that a more fine-grained abstraction
of circuits sometimes is necessary to obtain better faithfulness with an extremely small and specific
set of nodes, as in the IOI case.

4.3     I DENTIFIED CIRCUITS MATCH FULL MODEL PERFORMANCE

4.3.1    FAITHFULNESS OF CIRCUITS OF VARYING SIZES
To understand how faithfulness changes as the size of the circuits grows, we compute node impor-
tance before pruning for each method 5 , and track faithfulness performance as we add circuit nodes
in order of importance, while ablating all other nodes with corrupted activations (see Appendix A).
We sample attention heads in the original model one by one in random order to construct the random
baseline, and report the results in Figure 2. Since the goal of mechanistic interpretability is to repli-
cate the original model’s behavior, namely achieving faithfulness = 1 6 , with the smallest amount
   5
      ACDC is omitted in this experiment because of the prohibitive amount of runtime in hours to obtain
individual node importance.
    6
      Faithfulness can go beyond 1 because there are both positively and negatively contributing heads in the
model. The original model performance relies on a certain dynamic of interactions between them. When the


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Faithfulness (IOI)                                                      Faithfulness (Greater-than)                                    1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                         Faithfulness (Docstring)
               1.50                                                                          1.0
                                                                                                                                                                           1.0
               1.25
                                                                                             0.8                                                                           0.8
               1.00
                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
Faithfulness


                                                                              Faithfulness


                                                                                                                                                            Faithfulness
               0.75                                                                          0.6
                                                                                                                                                                           0.4
               0.50
                                                                                             0.4                                                                           0.2
               0.25
                                                                                                                                                                           0.0
               0.00                                      CD-T mean ablation                  0.2                                       CD-T mean ablation                                                      CD-T mean ablation
                                                         CD-T zero ablation                                                            CD-T zero ablation                                                      CD-T zero ablation
                                                         EAP                                                                           EAP                                 0.2                                 EAP
               0.25                                      Random                                                                        Random                                                                  Random
                                                         Manual                              0.0                                       Manual                              0.4                                 Manual
               0.50
                      0   20   40       60    80    100       120     140                          0   20     40      60    80   100       120      140                          0   5    10      15     20      25       30
                                    No. Atten. Heads                                                               No. Atten. Heads                                                         No. Atten. Heads

Figure 2: Faithfulness of CD-T circuits, EAP circuits, and randomly selected circuits of equiva-
lent size for IOI, Greater-than and Docstring tasks. CD-T circuits obtains the full model’s perfor-
mance (faithfulness of 1) faster than EAP as attention heads are added in order of importance.


of nodes possible, this is naturally the first question we ask. First, we find CD-T circuits are able to
perfectly replicate model behavior (faithfulness = 1) using fewer nodes than EAP for all the three
tasks. Second, manual circuits outperform both CD-T and EAP of the same size, indicating room
of improvement of advanced circuit discovery methods. Finally, we compare the effect of ablation
methods on CD-T circuits’ performance by including CD-T circuits obtained from zero-ablation in
the plot, and find that mean-ablation tend to yield higher faithfulness compared to zero-ablation on
Greater-than and Docstring, except for IOI where they are quite comparable. Mean-ablation is of-
ten viewed as a preferred way of ablation because it preserves a general concept of the task, hence
is less destructive than zero-ablation. Similar finding is also discussed in other circuit discovery
work (Conmy et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023).

5                     D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS

Despite having shown both qualitative and quantitative evidence of the strengths of CD-T in auto-
mated circuit discovery, our results is limited in scale and to the datasets and prior interpretation
methods evaluated. More work is needed to generalize these findings to a broader set of models,
datasets, and interpretation methods. Although our methods can be applied to construct circuits
comprised of any of a neural network’s internal components, we only discussed circuits built with
purely attention heads. Automating the discovery of circuits with different/heterogeneous compo-
nents, particularly the MLPs of a transformer, is a promising direction for further investigation.
Finally, our method is itself limited in two ways: first, as mentioned in 3.3, the metric which mea-
sures the relevance of a source node to a target node does not differentiate signs of the contribution,
which might be useful in an interpretability context. Second, while the algorithm is capable of
finding circuits under reasonable default settings, some amount of effort is still applied to tune the
heuristic elements, such as the number of heads to select in each iteration.

6                     C ONCLUSIONS

We have proposed contextual decomposition for transformers (CD-T), a set of mathematical decom-
position principles to efficiently compute the contribution of model features to other model features
within a transformer. CD-T can produce circuits of arbitrary granularity, and is the first able to
produce circuits as fine-grained as attention heads at specific sequence positions while at the same
time reduce runtime from hours to seconds, when it is compared with prior work (Syed et al., 2023;
Conmy et al., 2023). CD-T improves upon limitations of prior work, as it is automatic and does not
require any training or manually-crafted examples by humans. CD-T is fundamentally compatible
with all common transformer architectures. On three standard circuit evaluation datasets (indirect
object identification, greater-than comparisons, and docstring completion), we demonstrate that CD-
dynamic is not perfectly replicated and there’s extra positively contributing effect, the circuit might give a
higher prediction score than the original model would give, which results in a faithfulness > 1.


                                                                                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T outperforms ACDC and EAP by better recovering the manual circuits with an average of 97% ROC
AUC under low runtimes. In addition, we provide evidence that faithfulness of CD-T circuits is not
due to random chance by showing our circuits are 80% more faithful than random circuits of up to
60% of the original model size. Finally, we show CD-T circuits are able to perfectly replicate origi-
nal models’ behavior (faithfulness = 1) using fewer nodes than the baselines for all tasks. We hope
that our future open-source implementation of CD-T benefits mechanistic interpretability research
community by opening up a window from enabling more fine-grained analysis within a practical
runtime.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
GZ would like to thank Shawn Hu for valuable discussions that contributed greatly to mathematical
formalization, experiment design, and important heuristic components of our method. We gratefully
acknowledge partial support from NSF grant DMS-2413265, NSF grant 2023505 on Collaborative
Research: Foundations of Data Science Institute (FODSI), the NSF and the Simons Foundation for
the Collaboration on the Theoretical Foundations of Deep Learning through awards DMS-2031883
and 814639, NSF grant MC2378 to the Institute for Artificial CyberThreat Intelligence and Opera-
tioN (ACTION), and a Berkeley Deep Drive (BDD) grant from BAIR and a Dean’s fund from CoE,
both at UC Berkeley.

R EFERENCES
Marco Bertolini, Linlin Zhao, Djork-Arné Clevert, and Floriane Montanari. Beyond atoms and
 bonds: contextual explainability via molecular graphical depictions. 2022.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeff Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Ma teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
  Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. ArXiv, abs/2005.14165, 2020a. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:218971783.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020b.
Arthur Conmy, Augustine N. Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià
  Garriga-Alonso. Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability. ArXiv,
  abs/2304.14997, 2023.    URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  258418244.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In North American Chapter of the Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics, 2019. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:52967399.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep
  Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt,
  Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and
  Chris Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread,
  2021. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna
  Kravec, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse,


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah.
  Toy models of superposition. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022. https://transformer-
  circuits.pub/2022/toy model/index.html.
Amir Feder, Nadav Oved, Uri Shalit, and Roi Reichart. Causalm: Causal model explanation through
 counterfactual language models. Computational Linguistics, 47:333–386, 2020. URL https:
 //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:218901061.
Jiahai Feng and Jacob Steinhardt. How do language models bind entities in context? ArXiv,
   abs/2310.17191, 2023.     URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
   264490454.
Atticus Geiger, Hanson Lu, Thomas F. Icard, and Christopher Potts. Causal abstractions of
  neural networks. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235358214.
Mor Geva, R. Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are key-
 value memories. ArXiv, abs/2012.14913, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
 org/CorpusID:229923720.
Nicholas W. Goldowsky-Dill, Chris MacLeod, Lucas Jun Koba Sato, and Aryaman Arora. Lo-
  calizing model behavior with path patching. ArXiv, abs/2304.05969, 2023. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258079237.
Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. How does gpt-2 compute greater-than?:
 Interpreting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model, 2023. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2305.00586.
Michael Hanna, Sandro Pezzelle, and Yonatan Belinkov. Have faith in faithfulness: Going beyond
 circuit overlap when finding model mechanisms, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
 2403.17806.
Kelei He, Chen Gan, Zhuoyuan Li, Islem Rekik, Zihao Yin, Wen Ji, Yang Gao, Qian Wang, Junfeng
  Zhang, and Dinggang Shen. Transformers in medical image analysis. Intelligent Medicine, 3(1):
  59–78, 2023. ISSN 2667-1026. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imed.2022.07.002. URL https:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2667102622000717.
Zhengfu He, Xuyang Ge, Qiong Tang, Tianxiang Sun, Qinyuan Cheng, and Xipeng Qiu. Dictionary
  learning improves patch-free circuit discovery in mechanistic interpretability: A case study on
  othello-gpt, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.12201.
Stefan Heimersheim and Jett Janiak. A circuit for python docstrings in a 4-layer attention-only
  transformer. URL: https://www. alignmentforum. org/posts/u6KXXmKFbXfWzoAXn/acircuit-for-
  python-docstrings-in-a-4-layer-attention-only, 2023.
Jaap Jumelet, Willem H. Zuidema, and Dieuwke Hupkes. Analysing neural language mod-
  els: Contextual decomposition reveals default reasoning in number and gender assignment.
  In Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, 2019. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:202676782.
John M. Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ron-
  neberger, Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Zı́dek, Anna Potapenko, Alex Bridg-
  land, Clemens Meyer, Simon A A Kohl, Andy Ballard, Andrew Cowie, Bernardino Romera-
  Paredes, Stanislav Nikolov, Rishub Jain, Jonas Adler, Trevor Back, Stig Petersen, David A.
  Reiman, Ellen Clancy, Michal Zielinski, Martin Steinegger, Michalina Pacholska, Tamas
  Berghammer, Sebastian Bodenstein, David Silver, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew W. Senior, Koray
  Kavukcuoglu, Pushmeet Kohli, and Demis Hassabis. Highly accurate protein structure prediction
  with alphafold. Nature, 596:583 – 589, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:235959867.
Jean Kaddour, Aengus Lynch, Qi Liu, Matt J. Kusner, and Ricardo Silva. Causal machine learn-
  ing: A survey and open problems. ArXiv, abs/2206.15475, 2022. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:250144475.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


David Lindner, J’anos Kram’ar, Matthew Rahtz, Tom McGrath, and Vladimir Mikulik. Tracr:
  Compiled transformers as a laboratory for interpretability. ArXiv, abs/2301.05062, 2023. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:255749093.

Samuel Marks, Can Rager, Eric J. Michaud, Yonatan Belinkov, David Bau, and Aaron Mueller.
  Sparse feature circuits: Discovering and editing interpretable causal graphs in language mod-
  els. ArXiv, abs/2403.19647, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:268732732.

Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in gpt, 2023.

W. James Murdoch, Peter J. Liu, and Bin Yu. Beyond word importance: Contextual decomposition
  to extract interactions from LSTMs. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rkRwGg-0Z.

Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures
  for grokking via mechanistic interpretability. ArXiv, abs/2301.05217, 2023. URL https://
  api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:255749430.

Christopher Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and
  Shan Carter. Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. 2020. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:215930358.

Charles O’Neill and Thang Bui. Sparse autoencoders enable scalable and reliable circuit identifica-
  tion in language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12522.

Judea Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. Cambridge University Press, USA, 2nd
  edition, 2009. ISBN 052189560X.

Tilman Räuker, Anson Ho, Stephen Casper, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Toward transparent ai: A
   survey on interpreting the inner structures of deep neural networks, 2023.

Claudia Shi, Nicolas Beltran-Velez, Achille Nazaret, Carolina Zheng, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, An-
  drew Jesson, Maggie Makar, and David Blei. Hypothesis testing the circuit hypothesis in
  LLMs. In ICML 2024 Workshop on Mechanistic Interpretability, 2024. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=ibSNv9cldu.

Chandan Singh, W. James Murdoch, and Bin Yu. Hierarchical interpretations for neural network
  predictions. ArXiv, abs/1806.05337, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:49214673.

Chandan Singh, W. James Murdoch, and Bin Yu. Hierarchical interpretations for neural network
  predictions. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/pdf/1806.05337.

Alessandro Stolfo, Yonatan Belinkov, and Mrinmaya Sachan. A mechanistic interpretation of arith-
  metic reasoning in language models using causal mediation analysis. In Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:258865170.

Aaquib Syed, Can Rager, and Arthur Conmy. Attribution patching outperforms automated circuit
  discovery, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10348.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von
  Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman
  Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp.
  5998–6008, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/
  3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html.

                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer, and
  Stuart M. Shieber. Causal mediation analysis for interpreting neural nlp: The case of gen-
  der bias. ArXiv, abs/2004.12265, 2020a. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:216553696.

Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer,
  and Stuart M. Shieber. Investigating gender bias in language models using causal media-
  tion analysis. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020b. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:227275068.

Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt.
  Interpretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in GPT-2 small. In
  The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=NpsVSN6o4ul.

Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Josh Rozner, Elisa Kreiss, Hanson Lu, Thomas F. Icard, Christopher
  Potts, and Noah D. Goodman. Causal distillation for language models. ArXiv, abs/2112.02505,
  2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:244909258.


A     E XPERIMENT DETAILS

A.1     TASK D ESCRIPTION

Here we describe each task and how the experiments are performed in more detail; we also specify
the exact model components which comprise the circuits we analyzed in the main paper. In this
section, we use the convention of specifying attention heads in a model by the tuple (layer index,
head index). For the IOI task, we add a third entry for output of the head at a specific sequence
position, and follow their nomenclature for semantically labeling the sequence positions.

A.1.1     I NDIRECT O BJECT I DENTIFICATION (IOI) (WANG ET AL ., 2023)
The indirect object identification (IOI) task is to predict the indirect object in a sentence with two
entities, such as identifying “Mary” in the sequence “When Mary and John went for a walk, John
gave an apple to ...”. The objective originally defined for this task, which we also use, is the differ-
ence between the predicted logit of the indirect object (IO) token and the subject (S) token. Wang
et al. (2023) carefully design their experiment and dataset code so that mean ablation occurs using
the mean activations over the corrupted “ABC dataset”, which replaces the three name tokens in the
task with random names. Likewise, when setting the decomposition of a node, we set the “relevant”
component to the deviation from the mean activations on the ABC dataset. This task was performed
on GPT2-small. GPT-2 correctly performs this task about 99 percent of the time, so we did not take
special measures to account for those samples where it doesn’t in our circuit analysis. We identify
circuits using 25 IOI samples drawn from mixed templates, and mean ablation is conducted using
the corrupted ABC dataset. Another set of 100 IOI samples are used in evaluation. Manual circuit
of IOI compared against in the ROC AUC experiment is: [(2, 2), (4, 11), (0, 1), (3, 0), (0, 10), (5,
5), (6, 9), (5, 8), (5, 9), (7, 3), (7, 9), (8, 6), (8, 10), (10, 7), (11, 0), (9, 9), (9, 6), (10, 0), (9, 0), (9,
7), (10, 1), (10, 2), (10, 6), (10, 10), (11, 2), (11, 9)], which is from Figure 2 in Wang et al. (2023).

Details of Circuit Analysis For this task, in order to provide some intuitions about what CD-T
calculates, we provide a number of heatmaps of the relevance scores at specific positions during
various iterations of the circuit analysis. In this section, we don’t follow our automated circuit
discovery algorithm exactly, but instead partially follow Wang et al. (2023)’s analysis to decide
what sequence positions to search over and visualize.
The first iteration of the algorithm finds the Name Mover Heads: (9, 9, end), (10, 0, end), and (9, 6,
end); the Negative Name Mover Heads: (10, 7, end), (11, 10, end); and some Backup Name Mover
Heads: (10, 2, end), (10, 6, end), (10, 10, end), described by Wang et al. (2023)
Following Wang et al. (2023)’s analysis further, and deviating from the normal course of our circuit-
finding algorithm, we compute the relevance of nodes to the Name Mover Heads on just the end

                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


position, and find what they named the “S-Inhibition Heads”, at (8, 10, end), (7, 9, end), and (7, 3,
end), though there are some other relevant-looking contenders:


Continuing to follow their analysis, Wang et al. (2023)’s analysis further, we compute the relevance
of nodes to the S-Inhibition Heads at the S2 position, and find our first minor disagreement with
their process: though we find two of what they named the Induction Heads at (5, 5, S2), (5, 8, S2),
(5, 9, S2) we don’t find the one at (6, 9, S2) but instead find one at (5, 10, S2), and find a head their
later analysis called a Duplicate Token Head, at (3, 0, S2).
Next we compute the relevance of nodes to the Induction Heads at the S2 position, and find that (3,
0, S2) mostly drowns out the signal of the other Duplicate Token Heads:
Finally, we compute the relevance of nodes to the Induction Heads at the S1+1 position, and find (4,
11, S1+1), with the other Previous Token Head they found at (2, 2, S1+1) a top contender, though
there are other heads not accounted for in their analysis:
Overall, there is significant but not perfect agreement with the results and analysis of the IOI paper.
We also attempted analysis by computing relevance to intermediate matrices (i.e., the key, query,


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


value vectors) in the attention calculation, but found the plots to be qualitatively similar, possibly
due to the fact that CD-T by design propagates relevances from these vectors to the attention head
outputs as well.
Another fact of note is that the scales on these plots vary substantially. It would be desirable to find
an interpretable normalization method to put these on the same scale with some intrinsic meaning,
or otherwise explain the causes of this phenomenon.

A.1.2    G REATER -T HAN (H ANNA ET AL ., 2023)
The Greater than task is to predict the last two digits in an incomplete sentence following the tem-
plate “The [noun] lasted from the year XXYY to the year XX”. And we expect the model to assign
higher probability to years greater than YY. The objective originally defined for this task, which we
also use, is the sum of probabilities assigned to tokens corresponding to greater years, minus the
sum of probabilities assigned to tokens corresponding to lesser years. (Some probability is assigned
to tokens which don’t correspond to numbers at all.) For our “mean-ablation”, we simply take the


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


mean over the activations over 100 negative datapoints (impossible completions, with the ending
year preceding the starting century), and as above, when setting the decomposition at a source node,
define the relevant component to be the deviation from the mean activation over this distribution.
This task was performed on GPT2-small. GPT-2 correctly performs this task about 99 percent of the
time, so we did not take special measures to account for those samples where it doesn’t in our circuit
analysis. We identify circuits using a random sample of 100 datapoints provided by Hanna et al.
(2023), and mean ablation is conducted using the negative impossible completion samples. Another
set of 100 samples are used in evaluation.
It should be noted that our result and the results in Hanna et al. (2023) are not directly comparable,
since they also attempt to investigate the influence of MLPs and their resulting circuit removes most
of the MLPs in GPT-2. For the comparisons found in the main paper, we have compared our result
(with all MLPs) to the circuit which is obtained by taking all the attention heads named in Hanna
et al. (2023) (also with all MLPs), which is a circuit distinct from the one found in their work.
Manual circuit of Greater-than compared against in the ROC AUC experiment is: [(5, 1), (5, 5), (6,
1), (6, 9), (7, 10), (8, 8), (8, 11), (9, 1)].
Independently of the comparison, it remains true that keeping the relatively small proportion of
attention heads in our circuit results in recovering almost all of GPT-2’s capability on this task; see
below.

                                                 Task-specific metric    Correct guess rate
                      Full model                        0.817                 0.992
             All attention heads ablated               -2.095                    0
                     Their circuit                      0.768                 0.989
          Their circuit (most MLPs ablated)             0.727                  N/A
                      Our circuit                       0.761                 0.981


A.1.3    D OCSTRING (H EIMERSHEIM & JANIAK , 2023)
The goal of the Docstring task is to predict the next variable name in a Python docstring. For
example, given a function with variable names LOAD, SIZE, FILES, and LAST, the task is to predict
the word after one : PARAM. According to docstring conventions, this should be the variable name
in the function definition which follows the most recent variable name to appear after : PARAM.
The objective originally defined for this task is the logit assigned to the correct variable name,
minus the max logit assigned to all other variable name tokens found in the function signature. For


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


our “mean-ablation”, we use their random random dataset which randomize both the variable
names in the function definition and in the docstring of prompts, and correspondingly, when setting
the decomposition at a source node, define the relevant component to be the deviation from the
mean activation over this distribution. We identify circuits using a 100 datapoints sampling for
the dataset provided by Heimersheim & Janiak (2023), and mean ablation is conducted using the
corrupted random random dataset. Another set of 100 samples are used in evaluation. This task
was performed on a 4-layer attention-only transformer trained on natural language and Python code
(attn-only-4l) released with the TransformerLens library for the express purpose of facilitating
mechanistic interpretability research. Another complication is that the toy model only guesses the
correct token between 60 and 65 percent of the time. To account for this, we perform our circuit
analysis and evaluation on the subset of input examples for which the model performs the task
correctly.
Our circuit consists of the nodes (3, 0), (3, 6), (1, 4), (0, 5), (0, 0), (1, 0), (1, 4), (0, 1), (2, 3), (1, 2).
Heimersheim & Janiak (2023) find the circuit (0, 2), (0, 4), (0, 5), (1, 2), (1, 4), (2, 0), (3, 0), (3, 6)
with their initial analysis, and heuristically observe that three heads help to obtain the “augmented
circuit” (0, 2), (0, 4), (0, 5), (1, 2), (1, 4), (2, 0), (3, 0), (3, 6), (1, 0), (0, 1), (2, 3).
Manual circuit of Docstring compared against in the ROC AUC experiment is: [(0, 2), (0, 4), (0, 5),
(1, 2), (1, 4), (2, 0), (3, 0), (3, 6)].

                                                 Task-specific metric      Correct guess rate
                       Full model                       3.661                     1.0
               All attention heads ablated             -2.095                      0
                       Their circuit                    2.884                    0.54
                   Augmented circuit                    3.524                    0.66
                        Our circuit                     3.235                    0.57


B     A LGORITHM DETAILS

B.1    H EURISTICS

In addition to the greedy pruning presented in Algorithm 1 as a refinement step, here we describe
other heuristic elements to the algorithm.

       • The threshold for determining which set S of highest-contributing nodes may be varied: it
         is possible to pick the top N nodes or fraction of nodes, or to automatically detect outliers.
         Empirically, we find that the distribution of node contributions varies quite severely, so
         finding a heuristic which works in all cases is actually an object of future work. In this
         paper, we set the threshold by varying the percentile of top nodes to extract, in the range of
         [90, 99] to obtain the ROC AUC in section 4.2.1.
       • Empirically we find, for a fixed target node, the relevance scores of source nodes in different
         layers to this target node may have different expected magnitudes, due to the numerical
         effects of propagation through the network. To account for this, we normalize the relevance
         scores by dividing by the average magnitude across scores found in a given layer.
       • To avoid the risk of propagation equations becoming numerically unstable after a large
         number of iterations, especially if the relevant and irrelevant constituents differ in sign at a
         specific index, we set the value of one of rel/irrel at this position to 0 and the other to the
         sum of the two terms.

B.2    C OMPLEXITY ANALYSIS

To provide more clarity, the computational complexity of the algorithm satisfy the following prop-
erties:

       • Each decomposition (of a set of target nodes with respect to a set of source nodes) requires
         cost in FLOPs similar to one forward pass of the model (and often less, since values prior


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        to the source nodes can be cached and values after the target nodes do not need to be
        calculated).
      • The core of the algorithm is a loop, where in each iteration, we search over all nodes which
        can potentially have high relevance to the target nodes. (This means that heuristically
        excluding some nodes from the search can potentially significantly decrease cost in FLOPs,
        and cost in FLOPs increases linearly with respect to the granularity with which we separate
        the nodes in the model.)
      • The memory footprint of a single decomposition, including the forward pass, is a small (less
        than 3) constant multiple of the cost of a forward pass; the only added costs are to keep
        track of the relevant and irrelevant constituent tensors separately, as well as bookkeeping
        of components of the target decomposition metric.
      • The cost (in FLOPs or memory) of performing the analysis on a set of input examples is
        linear in the number of input examples, since the same set of computations needs to be
        done with respect to each example.


                                                19
