Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D EMYSTIFYING O NLINE C LUSTERING OF BANDITS :
E NHANCED E XPLORATION U NDER S TOCHASTIC AND
S MOOTHED A DVERSARIAL C ONTEXTS
 Zhuohua Li1,2∗, Maoli Liu2∗, Xiangxiang Dai2 , John C.S. Lui2
 1
   Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University
 2
   Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
 {zhli,mlliu,xxdai23,cslui}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk



                                               A BSTRACT

             The contextual multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is crucial in sequential
             decision-making. A line of research, known as online clustering of bandits, ex-
             tends contextual MAB by grouping similar users into clusters, utilizing shared
             features to improve learning efficiency. However, existing algorithms, which rely
             on the upper confidence bound (UCB) strategy, struggle to gather adequate statis-
             tical information to accurately identify unknown user clusters. As a result, their
             theoretical analyses require several strong assumptions about the “diversity” of
             contexts generated by the environment, leading to impractical settings, compli-
             cated analyses, and poor practical performance. Removing these assumptions has
             been a long-standing open problem in the clustering of bandits literature. In this
             work, we provide two partial solutions. First, we introduce an additional explo-
             ration phase to accelerate the identification of clusters. We integrate this general
             strategy into both graph-based and set-based algorithms and propose two new
             algorithms, UniCLUB and UniSCLUB. Remarkably, our algorithms require sub-
             stantially weaker assumptions and simpler theoretical analyses while achieving
             superior cumulative regret compared to previous studies. Second, inspired by the
             smoothed analysis framework, we propose a more practical setting that eliminates
             the requirement for i.i.d. context generation used in previous studies, thus en-
             hancing the performance of existing algorithms for online clustering of bandits.
             Extensive evaluations on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that
             our proposed algorithms outperform existing approaches.


1       I NTRODUCTION

The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is an online sequential decision-making problem,
where at each time step, the learner selects an action (a.k.a. arm) and observes a reward generated
from an unknown probability distribution associated with that arm. The goal of the learner is to
maximize cumulative rewards (or equivalently, minimize cumulative regrets) in the long run. The
contextual linear bandit problem (Li et al., 2010; Chu et al., 2011) extends the MAB framework by
associating each action with a feature vector and a corresponding unknown linear reward function.
Online clustering of bandits, first introduced by Gentile et al. (2014), generalizes contextual linear
bandits by utilizing preference relationships among users. It adaptively partitions users into clusters
and leverages the collaborative effect of similar users to enhance learning efficiency. This approach
has many applications in computational advertising, web page content optimization, and recommen-
dation systems (Li & Zhang, 2018). Different from conventional MAB problems that focus solely
on regret minimization, online clustering of bandits has two simultaneous goals. Firstly, it infers
the underlying cluster structures among users by sequentially recommending arms and receiving
user feedback. Secondly, based on the inferred clusters, it minimizes the cumulative regret along
    ∗
        Zhuohua Li and Maoli Liu contributed equally to this work. Maoli Liu is the corresponding author.
        An updated version of this paper is available on arXiv at https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.00891.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the learning trajectory. These dual goals significantly influence the algorithm design, as the learner
must balance the accurate cluster inference and effective regret minimization.
Most existing studies such as Gentile et al. (2014); Li & Zhang (2018) employ an Upper Confidence
Bound (UCB)-based strategy (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) to balance exploration (for cluster in-
ference) and exploitation (for regret minimization). While this strategy is intuitive and standard for
stochastic linear bandits, the least squares estimator used in the UCB strategy does not directly yield
a precise estimation of underlying parameters, leading to insufficient statistical information for clus-
ter inference. As a result, to ensure correct cluster inference, existing algorithms for clustering of
bandits require several strong assumptions on “data diversity” for their regret analysis, such as con-
texts being independently generated from a fixed random process (we refer to it as stochastic context
setting) with lower bounded minimum eigenvalue of a covariance matrix and upper bounded vari-
ance (See Section 3.2 for details). Unfortunately, these assumptions result in impractical settings,
overly complicated theoretical analysis, suboptimal regret incurred by cluster inference, and more
importantly, poor performance in practice. Based on these challenges, a natural question arises:

         Can we design new algorithms or propose new settings for the online clustering of
         bandits that eliminate the restrictive assumptions while achieving similar regrets?

Several efforts have been made to relax these assumptions. However, previous attempts have not
addressed the fundamental issues, and some have resulted in deteriorated regret that grows exponen-
tially with the number of arms, in exchange for milder assumptions (See details in Section 2).
In this paper, we demystify the process of cluster inference and provide two (partial) solutions to
the aforementioned open problem. We show that merely employing a UCB algorithm is insufficient
for simultaneously achieving both cluster inference and regret minimization. Specifically, the lack
of sufficient exploration in a UCB-like strategy hinders efficient inference of the underlying cluster
structures. To tackle this problem, we propose two approaches, one focusing on algorithmic design
and the other on problem setup:
Algorithmic Design Perspective: We maintain the stochastic context setting as in Gentile et al.
(2014) (with some minor changes, see Section 3.1), and propose new algorithms with an additional
pure exploration phase before applying UCB, leading to more reasonable settings, significantly re-
laxed assumptions, simpler proofs, and improved cumulative regret. Intuitively, the additional ex-
ploration phase gathers more information about the underlying clusters, preventing the subsequent
UCB strategy from exploiting inaccurate clusters. This technique is quite general and applicable to
both graph-based (Gentile et al., 2014) and set-based (Li et al., 2019) algorithms. It may also be of
independent interest to other research on multi-objective MAB problems.
Problem Setup Perspective: We eliminate the need for stochastic context generation by proposing
a new setup based on the smoothed analysis framework (Spielman & Teng, 2004), where the con-
texts can be chosen by a “smoothed” adversary. This setting interpolates between two extremes: the
i.i.d. context generation used in Gentile et al. (2014) and the adversarial context generation used in
Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011). We show that with some minor changes, existing algorithms (such as
CLUB proposed by Gentile et al. (2014)) achieve better performance in this setting.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to clarify the inferior results due to the restric-
tive assumptions in the clustering of bandits literature (Gentile et al., 2014), propose new algo-
rithms/settings to eliminate the assumptions, and obtain improved cumulative regrets.
Main contributions. Our contributions are highlighted as follows:

• Following the stochastic context setting established in Gentile et al. (2014), we propose two algo-
  rithms: a graph-based algorithm UniCLUB based on CLUB (Gentile et al., 2014) and a set-based
  algorithm UniSCLUB based on SCLUB (Li et al., 2019). Both algorithms incorporate an initial
  exploration phase before the conventional UCB strategy. Benefiting from our design and novel
  analysis techniques, we substantially relax the assumptions required in our theoretical analysis.
                                                                                         √
• We show that UniCLUB and UniSCLUB enjoy a regret bound of O             e u 2d + d mT , where
                                                                               γ
                                                                               e λx
  the first term improves the state-of-the-art regret in existing literature (Gentile et al., 2014; Li &
  Zhang, 2018; Li et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a;b), and the second term matches
  the minimax near-optimal regret bound of contextual linear bandits (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011).


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• Besides the stochastic context setting, we propose a new setting called the smoothed adversarial
  context setting, where in each round, the context is chosen by an adversary but is then randomly
  perturbed. This setup is more practical and aligns more closely with the original setting of con-
  textual linear bandits (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011).
                                                       We give two associated algorithms
                                                                                         SACLUB,
                                                                √
  SASCLUB and prove that they enjoy a regret of O   e u d + d mT where λ       ex = O 1 .
                                                         2e                              log K   γ λx
• We perform extensive evaluations on both synthetic and real-world datasets. The results demon-
  strate that our algorithms outperform all the baseline algorithms, validating their effectiveness and
  practical applicability in various settings.
Table 1 summarizes the comparison between our algorithms and existing studies with different as-
sumptions and cumulative regrets. Detailed explanations of the diversity conditions and regret anal-
ysis are given in Section 3.2 and Section 5.

    Table 1: Comparison between our algorithms and existing studies with different design choices.
                                                            Context                                                   Regret incurred
 Algorithms                                                                 Diversity Assumption                                                Constants
                                                            Generation                                                by clustering
 CLUB (Gentile et al., 2014),                                               λmin (E[XX T ]) = λx ,

                                                                                                                      e u 2d + 12               λx = O d1

 CLUB-cascade (Li & Zhang, 2018),                           i.i.d.          (z T X)2 is σ 2 -sub-Gaussian,            O     γ λx λ          x

                                                                                           λ2x
 SCLUB (Li et al., 2019), FCLUB (Liu et al., 2022)                          σ 2 ≤ 8 log(4K) .

 RCLUMB, RSCLUMB (Wang et al., 2023a),
                                                                            λmin (E[XX T ]) = λx ,
                                                                                                                      e u d + 1

                                                                                                                                                         1

 RCLUB-WCU (Wang et al., 2023b),                            i.i.d.                                                    O     2e e2               λ
                                                                                                                                                ex = O 2K+1
                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                                  γ λx     λx
                                                                               T       2         2
                                                                            (z X) is σ -sub-Gaussian.
 FedC3 UCB-H (Yang et al., 2024)
                                                                            λmin (E[XX T ]) = λx ,
                                                                                                                                ud
                                                                                                                                                λx = O d1

 UniCLUB, UniSCLUB (Ours, Theorems 1 and 2)                 i.i.d.          The minimum gap between clusters          O
                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                              e 2 λx
                                                                                                                              γ

                                                                            γ has a known lower bound γ
                                                                                                      e.

                                                                                                                               ud                              1
 SACLUB, SASCLUB (Ours, Theorem 4)                          Adversarial     Gaussian noise perturbation               O
                                                                                                                      e                         λ
                                                                                                                                                ex = O
                                                                                                                                                             log K
                                                                                                                              γ2λ
                                                                                                                                ex

    K, u, and d denote the number of arms, the number of users, and the dimension, respectively. γ and γ
                                                                                                       e are defined in Assumption 2.
    X and λx are defined in Assumption 3. z ∈ Rd represents an arbitrary unit vector.


The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review related work, emphasizing
the restrictive assumptions in the original setting and discussing prior attempts to eliminate these
assumptions. In Section 3, we present our solution for removing these assumptions in the orig-
inal setting. In Section 4, we introduce an alternative approach based on the smoothed analysis
framework, which aligns more closely with the original linear bandits setting (Abbasi-Yadkori et al.,
2011). Finally, in Section 5 and Section 6, we present the theoretical analysis and experiment results.

2      R ELATED W ORK
Our work is closely related to the literature of online clustering of bandits. Since the seminal work by
Gentile et al. (2014), which first formulated the clustering of bandits problem and proposed a graph-
based algorithm, there has been a line of follow-up studies. For example, Li et al. (2016) considers
the collaborative effects that arise from user-item interactions. Gentile et al. (2017) implements the
underlying feedback-sharing mechanism by estimating user neighborhoods in a context-dependent
manner. Li & Zhang (2018) consider the clustering of bandits problem in the cascading bandits
setting with random prefix feedback. Li et al. (2019) propose a set-based algorithm and consider
users with non-uniform arrival frequencies. Ban & He (2021) introduce local clustering which does
not assume that users within the same cluster share exactly the same parameter. Liu et al. (2022)
extend the clustering of bandits problem to the federated setting and consider privacy preservation.
Wang et al. (2023a;b) investigate clustering of bandits under misspecified and corrupted user models.
However, all of these studies adhere to Gentile et al. (2014)’s original setting and theoretical analy-
sis framework, which imposes several restrictive assumptions on the generation process of contexts,
such as (a) the feature vector of each arm is independently sampled from a fixed distribution; (b)
the covariance matrix constructed on specific context-action features is full rank with the minimum
eigenvalue greater than 0; and (c) the square of contexts projected in a fixed direction is sub-Gaussian
with bounded conditional variance. Constructing a natural context generation distribution that sat-
isfies all these assumptions simultaneously is highly challenging (if not impossible), and none of


                                                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the aforementioned papers provide any concrete examples. There have been some attempts to relax
these assumptions. For example, Wang et al. (2023a;b); Yang et al. (2024) propose a more relaxed
assumption regarding the variance of contexts. However, these approaches result in a regret that
grows exponentially with the number of arms K (as shown in Table 1). We refer interested readers
to more related works about leveraging similar assumptions in Appendix A.
Our smoothed adversarial setting and algorithms SACLUB, SASCLUB are inspired by the smoothed
analysis framework, introduced by Spielman & Teng (2004). This framework studies algorithms
where some instances are chosen by an adversary, but are then perturbed randomly, representing an
interpolation between worst-case and average-case analyses. It was originally proposed to analyze
the running time of algorithms. Kannan et al. (2018) first introduce the “smoothed adversary” setting
in multi-armed bandits and study how the regret bound of greedy algorithms behave on smoothed
bandit instances. This setting has been extended to structured linear bandits (i.e., the unknown pref-
erence vector has structures such as sparsity, group sparsity, or low rank) (Sivakumar et al., 2020),
linear bandits with knapsacks (Sivakumar et al., 2022), and Bayesian regret (Raghavan et al., 2023).
All these studies show that the greedy algorithm almost matches the best possible regret bound. The
core idea is that the inherent diversity in perturbed data (contexts) makes explicit exploration unnec-
essary. In contrast to the analysis of greedy algorithms, our work introduces the smoothed analysis
framework into the clustering of bandits setting, where the UCB strategy lacks sufficient exploration
for identifying unknown user clusters. We demonstrate that the inherent diversity of contexts in the
smoothed adversary setting eliminates the impractical requirement for i.i.d. context generation and
enhances the cumulative regrets of existing algorithms (e.g., CLUB (Gentile et al., 2014)).

3     S TOCHASTIC C ONTEXT S ETTING
In this section, we study the online clustering of bandits problem under the stochastic context setting,
building upon the seminal work of Gentile et al. (2014) but with substantially relaxed assumptions
and improved cumulative regrets. We begin by introducing the problem setting, which largely fol-
lows Gentile et al. (2014) with the stringent assumptions replaced by a mild assumption that the
minimum gap between clusters has a known lower bound. Then we provide the intuition of our key
techniques. Finally, we present our proposed algorithms.

3.1   P ROBLEM S ETTING

In the following, we use boldface letters for vectors and matrices. We denote [M ] := {1, . . . , M }
for M ∈ N+ . For any real vector x, y and positive semi-definite (PSD) matrix V , ∥x∥ denotes
the ℓ2 norm of x, ⟨x, y⟩ = xT y denotes the dot product of vectors, √⟨x, y⟩V = xT V y denotes the
weighted inner product, and ∥x∥V denotes the Mahalanobis norm xT V x. We use λmin (·) and
λmax (·) to denote the minimum and maximum eigenvalue.
In the online clustering of bandit problem, there are u users, denoted by set [u] = {1, 2, . . . , u}.
Each user i ∈ [u] is associated with an unknown preference feature vector θi ∈ Rd with ∥θi ∥2 ≤ 1.
There is an underlying cluster structure among all S the users. Specifically, the users are separated
into m clusters I1 , I2 , . . . , Im (m ≪ u), where i∈[m] Ii = [u] and Ii ∩ Ij = ∅ for i ̸= j,
such that users lying in the same cluster share the same preference feature vector (i.e., they have
similar behavior) and users lying in different clusters have different preference feature vector (i.e.,
they have different behavior). Formally, let θ k denote the common preference vector for cluster Ik
and j(i) ∈ [m] denote the index of the cluster that user i belongs to. In other words, for any user
i ∈ Ik , we have θi = θ k = θ j(i) . The underlying partition of users and the number of clusters m
are unknown to the learner, and need to be learned during the algorithm.
The learning procedure operates as follows: At each round t = 1, 2, . . . , T , the learner receives a
user index it ∈ [u] and a finite set of arms At ⊆ A where |At | = K. Each arm a ∈ A is associated
with a feature vector xa ∈ Rd , and we denote Dt = {xa }a∈At ⊆ Rd . Dt is also called context.
                                                                            K                     K
When we need to emphasize the index of arms, we also denote At = {at,i }i=1 and Dt = {xt,i }i=1 .
Then the learner assigns an appropriate cluster Vt for user it and recommends an arm at ∈ At based
on the aggregated data gathered from cluster Vt . After receiving the recommended arm, user it sends
a random reward rt ∈ [−1, 1] back to the learner. The reward is assumed to have a linear structure:
rt = xTat θit + ηt , where ηt is a zero-mean, 1-sub-Gaussian noise term.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let a∗t = arg maxa∈At xT   a θit be the optimal arm with the highest expected reward at time step t.
The goal of the learner is to minimize the expected cumulative regret defined as follows:
                                             " T                       #
                                              X
                                                    T          T
                               E[R(T )] = E        xa∗t θit − xat θit ,
                                                   t=1

where the expectation is taken over both the arms (at ) and users (it ) chosen during the process.
We assume the users and clusters satisfy the assumptions as follows:
Assumption 1 (User uniformness). At each time step t, the user it is drawn uniformly from the set
of all users [u], independently over the past.
Assumption 2 (Well-separatedness among clusters). All users in the same cluster Ij share the same
preference vector θ j . For users in different clusters, there is a fixed but unknown gap γ between
their preference vectors, with a known lower bound γ  e. Specifically, for any cluster indices i ̸= j,
                                           θi − θj 2 ≥ γ ≥ γ
                                                           e > 0.
Remark 1. Unlike the original setting in Gentile et al. (2014), where the gap γ is completely un-
known, we assume that γ has a known lower bound γ    e. We emphasize that this adjustment is natural
and results in a more practical setting. On the one hand, the clustering of bandits problem intrinsi-
cally requires a lower bound for γ. Specifically, to ensure successful clustering, it is necessary to
have γ12 ≪ T , where T is the total time horizon. Without this condition, no algorithm can effec-
tively identify the underlying clusters within time T .1 On the other hand, in real-world clustering
tasks, γ is usually a pre-defined parameter used to determine whether two items belong to the same
cluster (Ban & He, 2021; Ban et al., 2022). Therefore, incorporating a known lower bound for γ is
both reasonable and aligned with practical scenarios.
Remark 2. We also consider the case where γ is completely unknown. In this scenario, without the
stringent assumptions used in previous studies, algorithms are unable to determine whether cluster-
ing has been successful. As a result, we have to deal with the additional regret incurred by misclus-
tering, similar to the misspecified linear bandits setting (Ghosh et al., 2017), which typically leads
to regret that grows linearly with T (Lattimore et al., 2020). To overcome this challenge, we lever-
age the structure of the clustering problem and propose a phase-based algorithm, PhaseUniCLUB,
with carefully designed phase lengths. We demonstrate that our algorithm achieves sublinear regret
          e 23 ) (see details in Appendix D).
of order O(T

In the stochastic context setting, we assume the feature vectors (i.e., contexts) are independently
sampled from a fixed distribution, but we completely remove the restricted assumptions on the sub-
Gaussian distribution and variance of the arm generation process as mentioned in prior works.
Assumption 3 (Context diversity for stochastic contexts). At each time step t, the feature vectors
in Dt are drawn independently from a fixed distribution X with ∥X∥ ≤ L, and E[XX T ] is of full
rank with minimum eigenvalue λx > 0.
Remark 3. Intuitively, the minimum eigenvalue indicates how “diverse” the distribution X is, de-
picting how certain the feature vectors span the full Rd space. Having a lower bound on the min-
imum eigenvalue means that X has non-zero variance in all directions, which is necessary for the
least squares estimator to converge to the true parameter. Note that Assumption 3 only maintains
the minimum eigenvalue assumption2 and completely removes the additional stringent assumptions
as in previous studies (Gentile et al., 2014; Li & Zhang, 2018; Li et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2023a;b;
Liu et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024).

3.2    D IVERSITY C ONDITIONS IN P REVIOUS S TUDIES AND K EY T ECHNIQUES

Before delving into detailed algorithms, we first examine the stringent statistical assumptions in
previous studies (Gentile et al., 2014; Li & Zhang, 2018; Li et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2023a;b; Liu
   1
      To distinguish between two hypotheses about the bias of a coin with a difference ∆ in their probabilities
of heads, approximately 1/∆2 samples are needed.
    2
      This assumption is inevitable, since if the minimum eigenvalue is zero, the covariance matrix is not of full
rank, and thus θ cannot be uniquely determined.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024) and explain their necessity for the theoretical analysis of the existing
UCB-based algorithms. Then we provide insights on how these assumptions can be eliminated.
The key requirement of online clustering of bandits is the precise estimation of the preference vectors
θi for each user i, which is essential for correctly identifying the unknown user clusters. However,
the convergence of the least squares estimator relies on sufficiently diverse data. Intuitively, when
data points span a broad range of values and cover the spectrum of possible predictors, the model
can better capture the true underlying relationships, leading to more reliableP      parameter estimates.
Mathematically, diverse data help ensure that user i’s design matrix Si,t = s∈[t]:is =i xas xT       as is
well-conditioned, resulting in a more stable matrix inverse, which in turn reduces the variance of the
                                      −1 P
estimated preference vector θbi = Si,t       s∈[t]:is =i rs xas . Therefore, all the previous studies rely
on the diverse stochastic context assumption (Assumption 3), which states that the feature vector
of each arm is drawn independently from a fixed distribution X with λmin (E[XX T ]) = λx >
0. However, diverse contexts do not necessarily lead to a well-conditioned design matrix because
Assumption 3 only guarantees the diversity of arm set Dt , but not that the arms selected by the UCB
strategy are diverse. As a result, previous studies impose an additional assumption, requiring that
for any fixed unit vector z ∈ Rd , random variable (z T X)2 has sub-Gaussian tails with variance
                      λ2x
parameter σ 2 ≤ 8 log(4K)   . This assumption, however, contradicts the diverse stochastic context
assumption (Assumption 3), as the bounded variance condition restricts the diversity of X. In fact,
it is extremely difficult to construct a natural example of X such that all these assumptions are
satisfied simultaneously, and the aforementioned papers also do not provide any.
In summary, the key insight for eliminating the additional assumption is to ensure a well-conditioned
design matrix Si,t , i.e., the selected arms are sufficiently diverse. To this end, we introduce an
additional pure exploration phase which uniformly selects arms in the arm set Dt . In Lemma 2, we
will show that this explicit exploration guarantees that the minimum eigenvalue of the design matrix
Si,t grows linearly with the number of times user i appears.


3.3   A LGORITHMS FOR S TOCHASTIC C ONTEXT S ETTING

For the stochastic context setting, we introduce two algorithms: a graph-based algorithm called
Uniform Exploration Clustering of Bandits (UniCLUB, Algorithm 1) and a set-based algorithm
called Uniform Exploration Set-based Clustering of Bandits (UniSCLUB, Algorithm 2). Due to
space constraints, we focus on UniCLUB in the main paper, leaving the details and regret analysis
of UniSCLUB in Appendix C.
As shown in Algorithm 1, inspired by the CLUB algorithm proposed in Gentile et al. (2014),
UniCLUB maintains a dynamic undirected graph Gt = ([u], Et ) representing the current estimated
cluster structures of all users. The main difference is that UniCLUB includes an additional uniform
exploration phase to promote cluster identification. At the beginning, Gt is initialized as a complete
graph, indicating that all users are considered in a single cluster. Then at each round t, a user it ∈ [u]
comes to be served with a feasible arm set At from which the learner has to choose. The algorithm
operates in the following two phases depending on whether the current time step t ≤ T0 , and the
arm selection strategy differs between these phases.
Pure exploration phase. In the first T0 rounds, the algorithm uniformly select arm at from At
(Line 4). This arm selection strategy ensures selecting sufficiently diverse arms so that the minimum
eigenvalue of the design matrix grows linearly in time (Lemma 2). In Lemma 3, we will show that
the phase length T0 is chosen to guarantee that this phase gathers sufficient statistics to estimate each
user’s preference vector and correctly infer the underlying user clusters with high probability.
Exploration-exploitation phase. After T0 , the algorithm constructs the connected component Vt
containing user it in the graph Gt−1 (Line 6), and computes the estimated preference vector θbVt ,t−1
based on historical information associated with Vt using the least squares estimator with regulariza-
tion parameter λ > 0 (Line 8). The algorithm then recommends an arm using the upper confidence
bound (UCB) strategy (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) to balance exploration and exploitation (Line 9):
                                                            q
                                                                  −1
                           at = arg max θbVTt ,t−1 xa + β    xT
                                                              a M Vt ,t−1 xa ,
                                   a∈At


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: UniCLUB: Uniform Exploration Clustering of Bandits
  Input: λ, β, λx , δ, L, γ
                          e
  Initialization: Let G0 = ([u], E0 ) be a complete graph.
  Let Si,0 = 0d×d , bqi,0 = 0d×1 , Ti,0 = 0, ∀i ∈ [u].
                                                  T L2       √ p
  Define f (Ti,t ) ≜ ( 2 log(u/δ) + d log(1 + i,t   λd   ) + λ)/ λ + Ti,t λx /2.
                                        n 2                          o
  Define T0 ≜ 16u log uδ + 4u max 8L               ud
                                                        512d      u
                                          λx  log   δ  , γ 2
                                                         e λx log δ   .
1  for t = 1, 2, . . . do
 2     Receive user index it and arm set At
 3     if t ≤ T0 then
 4          Select at uniformly at random from At
 5     else
 6          Find the connected component Vt for it in Gt−1
                          P                                                P
 7          MVt ,t−1 = i∈Vt Si,t−1 , M Vt ,t−1 = λI + MVt ,t−1 , bVt ,t−1 = i∈Vt bi,t−1
                           −1
 8          θbVt ,t−1 = M Vt ,t−1 bVt ,t−1
                                                         q
                                                               −1
 9          Select arm at = arg maxa∈At θbVTt ,t−1 xa + β xT
                                                           a M Vt ,t−1 xa

10    Receive reward rt
11    Update statistics for user it , others remain unchanged:
       Sit ,t = Sit ,t−1 + xat xTat ,   bit ,t = bit ,t−1 + rt xat
                                                        −1
       Tit ,t = Tit ,t−1 + 1, θit ,t = (λI + Sit ,t ) bit ,t
                                b
12    Delete edge (it , ℓ) ∈ Et−1 if

                                     θbit ,t − θbℓ,t > f (Tit ,t ) + f (Tℓ,t )

       and obtain an updated graph Gt = ([u], Et )


                                               arm a at time t and the second term is the confidence
where the first term is the estimated reward ofq
                                                            L2
                                                                                 √
radius of arm a at time t with parameter β = d log(1 + Tdλ      ) + 2 log( 1δ ) + λ.
After receiving the feedback rt from user it , the learner updates the statistics for user it while
keeping other users’ statistics unchanged. Note that the estimated preference vector θbit is computed
using historical information associated with user it (Line 11). Finally, the algorithm updates the
inferred clusters by deleting edges in graph Gt−1 if it determines that two users belong to different
clusters. Specifically, for every user ℓ ∈ [u] that has an edge to user it , the algorithm checks if
the distance between the estimated preference vectors of users ℓ and it exceeds a specific threshold
(Line 12). If so, the algorithm deletes the edge it , ℓ to split them apart and update the graph.



4    S MOOTHED A DVERSARIAL C ONTEXT S ETTING

Although UniCLUB offers significant theoretical improvements, it requires a change in the arm
selection strategy during its execution, which might not be desirable in some circumstances. Ad-
ditionally, the stochastic context setting necessitates an i.i.d. context generation process, which
might be impractical in real-world applications. To overcome these limitations, based on the in-
tuition in Section 3.2, we propose the smoothed adversarial context setting to eliminate the need
for explicit pure exploration. This setting interpolates between the two extremes: the i.i.d. context
generation in Gentile et al. (2014) and the adversarial context generation in Abbasi-Yadkori et al.
(2011). The intrinsic diversity of contexts makes explicit exploration unnecessary, thereby ensuring
a well-conditioned design matrix (Lemma 11). This approach allows existing algorithms in previ-
ous studies, such as CLUB (Gentile et al., 2014) and SCLUB (Li et al., 2019), which consistently
employ the UCB strategy, to perform more effectively.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1   P ROBLEM S ETTING

In the smoothed adversarial setting, we retain Assumption 1, while replacing Assumptions 2 and
3 with Assumptions 4 and 5, respectively. As detailed below, since there is no need to switch arm
selection strategies during execution, Assumption 4 follows the original assumption in Gentile et al.
(2014), which does not require knowledge of a lower bound for γ. Meanwhile, Assumption 5 allows
feature vectors (i.e., contexts) to be arbitrarily chosen by an adversary, but with some random pertur-
bation to ensure the resulting contexts remain sufficiently diverse. This approach maintains enough
data diversity to support effective learning while avoiding the need for explicit pure exploration.
Assumption 4 (Well-separatedness among clusters). All users in the same cluster Ij share the same
preference vector θ j . For users in different clusters, there is a fixed but unknown gap γ between
their preference vectors. Specifically, for any cluster indices i ̸= j,
                                         θ i − θ j 2 ≥ γ > 0.
Assumption 5 (Context diversity for adversarial contexts). At each time step t, the feature vector
xa ∈ Dt for each arm a ∈ At is drawn by a “smoothed” adversary, meaning that the adversary first
chooses an arbitrary vector µa ∈ Rd with ∥µa ∥ ≤ 1, then samples a noise vector εa ∈ Rd from a
truncated multivariate Gaussian distribution where each dimension is truncated within [−R, R], i.e.,
εa ∼ N (0, σ 2 I) conditioned on |(εa )j | ≤ R, ∀j ∈ [d]. And the feature vector xa = µa + εa .
Remark 4. The truncation in Assumption 5 is used to guarantee that the length of each feature
vector is bounded, which is a standard requirement in the linear bandits literature. In fact, if we
are only concerned with high-probability regret, we can also use a Gaussian distribution (without
truncation) and show that the length of each feature vector is bounded with high probability. Note
that Assumption 5 is more similar to the original linear bandit setting (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011),
except that we require each arm to be perturbed by Gaussian noise. It remains an open problem
whether a fully adversarial setting can be achieved.

4.2   A LGORITHMS FOR S MOOTHED A DVERSARIAL C ONTEXT S ETTING

Our proposed algorithms for the smoothed adversarial context setting, SACLUB and SASCLUB, are
essentially CLUB (Gentile
                  √       et al., 2014) and SCLUB (Li et al., 2019) with λx replaced by λ
                                                                                        ex and
L replaced by 1 + dR in the edge deletion threshold. Due to space constraints, we omit the full
details of SACLUB and SASCLUB here, but the complete proofs are provided in Appendix E.

5     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we present the theoretical results of our algorithms, with detailed proofs provided in
Appendices B, C, D, and E. For clarity, we ignore the constants but they are fleshed out in the proofs.
Note that λx appears in the denominator of the regret expressions. This is due to the assumption of
bounded contexts (∥X∥2 is bounded) in the stochastic context setting, resulting in λx = O(1/d),
and therefore it is important to track the dependency of our regret bounds on λx .
Theorem 1 (Regret of UniCLUB). Under the stochastic context setting (Assumptions 1, 2, 3), the
expected regret of the UniCLUB (Algorithm 1) satisfies:
                                                              √

                                             ud
                          E[R(T )] = O 2 log(T ) + d mT log(T ) .
                                            γ
                                            e λx

Theorem 2 (Regret of UniSCLUB). Under the stochastic context setting (Assumptions 1, 2, 3), the
expected regret of the UniSCLUB (Algorithm 2) satisfies:
                                                         √

                                        ud
                         E[R(T )] = O 2 log(T ) + d mT log(T ) .
                                       γ
                                       e λx
Remark 5. Our results comprise two components: the first term is associated with cluster identifica-
tion, and the second term aligns with the minimax near-optimal regret of linear contextual bandits.
Notably, thanks to the careful design of UniCLUB and UniSCLUB, our results enhance the first
                2
term by O(u/λ
         e      x ), offering a significant improvement over existing studies, as detailed in Table 1.



                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 3 (Regret of PhaseUniCLUB). Under the stochastic context setting (Assumptions 1, 2,
3), but γ
        e is unknown, the expected regret of algorithm PhaseUniCLUB (Algorithm 5) satisfies:
                                                   31                              !
                              ud                ud      2     1         √
              E[R(T )] = O           log(T ) +        T 3 log 3 (T ) + d mT log(T ) .
                             γ 2 λ2x            λx

Remark 6. Without
              √        knowledge of γ  e (i.e., a lower bound of γ), PhaseUniCLUB suffers a regret
                         1   2
of order O(d mT + d T ). As noted in Remark 2, this deteriorated result is expected since the
          e              3   3

algorithm has to contend with the issue of misclustering, similar to the challenges seen in misspeci-
fied linear bandits (Ghosh et al., 2017; Lattimore et al., 2020). Despite this challenge, we carefully
design the phase lengths to exploit the property of clustering and achieve sublinear regret, which is a
significant improvement over the linear regret typically expected in misspecified linear bandits. We
emphasize that, as discussed in Remark 1, γ not only has an intrinsic lower bound but also is typi-
cally predefined in real-world applications. Therefore, our study of the scenario where γe is unknown
is primarily of theoretical interest. Further details about the algorithm can be found in Appendix D.
Theorem 4 (Regret of SACLUB and SASCLUB). Under the smoothed adversarial context setting
(Assumptions 1, 4, 5), the expected regrets of SACLUB and SASCLUB both satisfy:
                                                           √

                                           ud
                         E[R(T )] = O           log(T ) + d mT log(T ) ,
                                          γ2λex
                  2
      ex = c1 σ for some constant c1 .
where λ      log K
Remark 7. For the smoothed adversarial context setting, we prove  that the  intrinsic diversity of
contexts guarantees a lower bound on the minimum eigenvalue of E xat xT        at (Lemma 11). This
allows us to apply techniques similar to those used in the stochastic context setting to get this result.

6     P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION

In this section, we present the evaluation results of our algorithms. We focus on the stochastic
context setting in the main paper since the smoothed adversarial setting serves mainly for theoreti-
cal analysis, and algorithms SACLUB/SASCLUB are minor modifications of CLUB (Gentile et al.,
2014)/SCLUB (Li et al., 2019). Nonetheless, we provide detailed evaluations of the smoothed ad-
versarial setting and an ablation study on different arm set sizes and user numbers in Appendix G.

6.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

We compare our algorithms against the following state-of-the-art algorithms for clustering of ban-
dits: (1) LinUCB-One: LinUCB (Li et al., 2010) with a single preference vector shared across all
users. (2) LinUCB-Ind: LinUCB (Li et al., 2010) with separate preference vectors estimated for each
user. (3) CLUB (Gentile et al., 2014): A graph-based algorithm that consistently employs the UCB
strategy. (4) SCLUB (Li et al., 2019): A set-based algorithm with improved practical performance.
In addition to these clustering-based baselines, we also evaluate our approach against two graph-
based algorithms from a related but distinct setting in Appendix G: GOB.Lin (Cesa-Bianchi et al.,
2013), which incorporates user similarities using Laplacian regularization, and GraphUCB (Yang
et al., 2020), which utilizes the random-walk Laplacian matrix to encode user relationships. Note
that neither GOB.Lin nor GraphUCB explicitly performs clustering. All the experiments were con-
ducted on a device equipped with a 3.60 GHz Intel Xeon W-2223 CPU and 32GB RAM. Each
experiment was repeated over 5 random seeds, and the results are reported with confidence intervals
calculated by dividing the standard deviation by the square root of the number of seeds.

6.2   DATASETS G ENERATION AND P REPROCESSING

In our experiments, we employ one synthetic dataset and three real-world datasets, MovieLens-
25M (Harper & Konstan, 2015), Last.fm (Cantador et al., 2011), and Yelp (Yelp, 2023). We generate
the synthetic dataset and preprocess the real-world datasets following the same method in previous
studies (Zhang et al., 2020; Li et al., 2024; 2025; Dai et al., 2024a;b).


                                                   9
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 To generate the synthetic dataset, we set the dimension d = 50, the number of users u = 200,
 and the total number of arms |A| = 5, 000. The feature vector xa ∈ Rd of each arm a ∈ A and
 the preference vector θi ∈ Rd for each user i ∈ [u] are generated by independently sampling each
 dimension from a uniform distribution U(−1, 1) and then normalizing to unit length.
 For the real-world datasets, MovieLens-25M, Last.fm, and Yelp, we regard movies/artists/businesses
 as arms. We extract a subset of |A| = 5, 000 arms with the most quantity of user-assigned rat-
 ings/tags, and a subset of u = 200 users who assign the most quantity of ratings/tags. Using the data
 extracted above, we create a feedback matrix R of size u × |A|, where each element Ri,j represents
 the user i’s feedback to arm j. We assume that the user’s feedback is binary. For the MovieLens
 and Yelp datasets, a user’s feedback for a movie/business is 1 if the user’s rating is higher than 3.
 For the Last.fm dataset, a user’s feedback for an artist is 1 if the user assigns a tag to the artist. We
 generate feature vectors and preference vectors by decomposing R using Singular Value Decompo-
 sition (SVD) as R = ΘSAT , where Θ = {θi }i∈[u] , and A = {xa }a∈A . Then the top d = 50
 dimensions of these vectors associated with the highest singular values in S are extracted.

  6.3                               E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

 In the experiment, to incorporate user clustering, we randomly select 50 users and partition them
 into 10 clusters. For each cluster j, we calculate the mean preference vector across all users within
 that cluster to serve as θ j . Note that the number of clusters is unknown to the algorithms. At each
 round t, we uniformly draw a user it from the 50 users, and randomly select 100 arms from A to
 form the arm set At . The results are presented in Figure 1.
 As shown in Figure 1, the algorithms that employ user clustering significantly outperform LinUCB-
 Ind and LinUCB-One, which do not consider the similarity among users or cluster users. More
 importantly, our graph-based algorithm UniCLUB consistently outperforms the graph-based base-
 line CLUB, and our set-based algorithm UniSCLUB is better than the set-based baseline SCLUB
 across all four datasets. It is important to note that the modest advantage of UniCLUB/UniSCLUB
 over CLUB/SCLUB is both expected and reasonable, given the logarithmic improvement in the re-
 gret upper bound. The results demonstrate the effect of uniform exploration and the robustness of
 our proposed algorithms across various datasets. More evaluation under the smoothed adversarial
 context setting and ablation study can be found in Appendix G.
                                4
                          £10               Synthetic Dataset                          MovieLens Dataset                              Yelp Dataset                               Last.fm Dataset
                    2.5


                    2.0
Cumulative Regret


                    1.5


                    1.0


                    0.5


                    0.0
                           0         2000     4000    6000      8000   10000   0   10000   20000   30000   40000   50000   0   2000   4000    6000   8000   10000    0   10000    20000   30000    40000   50000
                                                Rounds                                       Rounds                                     Rounds                                      Rounds
                                                                UniSCLUB            UniCLUB                CLUB            SCLUB             LinUCB-Ind             LinUCB-One



                                             Figure 1: Comparison of cumulative regrets in the stochastic context setting.


  7                            C ONCLUSION
 In this paper, we proposed two new algorithms for online clustering of bandits, UniCLUB and
 UniSCLUB, which incorporate an additional pure exploration phase to enhance the identification
 of user clusters. Notably, our algorithms require significantly weaker assumptions while achieving
 superior cumulative regret compared to previous studies. Furthermore, we introduced the smoothed
 adversarial context setting, which interpolates between i.i.d. and fully adversarial context gener-
 ation. We showed that with minor modifications, existing algorithms perform better in this new
 setting. Finally, we conducted extensive evaluations to validate the effectiveness of our methods.

  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 The work of John C.S. Lui was supported in part by the RGC’s SRFS2122-4S02.


                                                                                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Dávid Pál, and Csaba Szepesvári. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, NIPS’11, pp. 2312–2320, 2011.
Sanae Amani, Mahnoosh Alizadeh, and Christos Thrampoulidis. Linear stochastic bandits under
  safety constraints. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2019.
Yikun Ban and Jingrui He. Local clustering in contextual multi-armed bandits. In Proceedings of
  the Web Conference 2021, WWW ’21, pp. 2335–2346, 2021. ISBN 9781450383127.
Yikun Ban, Yunzhe Qi, Tianxin Wei, and Jingrui He. Neural collaborative filtering bandits via meta
  learning, 2022.
Hamsa Bastani, Mohsen Bayati, and Khashayar Khosravi. Mostly exploration-free algorithms for
  contextual bandits. Management Science, 67(3):1329–1349, March 2021. ISSN 1526-5501.
Ivan Cantador, Peter Brusilovsky, and Tsvi Kuflik. Second workshop on information heterogeneity
  and fusion in recommender systems (hetrec2011). In Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference
  on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’11, pp. 387–388, 2011.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Claudio Gentile, and Giovanni Zappella. A gang of bandits. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 26, 2013.
Niladri Chatterji, Vidya Muthukumar, and Peter Bartlett. Osom: A simultaneously optimal algo-
  rithm for multi-armed and linear contextual bandits. In Proceedings of the Twenty Third Interna-
  tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 108 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 1844–1854. PMLR, 26–28 Aug 2020.
Wei Chu, Lihong Li, Lev Reyzin, and Robert Schapire. Contextual bandits with linear payoff func-
 tions. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, pp. 208–214, 2011.
Xiangxiang Dai, Zhiyong Wang, Jize Xie, Xutong Liu, and John C.S. Lui. Conversational rec-
  ommendation with online learning and clustering on misspecified users. IEEE Transactions on
  Knowledge and Data Engineering, pp. 1–14, 2024a.
Xiangxiang Dai, Zhiyong Wang, Jize Xie, Tong Yu, and John CS Lui. Online learning and detecting
  corrupted users for conversational recommendation systems. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
  and Data Engineering, 2024b.
Claudio Gentile, Shuai Li, and Giovanni Zappella. Online clustering of bandits. In Proceedings of
  the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 32 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 757–765. PMLR, 22–24 Jun 2014.
Claudio Gentile, Shuai Li, Purushottam Kar, Alexandros Karatzoglou, Giovanni Zappella, and
  Evans Etrue. On context-dependent clustering of bandits. In Proceedings of the 34th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  1253–1262. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017.
                                                             √
Avishek Ghosh and Abishek Sankararaman. Breaking the T barrier: Instance-independent log-
  arithmic regret in stochastic contextual linear bandits. In Proceedings of the 39th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 7531–7549. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.
Avishek Ghosh, Sayak Ray Chowdhury, and Aditya Gopalan. Misspecified linear bandits. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI’17, pp. 3761–3767.
  AAAI Press, 2017.
Avishek Ghosh, Abishek Sankararaman, and Ramchandran Kannan. Problem-complexity adaptive
  model selection for stochastic linear bandits. In Proceedings of The 24th International Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 130 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1396–1404. PMLR, 13–15 Apr 2021a.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Avishek Ghosh, Abishek Sankararaman, and Kannan Ramchandran. Collaborative learning and
  personalization in multi-agent stochastic linear bandits. stat, 1050:15, 2021b.
Botao Hao, Tor Lattimore, and Csaba Szepesvari. Adaptive exploration in linear contextual bandit.
  In Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-
  tics, volume 108 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3536–3545. PMLR, 26–28
  Aug 2020.
F. Maxwell Harper and Joseph A. Konstan. The movielens datasets: History and context. ACM
   Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., 5(4), dec 2015.
Sampath Kannan, Jamie Morgenstern, Aaron Roth, Bo Waggoner, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. A
  smoothed analysis of the greedy algorithm for the linear contextual bandit problem. In Proceed-
  ings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’18,
  pp. 2231–2241, 2018.
Tor Lattimore, Csaba Szepesvári, and Gellért Weisz. Learning with good feature representations in
  bandits and in rl with a generative model. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, ICML’20. JMLR.org, 2020.
Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E. Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to
  personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference
  on World Wide Web, WWW ’10, pp. 661–670, 2010.
Shuai Li and Shengyu Zhang. Online clustering of contextual cascading bandits. In Proceedings of
  the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirtieth Innovative Applica-
  tions of Artificial Intelligence Conference and Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances
  in Artificial Intelligence, AAAI’18/IAAI’18/EAAI’18, 2018.
Shuai Li, Alexandros Karatzoglou, and Claudio Gentile. Collaborative filtering bandits. In Proceed-
  ings of the 39th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Informa-
  tion Retrieval, SIGIR ’16, pp. 539–548, 2016. ISBN 9781450340694.
Shuai Li, Wei Chen, Shuai Li, and Kwong-Sak Leung. Improved algorithm on online clustering
  of bandits. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, IJCAI-19, pp. 2923–2929. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence
  Organization, 7 2019.
Zhuohua Li, Maoli Liu, and John C.S. Lui. Fedconpe: Efficient federated conversational bandits
  with heterogeneous clients. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-24. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Orga-
  nization, 2024.
Zhuohua Li, Maoli Liu, Xiangxiang Dai, and John C.S. Lui. Towards efficient conversational recom-
  mendations: Expected value of information meets bandit learning. In THE WEB CONFERENCE
  2025, 2025.
Xutong Liu, Haoru Zhao, Tong Yu, Shuai Li, and John Lui. Federated online clustering of bandits.
  In The 38th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2022.
Manish Raghavan, Aleksandrs Slivkins, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Greedy
 algorithm almost dominates in smoothed contextual bandits. SIAM Journal on Computing, 52(2):
 487–524, 2023.
Vidyashankar Sivakumar, Steven Wu, and Arindam Banerjee. Structured linear contextual bandits:
  A sharp and geometric smoothed analysis. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 9026–9035.
  PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
Vidyashankar Sivakumar, Shiliang Zuo, and Arindam Banerjee. Smoothed adversarial linear contex-
  tual bandits with knapsacks. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepes-
  vari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 20253–20277.
  PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Daniel A. Spielman and Shang-Hua Teng. Smoothed analysis of algorithms: Why the simplex
  algorithm usually takes polynomial time. J. ACM, 51(3):385–463, may 2004. ISSN 0004-5411.
Joel A. Tropp. User-friendly tail bounds for sums of random matrices. Foundations of Computa-
  tional Mathematics, 12(4):389–434, August 2011. ISSN 1615-3383.
Zhiyong Wang, Jize Xie, Xutong Liu, Shuai Li, and John C.S. Lui. Online clustering of bandits
  with misspecified user models. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023a.
Zhiyong Wang, Jize Xie, Tong Yu, Shuai Li, and John C.S. Lui. Online corrupted user detection and
  regret minimization. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023b.
Weiqiang Wu, Jing Yang, and Cong Shen. Stochastic linear contextual bandits with diverse contexts.
 In Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-
 tics, volume 108 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2392–2401. PMLR, 26–28
 Aug 2020.
Hantao Yang, Xutong Liu, Zhiyong Wang, Hong Xie, John C. S. Lui, Defu Lian, and Enhong Chen.
  Federated contextual cascading bandits with asynchronous communication and heterogeneous
  users. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(18):20596–20603, Mar.
  2024.
Kaige Yang, Laura Toni, and Xiaowen Dong. Laplacian-regularized graph bandits: Algorithms and
  theoretical analysis. In Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, volume 108 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3133–
  3143. PMLR, 26–28 Aug 2020.
Yelp. Yelp Dataset — yelp.com. https://www.yelp.com/dataset, 2023. [Accessed 21-
  05-2024].
Xiaoying Zhang, Hong Xie, Hang Li, and John C.S. Lui. Conversational contextual bandit: Algo-
  rithm and application. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, WWW ’20, pp. 662–672,
  2020.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      M ORE D ISCUSSIONS ON R ELATED W ORK
Leveraging data diversity (i.e., conditions refer to the minimum eigenvalue of a design matrix) in
stochastic linear contextual bandits has two lines of research. The first line involves using additional
“diversity conditions” to improve cumulative regrets. For example, Bastani et al. (2021) introduce a
condition for the disjoint-parameter case, and prove that a non-explorative greedy algorithm achieves
O(log T ) problem-dependent regret on a 2-arm bandit instance. Hao et al. (2020) give a condition
and prove a constant problem-dependent regret for LinUCB in the shared-parameter case. Wu et al.
(2020) show that under some diversity conditions, LinUCB achieves constant expected regret in the
disjoint-parameter case. Ghosh & Sankararaman (2022) use a condition similar to Gentile et al.
(2014) and achieve a problem-independent logarithmic regret for linear contextual bandits. The
second line of research focuses on achieving concurrent statistical inference and regret minimization
(i.e., multi-objective MAB). This involves performing additional tasks on top of regret minimization,
such as clustering (Gentile et al., 2014), model selection (Chatterji et al., 2020; Ghosh et al., 2021a),
personalization (Ghosh et al., 2021b), and exploration under safety constraints (Amani et al., 2019).

B      T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF U N I CLUB
Lemma 1. With probability at least 1 − δ for any δ ∈ (0, 1), ∀t ∈ [T ] and ∀i ∈ [u],
                                     r                                  √
                                                                T L2
                                       2 log uδ + d log 1 + i,t

                                                                 λd     + λ
                           j(i)
                  θi,t − θ
                  b               ≤             p                             .
                                2                  λ + λmin (Si,t )

Proof. Fix a user i ∈ [u], for all t ∈ [T ], we have
                                             −1                                                                            
                             X                                                    X
 θbi,t − θ j(i) = λI +              xaτ xTaτ
                                                                                           xaτ (xT
                                                                                                   aτ θ
                                                                                                        j(i)
                                                                                                             + ητ ) − θ j(i)
                                      τ ∈[t]:iτ =i                            τ ∈[t]:iτ =i
                                        −1                                                                                               
                   X                                                    X                                             X
=λI +                         xaτ xT
                                    aτ
                                               λI +                            xaτ xT  j(i) +
                                                                                       aτ θ                                   xaτ ητ − λθ j(i)  − θ j(i)
                τ ∈[t]:iτ =i                                       τ ∈[t]:iτ =i                                τ ∈[t]:iτ =i
                                         X
     j(i)                        −1                                                        −1 j(i)             j(i)
=θ          + (λI + Si,t )                           xaτ ητ − λ(λI + Si,t )                    θ        −θ
                                      τ ∈[t]:iτ =i
     −1        X                           −1
=S i,t                     xaτ ητ − λS i,t θ j(i) ,
            τ ∈[t]:iτ =i

                                                                                             T
                                                                        P
where we denote S i,t ≜ λI + Si,t = λI +                                   τ ∈[t]:iτ =i xaτ xaτ .

For any vector x ∈ Rd ,
                                        −1                                                                      −1
                                                                            X
               xT θbi,t − θ j(i) = xT S i,t                                            xaτ ητ − λxT S i,t θ j(i)
                                                                        τ ∈[t]:iτ =i
                                                         *                                 +
                                                                        X                                 D         E
                                                     =       x,                  xaτ ητ                − λ x, θ j(i) −1 .
                                                                                                                              S i,t
                                                                  τ ∈[t]:iτ =i                   −1
                                                                                               S i,t

Therefore, by the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality,
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                               X
              xT θbi,t − θ j(i) ≤ ∥x∥S −1                                                 xaτ ητ              + λ∥θ j(i) ∥S −1                (1)
                                                                                                                               
                                                                  i,t                                                             i,t
                                                                            τ ∈[t]:iτ =i                 −1
                                                                                                       S i,t

Next, we bound the two terms in the parenthesis. For the first term, consider the σ-algebra Ft =
σ(i1 , xa1 , η1 , . . . , it , xat , ηt , it+1 , xat+1 ), where it and xat are Ft−1 -measurable, and ηt is Ft -
                                ∞
measurable. Let {Ft }t=1 be a filtration. By applying Theorem 1 of Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011)


                                                                             14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and using the union bound over all users i ∈ [u], we have that for all i ∈ [u] and for all t ∈ [T ], with
probability ≥ 1 − δ,
                                            v                                      !
                                            u                       1            1
                      X                     u         u det(S i,t ) 2 det(λI)− 2
                            xaτ ητ        ≤ 2 log
                                            t
                                                                    δ
                    τ ∈[t]:iτ =i             −1
                                         S i,t
                                                        s
                                                                                   Ti,t L2
                                                                  u
                                                  ≤     2 log          + d log 1 +          ,
                                                                  δ                  λd
                                                                                                    d               d
                                                                                                             T L2

                                                                                      tr(S i,t )
where we use the standard derivation due to Lemma 16: det(S i,t ) ≤                      d              ≤ λ + i,td
and the fact that det(λI) = λd .
For the second term, by the property of the Rayleigh quotient, for any invertible PSD matrix V and
non-zero vector w, we have
                        ∥w∥2V −1   wT V −1 w                     1
                              2  =           ≤ λmax (V −1 ) =           .
                         ∥w∥2       wT w                      λmin (V )
Therefore, by the fact that λmin (S i,t ) ≥ λ, and the assumption that ∥θ j(i) ∥2 ≤ 1, we have
                                                   √              √
                                 λ∥θ j(i) ∥S −1 ≤ λ∥θ j(i) ∥2 ≤ λ.                                                (2)
                                                  i,t



Plugging in x = S i,t θbi,t − θ j(i) to Equation (1), we have
                                                    2
               xT θbi,t − θ j(i) = θbi,t − θ j(i)
                                                    S i,t
                                           s                                         !
                                                                        Ti,t L2    √
                                                    u
                              j(i)
             ≤ S i,t θi,t − θ
                      b
                                       −1
                                             2 log        + d log 1 +             + λ
                                     S i,t          δ                     λd
                                    s                                            !
                                                                Ti,t L2      √
                                             u
                        j(i)
             = θi,t − θ
                b                     2 log      + d log 1 +              + λ .
                             S i,t           δ                    λd

Again, by the property of the Rayleigh quotient, for any PSD matrix V and non-zero vector w,
                                   wT V w   ∥w∥2V             ∥w∥V
                    λmin (V ) ≤      T
                                          =     2 =⇒ ∥w∥2 ≤ p          .
                                    w w     ∥w∥2             λmin (V )

Therefore, dividing θbi,t − θ j(i)           on both sides and applying the above inequality, we get
                                     S i,t
                                             r                           √
                                                                  T L2
                                          2 log uδ + d log 1 + i,t

                                                                    λd  + λ
                      θbi,t − θ j(i) ≤              q
                                    2
                                                      λmin (S i,t )
                                        r                                √
                                                                  T L2
                                          2 log uδ + d log 1 + i,t

                                                                    λd  + λ
                                      ≤           p                         ,
                                                    λ + λmin (Si,t )
where in the last inequality we use λmin (λI + Si,t ) ≥ λmin (λI) + λmin (Si,t ), due to Weyl’s
inequality.
Lemma 2. In the uniform exploration phase of Algorithm 1, with probability at least 1 − δ for any
                         2
δ ∈ (0, 1), if Ti,t ≥ 8L      ud

                       λx log δ    for all users i ∈ [u], we have
                                                            λx Ti,t
                                     λmin (Si,t ) ≥                 , ∀i ∈ [u].
                                                              2

                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. To apply the matrix Chernoff bound (Lemma 12), we first verify the required two condi-
tions for the self-adjoint matrices xaτ xT
                                         aτ for any τ ∈ [t]. First, due to the generation process
of feature vectors, xaτ xTaτ is independent and obviously positive semi-definite. Second, by the
Courant-Fischer theorem, we have
 λmax (xaτ xT
            aτ ) =       max wT xaτ xT
                                     aτ w =         max (wT xaτ )2 ≤          max ∥w∥2 ∥xaτ ∥2 ≤ L2 .
                     w:∥w∥=1                      w:∥w∥=1                   w:∥w∥=1

According to Algorithm 1, in the uniform exploration phase, for all τ ∈ [t], aτ is uniformly selected
in Aτ . Also, by Assumption 3, all the feature vectors in Aτ are independently sampled from X,
therefore by Lemma 15, xaτ follows the same distribution as X.
So for a fixed user i ∈ [u], we can compute
                                                  
                                 X
                                       E[xaτ xT     = λmin Ti,t E[XX T ] = Ti,t λx ,

              µmin = λmin                    aτ ]
                               τ ∈[t]:iτ =i

where the last equality is due to the minimum eigenvalue in Assumption 3.                  Now applying
Lemma 12, we get for any ε ∈ (0, 1),
                                                                      Ti,t λx /L2
                                                             e−ε

                 Pr [λmin (Si,t ) ≤ (1 − ε)Ti,t λx ] ≤ d                          .
                                                          (1 − ε)1−ε
Choosing ε = 21 , we get

                                            Ti,t λx
                                                          √   1
                                                                 Ti,t λx /L2
                          Pr λmin (Si,t ) ≤           ≤ d 2e− 2              .
                                               2
                                               L2 log( ud δ )
Letting the RHS be uδ , we get Ti,t =         λx ( 21 −log(2))
                                                               .   Therefore, for any fixed user i ∈ [u],
               Ti,t λx                                                         2
                         holds with probability at least 1 − uδ when Ti,t ≥ 8L      ud

λmin (Si,t ) ≥    2                                                          λx log δ          . The proof
follows by a union bound over all users i ∈ [u].
Lemma 3. With probability at least 1 − 3δ, Algorithm 1 can cluster all the users correctly after
                             u                 2                           u
                                               8L       ud 512d
              T0 ≜ 16u log        + 4u max         log       , 2 log            .                (3)
                               δ                λx       δ     γ
                                                               e λx        δ

Proof. Combining Lemma 1 and Lemma 2, we have with probability at least 1 − 2δ, when Ti,t ≥
8L2     ud

 λx log δ     for all users i ∈ [u],
                               r                                 √
                                                          T L2
                                  2 log uδ + d log 1 + i,t

                                                            λd  + λ
           θbi,t − θ j(i) ≤               p
                          2                  λ + λmin (Si,t )
                               r                                 √
                                                          T L2
                                  2 log uδ + d log 1 + i,t

                                                            λd  + λ
                            ≤               p                       ≜ f (Ti,t ), ∀i ∈ [u].
                                              λ + Ti,t λx /2
Next, we find a sufficient time step Ti,t such that the following holds:
                                  r                                  √
                                                             T L2
                                     2 log uδ + d log 1 + i,t

                                                               λd    + λ
                                                                              γ
                                                                            ≤ .
                                                                              e
                      f (Ti,t ) ≜              p                                                    (4)
                                                 λ + Ti,t λx /2                4
                                           T L2

We assume λ ≤ 2 log uδ + d log 1 + i,t

                                             λd    , which typically holds. Then a sufficient condition
for Equation (4) is
                                                         T L2

                                 2 log uδ + d log 1 + i,t

                                                           λd        e2
                                                                     γ
                                                                  ≤     .
                                          λ + Ti,t λx /2             64

                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To make the above equation to hold, it suffices to let
                                                                         T L2

                                     u                          d log 1 + i,t

                                                2
                          2 log      δ γ                                   λd                   e2
                                                                                                γ
                                     ≤                                                      ≤
                                       e
                                                      and                                           .
                          Ti,t λx /2   128                           Ti,t λx /2                 128
                                       512 log( u
                                                δ)
The first inequality holds when Ti,t ≥    e2 λx
                                          γ        . For the second inequality, by some basic arithmetic
                                                                2
                                                                                                           2
(Lemma 14), a sufficient condition is Ti,t ≥ γe2 λx log γe256L
                                               512d
                                                            2 λλ
                                                                 x
                                                                     . By choosing δ such that uδ ≥ γe256L
                                                                                                       2 λλ ,
                                                                                                           x

we get a sufficient condition for Equation (4): Ti,t ≥ γe512d          u

                                                           2 λ log δ .
                                                              x

In summary, in the uniform exploration phase of Algorithm 1, with probability at least 1 − 2δ for
some δ > 0, when
                                 2                          u
                                  8L        ud 512d
                     Ti,t ≥ max        log      , 2 log          , ∀i ∈ [u]                   (5)
                                   λx        δ   γ
                                                 e λx       δ

we have θbi,t − θ j(i)        ≤ f (Ti,t ) ≤ γe4 for all users i ∈ [u].
                          2
Because of Assumption 1, users arrive uniformly, so by Lemma 13 and a union bound over all users
i ∈ [u], Equation (5) holds for all i ∈ [u] with probability at least 1 − δ when
                                    u                2                            u
                                                     8L          ud 512d
                t ≥ T0 ≜ 16u log         + 4u max          log        , 2 log          .
                                     δ                λx          δ     γ
                                                                        e λx      δ

Therefore, with probability 1 − 3δ, we have θbi,t − θ j(i)                    ≤ f (Ti,t ) ≤ γe4 , ∀i ∈ [u] when t ≥ T0 .
                                                                          2
Next, we show that under this condition, the algorithm will cluster all the users correctly. To guar-
antee this, we need to verify two aspects: (1) if users k, ℓ are in the same cluster, then the algorithm
will not delete edge (k, ℓ); (2) if users k, ℓ are not in the same cluster, then the algorithm will delete
edge (k, ℓ). We show the contrapositive of (1): if edge (k, ℓ) is deleted, then users k, ℓ are not in the
same cluster. Due to the triangle inequality and the deletion rule in Algorithm 1, we have

                θ j(k) − θ j(ℓ)          ≥ θbk,t − θbℓ,t        − θbk,t − θ j(k)            − θbℓ,t − θ j(ℓ)
                                    2                       2                           2                      2

                                         ≥ θbk,t − θbℓ,t        − f (Tk,t ) − f (Tℓ,t ) > 0.
                                                            2

So by Assumption 2, θ j(k) − θ j(ℓ) 2 > 0 implies that users k, ℓ are not in the same cluster. For
(2), we show that if θ j(k) − θ j(ℓ) 2 ≥ γ
                                         e, the algorithm will delete edge (k, ℓ). By the triangle
inequality,

                θbk,t − θbℓ,t       ≥ θ j(k) − θ j(ℓ)           − θbk,t − θ j(k)            − θbℓ,t − θ j(ℓ)
                                2                           2                           2                      2
                                        γ
                                        e γ γ
                                    ≥γ
                                     e − − = ≥ f (Tk,t ) + f (Tℓ,t ),
                                          e e
                                        4 4 2
which triggers Algorithm 1 to delete edge (k, ℓ).
Lemma 4. With probability at least 1 − 4δ, for all t > T0 , we have

                     xT a θVt ,t−1 − θ
                           b            j(it )
                                                 ≤ β∥xa ∥M −1      ≜ Ca,t ,
                                                                              Vt ,t−1

         q
                      L2
                                          √
where β = d log(1 + Tdλ  ) + 2 log( 1δ ) + λ.

Proof. Assume that after T0 , the underlying clusters are identified correctly, meaning that Vt is the
true cluster that contains user it , i.e., Vt = Ij(it ) then we have
                                                               −1                  
                                             X                        X
        θbVt ,t−1 − θ j(it ) = λI +                   xaτ xTaτ
                                                                             rτ xaτ  − θ j(it )
                                             τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt                      τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt



                                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                −1                                                       
                      X                                            X
                                      xaτ xT                                    xaτ xT            − θ j(it )

     =λI +                                aτ
                                                                                   aτ θit + ητ                                     (6)
                τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt                               τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt
                                                                                                                  
        −1                                X                                                      X
     =M Vt ,t−1 λI +                                xaτ xT
                                                           aτ θit − λθit +
                                                                                                           xaτ ητ  − θ j(it )
                                  τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt                                         τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt
            −1              −1                            X
     = − λM Vt ,t−1 θit + M Vt ,t−1                                   xaτ ητ ,
                                                 τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt

where we denote M Vt ,t−1 = λI + MVt ,t−1 . Equation (6) is because Vt is the true cluster that
contains it , thus by Assumption 2, θiτ = θit , ∀iτ ∈ Vt . Therefore, we have

                                           −1                      −1
                                                                                                            X
         xT
          a θVt ,t−1 − θ
              b          j(it )
                                  ≤ λ xT
                                       a M Vt ,t−1 θ
                                                     j(it )
                                                            + xT
                                                               a M Vt ,t−1                                                  xaτ ητ
                                                                                                      τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt
                                               *                                      +
           D               E                                    X
                  j(it )
      =λ xa , θ                 −1
                                           +       xa ,                      xaτ ητ
                            M Vt ,t−1
                                                          τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt                   −1
                                                                                          M Vt ,t−1

                                                                                      X
      ≤λ∥xa ∥M −1              θ j(it )     −1
                                                      + ∥xa ∥M −1                                 xaτ ητ                             (7)
                  Vt ,t−1                 M Vt ,t−1                   Vt ,t−1
                                                                                τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt                   −1
                                                                                                                M Vt ,t−1
                                                                                    
                           √                   X
      ≤∥xa ∥M −1            λ+                                xaτ ητ                ,                                              (8)
                                                                                     
                 Vt ,t−1
                                          τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt                  −1
                                                                         M Vt ,t−1

where Equation (7) is by the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality and Equation (8) is derived by Equa-
tion (2). Following Theorem 1 in Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011), with probability at least 1 − δ, for a
fixed user i ∈ [u], we have
                                            v                                        !
                                                                        1          1
                                            u
                    X                       u           det(M Vt ,t−1 ) 2 det(λI)− 2
                            xaτ ητ        ≤ 2 log
                                            t
                                                                     δ
               τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt                   −1
                                               M Vt ,t−1
                                                                 s
                                                                     1          det(M Vt ,t−1 )
                                                            =        2 log
                                                                        + log
                                                                     δ             det(λI)
                                                             s
                                                                                     T L2

                                                                     1
                                                            ≤ 2 log     + d log 1 +          ,                                       (9)
                                                                     δ                λd
where in Equation (9), we use det(λI) = λd and by Lemma 16, we get
                                                                          d
                                                                      T
                                                       P
                                    d    tr(λI) + tr    τ ∈[t−1] xaτ xaτ               2 d

                    tr(M Vt ,t−1 )                      iτ ∈Vt             ≤ λd + T L
                                                                           
det(M Vt ,t−1 ) ≤                     =                                                   .
                         d                             d                         d


Since the clusters are correctly identified after T0 with probability at least 1 − 3δ (Lemma 3), and
Equation (9) holds with probability at least 1 − δ. By plugging Equation (9) into Equation (8) and
collecting high probability events, we conclude the proof.
Lemma 5. Under the high probability event in Lemma 3, for any cluster j ∈ [m], we have
                  T
                                                                  T L2
                 X
                                      2
                       min 1, ∥xat ∥M −1          ≤ 2d log 1 +             ,
                                        Ij ,t−1                λd + 4L2
                     t=T0 +1
                      it ∈Ij
         −1                                               T
                                                                                                 1{iτ ∈ Ij }xaτ xTaτ .
                                P                                                P
where M Ij ,t−1 ≜ λI +               τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Ij xaτ xaτ = λI +                   τ ∈[t−1]


                                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. The proof mainly follows Lemma 9 in Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011), but we improve the
bound by leveraging Lemma 2.
Consider the covariance matrix of cluster Ij after time T , we have

             det M Ij ,T
           = det M Ij ,T −1 + 1{iT ∈ Ij }xaT xT

                                                  aT
                  1                  −1                               − 12
                                                                               1
           = det M I2j ,T −1 I + M Ij2,T −1 1{iT ∈ Ij }xaT xT                   2
                                                                aT M Ij ,T −1 M Ij ,T −1

                                                          − 12
                                                                      −1           T
           = det M Ij ,T −1 det I + 1{iT ∈ Ij }M Ij ,T −1 xaT M Ij ,T −1 xaT
                                                                           2



                                                                  2

                                                     − 12
           = det M Ij ,T −1 1 + 1{iT ∈ Ij } M Ij ,T −1 xaT

                                                                                                                   (10)

           = det M Ij ,T −1 1 + 1{iT ∈ Ij }∥xaT ∥M −1
                                                        2
                                                                       Ij ,T −1

                                T
                                Y
                                                        2
            = det(M Ij ,T0 )              1 + ∥xat ∥M −1               ,                                           (11)
                                                            Ij ,t−1
                               t=T0 +1

where Equation 10 is due to the property that all the eigenvalues of a matrix of the form I + xxT
are one except one eigenvalue, which is 1 + ∥x∥2 . And Equation 11 is by telescoping.
Since we assume the high probability event in Lemma 3 happens, when t > T0 , we have
                          2                           u    8L2
                           8L        ud 512d                            ud
           Ti,t ≥ max          log        , 2 log         ≥      log         , ∀i ∈ [u].
                            λx        δ    γ
                                           e λx       δ      λx          δ
                            PT0
                                         xaτ xT
                                                         P
Note that M Ij ,T0 = λI + τ =1:i   τ ∈Ij      aτ = λI +   i∈Ij Si,T0 . So by Lemma 2, we have
                                                   
                                           X
                tr M Ij ,T0 = trλI +         Si,T0 
                                                 i∈Ij
                                          X λx 8L2         ud

                                                                                             ud

                                                                                            2
                               ≥ λd +                  log                     ≥ λd + 4L log                       (12)
                                                  2 λx      δ                                 δ
                                          i∈Ij

Therefore, taking logarithms on both sides of Equation (11), we have
                                                        XT
                                                                            2
           log det M Ij ,T = log(det M Ij ,T0 ) +             log 1 + ∥xat ∥M −1                               .   (13)
                                                                                                    Ij ,t−1
                                                                      t=T0 +1

Since x ≤ 2 log(1 + x) for x ∈ [0, 1], by Equation 13, we get
    XT                                   XT
                       2                                      2
         min 1, ∥xat ∥M −1         ≤2         log 1 + ∥xat ∥M −1
                           Ij ,t−1                                                Ij ,t−1
  t=T0 +1                                    t=T0 +1

                                         = 2 log det M Ij ,T − log det M Ij ,T0                    (14)
                                            "                     !                        !#
                                                     tr(M Ij ,T )            tr M Ij ,T0
                                         ≤ 2 d log                  − d log                        (15)
                                                          d                       d
                                            "                                                   !#
                                                     λd + T L2              λd + 4L2 log ud

                                                                                            δ
                                         ≤ 2 d log                 − d log                         (16)
                                                         d                          d
                                                          T L2

                                         ≤ 2d log 1 +               .
                                                        λd + 4L2
where Equation (14) uses Equation (13). Equation (15) uses the determinant-trace inequality
Lemma 16. Equation (16) uses Equation (12).


                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 1 (Regret of UniCLUB). Under the stochastic context setting (Assumptions 1, 2, 3), the
expected regret of the UniCLUB (Algorithm 1) satisfies:
                                                        √

                                        ud
                         E[R(T )] = O 2 log(T ) + d mT log(T ) .
                                       γ
                                       e λx

Proof. Define events:
                    E1 = {all users are correctly clustered after T0 }.
                         n                                                  o
                    E2 = xT   a θVt ,t−1 − θ
                                 b           j(it )
                                                      ≤ β∥xa ∥M −1 , ∀t ≥ T0 .
                                                                                Vt ,t−1


Let E = E1 ∩ E2 . By Lemma 3 and 4, E happens with probability at least 1 − 4δ. Then let δ = T1
and by the law of total expectations:
                      E[R(T )] = E[R(T ) | E] Pr [E] + E[R(T ) | E c ] Pr [E c ]
                                                            4
                               ≤ E[R(T ) | E] × 1 + T × .                                      (17)
                                                            T
It remains to bound E[R(T ) | E], i.e., the expected cumulative regret conditioned on event E.
Assume E happens, by the bounded reward assumption, we can upper bound the regret in the first
T0 rounds by T0 . After T0 , the instantaneous regret at round t satisfies:
           Rt = x T
                  a∗
                   t
                     θ j(it ) − xT at θ
                                        j(it )

              = xT ∗
                  at   θ j(it )
                                −  bV ,t−1 + xT∗ θbV ,t−1 + Ca∗ ,t − xT θbV ,t−1 + Ca ,t
                                   θ  t           at     t        t     at t         t

                     T      j(it )
                + xat θ            − θbVt ,t−1 − Ca∗t ,t + Cat ,t
              ≤ Ca∗t ,t + Cat ,t − Ca∗t ,t + Cat ,t = 2Cat ,t ,
where the inequality is due to Lemma 4 and the UCB arm selection strategy of our algorithm.
Therefore, we can bound the cumulative regret conditioned on event E as follows:
           T
           X            T0
                        X               T
                                        X
 R(T ) =         Rt =         Rt +             Rt
           t=1          t=1          t=T0 +1
                   T
                   X
       ≤ T0 +              min{2, Rt }                                                        (18)
                  t=T0 +1
                  Xm    X            n                           o
       ≤ T0 +                     min 2, 2β∥xat ∥M −1                                         (19)
                                                       It ,t−1
                  j=1 T0 <t≤T
                       it ∈Ij
                     m
                     X X                 n                        o
       ≤ T0 + 2β                      min 1, ∥xat ∥M −1
                                                        It ,t−1
                     j=1 T0 <t≤T
                          it ∈Ij
                     m v
                     X                X           n                         o
                       u                                    2
       ≤ T0 + 2β       uTIj                    min 1, ∥xat ∥M −1                              (20)
                       t                                          It ,t−1
                     j=1             T0 <t≤T
                                      it ∈Ij
                                    s
                     m q
                                                      T L2
                     X
       ≤ T0 + 2β              TIj     2d log 1 +                                              (21)
                     j=1
                                                    λd + 4L2
                              s
                    √                T L2

       ≤ T0 + 2β mT               2d log 1 +                                   (22)
                                   λd + 4L2
                s                                 !s
                            T L2                √                   T L2

                                            1
       ≤ T0 + 2   d log 1 +        + 2 log     + λ   2dmT log 1 +            , (23)
                             dλ             δ                     λd + 4L2


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Equation (18) uses Rt ≤ 2. Equation (19) uses Lemma 4. Equation (20) uses the Cauchy-
Schwarz inequality, and we denote the number of times cluster j is selected as TIj . Equation (21)
                                                                               Pm
uses Lemma 5. And Equation (22) is due to the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and j=1 TIj = T .
Let δ = T1 and plug Equations (23) and (3) into Equation (17), we have
                           s                                  !s
                                      T L2                 √                     T L2

 E[R(T )] ≤ 4 + T0 + 2     d log 1 +         + 2 log(T ) + λ     2dmT log 1 +
                                       dλ                                      λd + 4L2
                                         2
                                         8L              512d
          ≤ 4 + 16u log(uT ) + 4u max         log(udT ), 2 log(uT )
                                          λx             γ
                                                         e λx
                  s                                    !s
                               T L2                √                      T L2

            +2      d log 1 +         + 2 log(T ) + λ      2dmT log 1 +
                                dλ                                      λd + 4L2
                                 √

                 ud
          = O 2 log(T ) + d mT log(T ) .
                γ
                e λx


C     T HE S ET- BASED A LGORITHM U N I SCLUB

C.1   D ETAILS OF THE U N I SCLUB A LGORITHM

In this section, we introduce a set-based algorithm named Uniform Exploration Set-based Clustering
of Bandits (UniSCLUB), which is inspired by SCLUB Li et al. (2019). Instead of using a graph
structure to maintain the clustering information, SCLUB uses a set structure for the same purpose.
UniSCLUB inherits the set structure from SCLUB, but incorporates the uniform exploration to
enhance its performance. The set structure not only supports the split operations which are similar
to those in the graph structure, but also enables the merging of two clusters when the algorithm
identifies that their estimated preference vectors are closely aligned. By allowing for both split and
merge operations, UniSCLUB can adapt to the underlying clusters more flexibly and expedite the
overall clustering process.
The details of UniSCLUB are shown in Algorithm 2. The algorithm maintains information at two
levels. At the cluster level, a cluster index J contains the indices of currently existing clusters,
and for each cluster j ∈ J , the algorithm maintains the set of users C j in this cluster and other
corresponding information such as the estimated preference vector θbj . Initially, there is only a single
cluster containing all users. At the user level, for each user i, the algorithm maintains the estimated
preference vector θbi,t at round t and other corresponding information. Additionally, all users and
clusters are associated with a “checked” or “unchecked” status to indicate the estimation accuracy of
their preference vectors. UniSCLUB proceeds in phases (Line 1) and each phase s ∈ N+ consists
of 2s−1 rounds. At the beginning of each phase, all users revert to the “unchecked” status (Line 2).
When a user first appears in a phase, it will be marked as “checked” (Line 14). A cluster is marked as
”checked” once all its users are checked. The algorithm will only consider merging checked clusters,
so as to avoid premature merging because of inaccurate preference vector estimation. At round t,
a user it comes with a set At of items (Line 4). If t ≤ 2T0 (with T0 defined in Equation (24)),
UniSCLUB uniformly selects the arm at from At (Line 9). Otherwise, it determines the cluster
j to which the user it belongs and selects the item at based on the cluster information (Lines 6
and 7). The algorithm updates the corresponding information of both the user and the cluster after
receiving the feedback of the selected item (Lines 10 to 12). Then the algorithm determines whether
any split or merge operations are necessary (Lines 13 and 15). If the estimated preference vector of
any user within the cluster j diverges from that of user it , the algorithm will split it from the cluster
(Algorithm 3). If the estimated preference vectors of two checked clusters are closely aligned, a
merge operation will be performed (Algorithm 4) .
Since no clustering information is utilized during the uniform exploration period, UniSCLUB can
only update the user-level information. Then the algorithm clusters all users at round 2T0 , and
continues updating both user and cluster information subsequently. This implementation makes
UniSCLUB more efficient and robust compared to SCLUB.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2: UniSCLUB: Uniform Exploration Set-based Clustering of Bandits
  Input: λ, β, λx , δ, L, γe
  Initialization: Initialize the cluster indexes by J = {1}.
                         1
  Let M 1 = 0d×d , M = λI, b0 = 0d×1 , T 0 = 0, C 1 = [u].
  Let Si,0 = 0d×d , bqi,0 = 0d×1 , Ti,0 = 0, ∀i ∈ [u].
                                                  T L2       √ p
  Define f (Ti,t ) = ( 2 log(u/δ) + d log(1 + i,t   λd  ) + λ)/ λ + Ti,t λx /2.
                                        n 2                          o
  Define T0 ≜ 16u log uδ + 4u max 8L               ud
                                                        512d      u
                                           λx log δ , γ e2 λx log δ   .
1  for s = 1, 2, . . . do
2      Mark every user unchecked for each cluster.
 3     for t = 2s−1 , . . . , 2s − 1 (terminate when t > T ) do
 4         Receive user index it and arm set At
 5         if t > 2T0 then
 6              Find the cluster j ∈ J satisfying it ∈ C j
                                                                    q
                                                                            j
 7              Select arm at = arg maxa∈At (θbj )T xa + β xT           a (M )
                                                                              −1 x
                                                                                   a
 8         else
 9              Select at uniformly at random from At
10         Receive reward rt
11         Update statistics for user it , others remain unchanged:
             Sit ,t = Sit ,t−1 + xat xT   at , bit ,t = bit ,t−1 + rt xat
                                                               −1
             Tit ,t = Tit ,t−1 + 1, θbit ,t = (λI + Sit ,t ) bit ,t
12         Update statistics for cluster j, others remain unchanged:
             M j = M j + xat xT              j      j
                                     at , b = b + rt xat
                                   j                               j
             T j = T j + 1, M = M j + λI, θbj = (M )−1 bj
13         Run Split
14         Mark user it as checked
15         Run Merge



Algorithm 3: Split
1 if ∃i′ ∈ C j s.t. θbit ,t − θbi′ ,t > f (Tit ,t ) + f (Ti′ ,t ) then
2     Split user it from the cluster j:
       M j = M j − Sit ,t , bj = bj − bit ,t , T j = T j − Tit ,t , C j = C j \ {it }
           j                              j
       M = M j + λI, θbj = (M )−1 bj
3     Generate a new cluster j ′ containing only user it :
             ′              ′              ′               ′            j′        ′         ′
        M j = Sit ,t , bj = bit ,t , T j = Tit ,t , C j = {it } M            = M j + λI, θbj = θbit ,t
4      J = J ∪ {j ′ }



C.2    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF U N I SCLUB

Theorem 2 (Regret of UniSCLUB). Under the stochastic context setting (Assumptions 1, 2, 3), the
expected regret of the UniSCLUB (Algorithm 2) satisfies:

                                                                 √

                                                ud
                            E[R(T )] = O              log(T ) + d  mT log(T )  .
                                               e 2 λx
                                               γ



Proof. From Lemma 6, Algorithm 2 will have correct clusers after 2T0 with probability ≥ 1 − 3δ.


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 4: Merge
1 for any two checked clusters j1 , j2 ∈ J do

2     if θbj1 − θbj2 < f (T j1 ) + f (T j2 ) then
3         Merge clusters j1 and j2 :
           M j1 = M j1 + M j2 , bj1 = bj1 + bj2 , T j1 = T j1 + T j2 , C j1 = C j1 ∪ C j2
              j1                               j1
           M = M j1 + λI, θbj1 = (M )−1 bj1
4         J = J \ {j2 }



Based on Lemma 6 and with T0 replaced by 2T0 , we can derive the counterparts of Lemma 4 and
Lemma 5. Then, similar to the proof of Theorem 1, we have
                         s                                     !s
                                        T L2                 √                      T L2

E[R(T )] ≤ 4 + 2T0 + 2      d log 1 +          + 2 log(T ) + λ     2dmT log 1 +
                                         dλ                                       λd + 4L2
                                         2
                                          8L             512d
         ≤ 4 + 32u log(uT ) + 8u max          log(udT ), 2 log(uT )
                                           λx            γ
                                                         e λx
                 s                                     !s
                               T L2                 √                       T L2

           +2      d log 1 +          + 2 log(T ) + λ       2dmT log 1 +
                                dλ                                       λd + 4L2
                                 √

                ud
         = O 2 log(T ) + d mT log(T ) .
               γ
               e λx
Lemma 6. With probability at least 1 − 3δ, Algorithm 2 can cluster all the users correctly after 2T0 ,
where
                              u                 2                            u
                                                8L       ud 512d
              T0 ≜ 16u log         + 4u max         log        , 2 log            .              (24)
                               δ                 λx       δ     γ
                                                                e λx         δ

Proof. From Lemma 3, with probability at least 1 − 3δ, we have θbi,t − θ j(i)                                     ≤ f (Ti,t ) ≤
                                                                                                              2
γ
4 , ∀i ∈ [u], when t ≥ T0 .
e


We now show that under this condition, Algorithm 2 will split well, i.e, the current clusters are
subsets of true clusters. To guarantee this, at round t, for the user it and the corresponding cluster
j, we need to verify that: (1) if the current cluster j is a subset of the ground-truth cluster of user it ,
then user it will not be split from the cluster j. (2) if the current cluster j contains users that are not
in the same ground-truth cluster as user it , then user it will be split from the cluster j.
To prove (1), we show the contrapositive of (1): if user it is split from the cluster j, the cluster j
contains users such that it and these users are from different ground-truth clusters.
If user it is split from the cluster j by Algorithm 3, i.e., there exists some user i′ ∈ C j such that
  θbi ,t − θbi′ ,t > f (Ti ,t ) + f (Ti′ ,t ), due to the triangle inequality, we have
   t                       t

                             ′                                                                        ′
            ∥θ j(it ) − θ j(i ) ∥2 ≥ ∥θbit ,t − θbi′ ,t ∥2 − ∥θbit ,t − θ j(it ) ∥2 − ∥θbi′ ,t − θ j(i ) ∥2
                                   ≥ ∥θbi ,t − θbi′ ,t ∥2 − f (Ti ,t ) − f (Ti′ ,t ) > 0.
                                              t                          t


                                          ′
By Assumption 3, θ j(it ) − θ j(i )               > 0 implies that users it , i′ are not in the same true cluster.
                                              2
                                                                                                      ′
To prove (2), we show that if there exists some user i′ ∈ C j and θ j(it ) − θ j(i )                          >γ
                                                                                                               e, we have
                                                                                                          2
                                                         ′                                                   ′
             θbit ,t − θbi′ ,t       ≥ θ j(it ) − θ j(i )        − θbit ,t − θ j(it )       − θbi′ ,t − θ j(i )
                                 2                           2                          2                          2
                                         e γ
                                         γ   γ
                                      e − − = ≥ f (Tit ,t ) + f (Ti′ ,t ),
                                           e e
                                     >γ
                                         4 4 2

                                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which satisfies the condition of splitting. Thus, user it will be split out from the current cluster j.
Therefore, when t > T0 , each existing cluster at t will not contain users from different true clusters.
Now we show that Algorithm 2 will merge well so that only correct clusters remain. For two checked
clusters j1 and j2 , we need to verify that: (1) if j1 and j2 are not merged, they are from different
true clusters. (2) if j1 and j2 are merged, they are from the same true cluster.
We only consider the case where the existing clusters are subsets of ground-truth clusters because
of splitting. For convenience, we denote the true preference vectors of clusters j1 and j2 by θ j1 and
θ j2 , which is reasonable since each of they only contains users with the same preference vector.

To prove (1), if j1 and j2 are not merged, i.e., θbj1 − θbj2       ≥ f (T j1 ) + f (T j2 ), by the triangle
inequality, we have
                   ∥θ j1 − θ j2 ∥2 ≥ ∥θbj1 − θbj2 ∥2 − ∥θbj1 − θ j1 ∥2 − ∥θbj2 − θ j2 ∥2
                                   ≥ ∥θbj1 − θbj2 ∥2 − f (T j1 ) − f (T j2 ) > 0,
which implies that j1 and j2 are from two different true clusters.
To prove (2), we show a contraction: if j1 and j2 are merged, but they are from different true clusters,
i.e., ∥θ j1 − θ j2 ∥2 > γ
                        e, we have

                ∥θbj1 − θbj2 ∥2 ≥ ∥θ j1 − θ j2 ∥2 − ∥θbj1 − θ j1 ∥2 − ∥θbj2 − θ j2 ∥2
                                                             γ
                                ≥γe − f (T j1 ) − f (T j2 ) ≥ ≥ (f (T j1 ) + f (T j2 )),
                                                             e
                                                             2
because that f (T j1 ) + f (T j2 ) ≤ γe2 . However, this contradicts the condition of merging. Therefore,
if j1 and j2 are merged, they are from the same true cluster.
We double the time T0 to 2T0 to ensure that all users in each cluster can be checked and provide
sufficient time for the split and merge operations. Therefore, after 2T0 , all the clusters are the
ground-truth clusters with probability at least 1 − 3δ.

D     T HE P HASE - BASED A LGORITHM WITHOUT K NOWLEDGE OF γ
D.1    D ETAILS OF THE P H A S E U N I CLUB A LGORITHM

In this section, we provide an algorithm PhaseUniCLUB (in Algorithm 5) for the online clustering
of bandits when the preference vectors’ distance γ between clusters is completely unknown. We
also theoretically provide an upper bound of its regret in Theorem 3.
For convenience, we first define the following notations used in PhaseUniCLUB:
                                          8L2
                              u
                                                   ud                  512d    u
            T init ≜ 16u log      + 4u ·      log       , T (s) ≜ 4u · −s log     .                   (25)
                              δ            λx       δ                 2 λx     δ
Same as UniCLUB (in Algorithm 1), PhaseUniCLUB also maintains a dynamic undirected graph
Gt = ([u], Et ) over all users for the purpose of clustering. However, to cope with the unknown γ,
PhaseUniCLUB leverages the idea of the doubling trick. Specifically, as depicted in Algorithm 5,
the algorithm first runs for T init rounds with uniform exploration (Line 1 to Line 5). Then, it proceeds
in phases. For each phase s = 0, 1, . . ., we divide it into two subphases: (1) the first subphase
(named the exploration subphase), consisting of T (s) rounds, where PhaseUniCLUB selects an
item uniformly from the item set for each coming user (Line 11); (2) the second subphase (named
the UCB subphase), containing (2s/2 −1)T (s) rounds, where PhaseUniCLUB identifies the cluster
of each coming user (Line 13) and selects an item based on the estimated preference vector of the
cluster (Line 16). Meanwhile, in each round, after receiving the reward feedback (Line 17), the
algorithm updates statistics for user it (Line 18), and determine whether to delete any edge between
it and its neighbors (Line 19).
Due to insufficient information about the distance gap γ, PhaseUniCLUB keeps uniformly ex-
ploring users’ item sets. Unlike UniCLUB, PhaseUniCLUB distributes the uniform exploration


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 5: PhaseUniCLUB: Phase-based Uniform Exploration Clustering of Bandits
   Input: λ, β, λx , δ, L
   Initialization: Let G0 = ([u], E0 ) be a complete graph.
   Let Si,0 = 0d×d , bq    i,0 = 0d×1 , Ti,0 = 0, ∀i ∈ [u].
                                                          T L2            √ p
   Define f (Ti,t ) = ( 2 log(u/δ) + d log(1 + i,t            λd ) +       λ)/ λ + Ti,t λx /2.
                           init
 1 for t = 1, 2, . . . , T      do
 2     Receive user index it and arm set At
 3     Select at uniformly at random from At
 4     Receive reward rt
 5     Update statistics for user it : Sit ,t , bit ,t , Tit ,t , θbit ,t
 6 for s = 0, 1, . . . do
                                 s
 7     for τ = 1, 2, . . . , 2 2 · T (s) (terminate when t > T ) do
 8         t=t+1
 9         Receive user index it and arm set At
10         if τ ≤ T (s) then
11              Select at uniformly at random from At
12         else
13              Find all neighbors of user it in Gt−1 and include it to form the cluster Vt
                                  P
14              MVt ,t−1 = i∈Vt Si,t−1 , M Vt ,t−1 = λI + MVt ,t−1
                                P                                    −1                      P
15              bVt ,t−1 = i∈Vt bi,t−1 , θbVt ,t−1 = M Vt ,t−1 bVt ,t−1 , TVt ,t−1 = i∈Vt Ti,t
                                                                           q
                                                                                  −1
16              Select arm at = arg maxa∈At θbVTt ,t−1 xa + β xT              a M Vt ,t−1 xa

17        Receive reward rt
18        Update statistics for user it : Sit ,t , bit ,t , Tit ,t , θbit ,t
19        Delete edge (it , ℓ) ∈ Et−1 if

                                               θbit ,t − θbℓ,t > f (Tit ,t ) + f (Tℓ,t )

           and obtain an updated graph Gt = ([u], Et )



across all phases. During the exploration subphase of each phase s, PhaseUniCLUB focuses on
estimating the users’ preference vectors to a precision level of γs . In the subsequent UCB subphase,
it clusters users based on the current precision level. If γs > γ, there is a risk of users being incor-
rectly assigned to clusters they are not belonging to. To mitigate this risk of misclustering, when
a user appears, PhaseUniCLUB only identifies the neighbors of the user to form a cluster, rather
than finding the user’s entire connected component as in UniCLUB. Additionally, with carefully
chosen phase lengths, the regret of PhaseUniCLUB can be bounded sublinearly. The approach of
identifying only neighbors is also applied in Wang et al. (2023a), but to avoid misclustering due to
model misspecification. Moreover, PhaseUniCLUB achieves better regret bound compared to that
in Wang et al. (2023a). While their regret term associated with this error is linear with respect to T ,
ours scales as T 2/3 .

D.2   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF P H A S E U N I CLUB

To bound the cumulative regret of PhaseUniCLUB, we present the following lemmas.
                                                                       √
                                           s            2λx
                                  −2
Lemma   7. Denote γ s ≜ 2             and Cp = 1024ud       .   With probability at least 1 −
              T
3 log2 Cp log (u/δ) + 1 δ, after the exploration subphase in any phase s = 0, 1, . . ., for all users
i ∈ [u], we have
                                                                           γs
                                                  θbi,t − θ j(i)       ≤      .
                                                                   2       4


                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. According to Lemma 3, with probability ≥ 1 − 3δ, after the exploration subphase in phase
s = 0, 1, . . ., for any user i ∈ [u], we have
                                                            γs
                                            θbi,t − θ j(i) ≤ .
                                                          2 4

Denote the number of phases for PhaseUniCLUB by Np . Since phase s contains 2s/2 T (s) rounds,
Np is the maximum integer satisfying
                                              Np −1
                                              X                      512d       u
                               T   init
                                          +           2s/2 · 4u ·          log     ≤ T.
                                              s=0
                                                                    2−s λx      δ
By some calculations, we have
                            √                       !
                              2λx (T − T init )                 Cp (T − T init )

                    2
             Np ≤ log2                          + 1   = log 2                    + 1   ,
                    3         1024ud log uδ                         log uδ
                           √
                       2λx
where we denote Cp = 1024ud .
Applying  a union bound           over all phases, we have that with probability at least 1 −
                 T
3 log2 Cp log (u/δ)    + 1 δ, after the exploration subphase in any phase s = 0, 1, . . ., for all users
i ∈ [u], ∥θbi,t − θ j(i) ∥2 ≤ γ4s holds.

                                                          T
Lemma 8. With probability at least 1 − 3 log2 Cp log (u/δ)      + 1 δ, in any phase s, for two users
i1 , i2 ∈ Vt , we have
                                                  θ j(i1 ) − θ j(i2 )       ≤ γs .
                                                                        2


Proof. In phase s, for any two users i1 , i2 ∈ Vt , it satisfies θbi1 ,t − θbi2 ,t ≤ f (Ti1 ,t ) + f (Ti2 ,t ).

                                                                                         T
By the triangle inequality and Lemma 8, with probability at least 1 − 3 log2 Cp log (u/δ)        + 1 δ, we
have
            θ j(i1 ) − θ j(i2 ) ≤ θ j(i1 ) − θbi ,t + θbi ,t − θ j(i2 ) + θbi ,t − θbi ,t
                                                          1                 2                     1   2
                               2                               2                             2            2
                              γs     γs
                           ≤      +     + f (Ti1 ,t ) + f (Ti2 ,t ) ≤ γs .
                               4     4

                                                        T
Lemma 9. With probability at least 1 − 4 log2 Cp log (u/δ)    + 1 δ, in any phase s, we have
                                                         2L2 γs
                     xTa θVt ,t−1 − θ
                          b           j(it )
                                               ≤ Ca,t +         1{γs > γ},
                                                          λx
                                    q
                                                    L2
                                                                        √
where Ca,t ≜ β∥xa ∥M −1    and β = d log(1 + Tdλ       ) + 2 log( 1δ ) + λ.
                          Vt ,t−1



Proof. In phase s, the confidence radius for users’ preference vectors is γ4s . If γs > γ, user it may
be mistakenly grouped into the wrong cluster, i.e., Vt ̸= Vj(it ) . Accounting for this error, we analyze
the following two cases:
Case 1: user it is correctly clustered, i.e., Vt = Vj(it ) . Same as Lemma 4, we have

                               xT
                                a
                                    bV ,t−1 − θ j(it ) ≤ β∥xa ∥ −1 ,
                                    θ  t                           M Vt ,t−1

                                      T
with probability 1 − 4 log2 Cp log (u/δ)    + 1 δ.

Case 2: user it is mistakenly clustered, i.e., Vt ̸= Vj(it ) , which happens when γs > γ. Then,
                                                      −1                       
                                   X                               X
 θbVt ,t−1 − θ j(it ) = λI +               xaτ xT  aτ
                                                                         rτ xaτ  − θ j(it )
                                    τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt                             τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt



                                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                       −1                                                          
                 X                                          X
                             xaτ xT                                     xaτ xT               − θ j(it )

=λI +                            aτ
                                                                           a τ θi τ + η τ
           τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt                          τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt
                                                                                                                                       
   −1                X                                                    X                                          X
=M Vt ,t−1                       xaτ xT
                                       aτ (θiτ − θit ) +                               xaτ xT
                                                                                            a τ θi t +                           xaτ ητ  − θ j(it )
                τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt                                     τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt                            τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt
                                                                                                              
      −1                          X                                                       X
=M Vt ,t−1 λI +                          xaτ xT
                                                aτ θit − λθit +
                                                                                                     xaτ ητ  − θ j(it )
                         τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt                                         τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt
      −1              X
  + M Vt ,t−1                      xaτ xT
                                        aτ (θiτ − θit )
                 τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt
       −1                   −1                      X                                −1               X
= − λM Vt ,t−1 θ j(it ) + M Vt ,t−1                               xaτ ητ + M Vt ,t−1                                xaτ xT
                                                                                                                         aτ (θiτ − θit ),
                                           τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt                                   τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt

where we denote M Vt ,t−1 = λI + MVt ,t−1 .
Then from Lemma 4, we have

                                                                          −1
                                                                                            X
  xT
   a θVt ,t−1 − θ
       b          j(it )
                           ≤ β∥xa ∥M −1                       + xT
                                                                 a M Vt ,t−1                              xaτ xT
                                                                                                               aτ (θiτ − θit ) . (26)
                                                    Vt ,t−1
                                                                                     τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt


Now we bound the second term in Equation (26).

                                      −1               X
                             xT
                              a M Vt ,t−1                           xaτ xT
                                                                         aτ (θiτ − θit )
                                             τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt


                                           −1                      X
                        ≤∥xa ∥2 M Vt ,t−1                                       xaτ xT
                                                                                     aτ (θiτ − θit )                                   (27)
                                                        2
                                                              τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt
                                                                                                                2
                                  −1                        X
                        ≤L      M Vt ,t−1                               xaτ xT
                                                                             aτ       2
                                                                                          ∥θiτ − θit ∥2                                (28)
                                                2
                                                    τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt
                                             −1                    X
                        ≤Lγs λmax (M Vt ,t−1 )                                  xaτ xT
                                                                                     aτ       2
                                                                                                                                       (29)
                                                              τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt
                                  P
                                      τ ∈[t−1]:iτ ∈Vt L
                        ≤Lγs                                                                                                           (30)
                              λmin (M Vt ,t−1 )
                                 TVt ,t−1 L
                        ≤Lγs                                                                                                           (31)
                             λx TVt ,t−1 /2 + λ
                             2L2 γs
                        ≤           ,
                              λx
            −1                                                                                            −1
where ∥M Vt ,t−1 ∥2 and xaτ xT                                                        T
                              aτ 2 are the spectral norm of matrix M Vt ,t−1 and xaτ xaτ . Equa-
tion (27) is because of the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality and the induced matrix norm inequality.
Equation (28) is due to ∥xa ∥2 ≤ L and the induced matrix norm inequality. Equation (29) fol-
                           −1
lows Lemma 8 and that M Vt ,t−1 is PSD. Equation (30) is because of xaτ xT  aτ 2 = L and Equa-
tion (31) follows Lemma 2.
Therefore, we have
                                                                                          2L2 γs
                      xT
                       a θVt ,t−1 − θ
                           b          j(it )
                                               ≤ β∥xa ∥M −1                          +           1{γs > γ}.
                                                                           Vt ,t−1         λx

Combining the two cases, we finish the proof of Lemma 9.


                                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now we can prove the regret upper bound of PhaseUniCLUB.
Theorem 3 (Regret of PhaseUniCLUB). Under the stochastic context setting (Assumptions 1, 2,
3), but γ
        e is unknown, the expected regret of algorithm PhaseUniCLUB (Algorithm 5) satisfies:
                                                   31                              !
                              ud                ud      2     1         √
              E[R(T )] = O           log(T ) +        T 3 log 3 (T ) + d mT log(T ) .
                             γ 2 λ2x            λx

Proof.  For any round  t in the UCB subphase of any phase s, with probability at least 1 −
              T
4 log2 Cp log (u/δ) + 1 δ, we have

         Rt = x T
                a∗
                 t
                   θ j(it ) − xT at θ
                                      j(it )

            = xTa∗
                 t
                     θ j(it ) − θbVt ,t−1 + xT  a∗
                                                 t
                                                   θbVt ,t−1 + Ca∗t ,t − xT
                                                                          at θVt ,t−1 + Cat ,t
                                                                             b

              + xT at θ
                          j(it )
                                 − θbVt ,t−1 − Ca∗t ,t + Cat ,t
                         2L2 γs                      2L2 γs
                  ≤ Ca∗t ,t +   1{γs > γ} + Cat ,t +        1{γs > γ} − Ca∗t ,t + Cat ,t
                           λx                         λx
                          4L2 γs
             = 2Cat ,t +         1{γs > γ},
                            λx
where the inequality is due to Lemma 9 and the UCB arm selection strategy of our algorithm.
Denote the regret in phase s by R(s) . With the same probability, for any phase s, we have
                                   T init + sp=0 2p/2 T (p)
                                           P
                                                X
     R(s) ≤ T (s) +                                                    Rt
                                     Ps−1
                         t=T init +       p=0   2p/2 T (p) +T (s) +1

                                                                                        T init + sp=0 2p/2 T (p)
                                                                                                P
                               2
                            4L γs
                                  1{γs > γ} · (2s/2 − 1)T (s) +
                                                                                                        X
          ≤ T (s) +                                                                                                            2Cat ,t .
                             λx                                                           Ps−1
                                                                                 t=T init +       p=0   2p/2 T (p) +T (s) +1


Summing up the regret over all phases, we obtain
                      Np −1
                      X
R(T ) ≤ T init +              R(s)
                      s=0
                      Np −1                                                                               T
                                           4L2 γs

                                                  1{γs > γ} · (2s/2 − 1)T (s)
                      X                                                                                   X
           init                    (s)
      ≤T          +            T         +                                                        +                 2Cat ,t
                      s=0
                                            λx
                                                                                                      t=T init +1
                      Np −1
                                                                                                          s
                                           4L2 γs                                                                                       T L2

                                                  1{γs > γ} · (2s/2 − 1)T (s)
                      X
           init                    (s)
      ≤T          +            T         +                                                        + 2β        2mT d log 1 +                      ,
                      s=0
                                            λx                                                                                        λd + 4L2
                                                                                                                                        (32)


where Equation (32) follows Lemma 5 and the proof of Theorem 1.
Now we bound the second term in Equation (32),
 Np −1                                    NXp −1
                4L2 γs                                    4L2 γs

                                                                 1{γs > γ} · 2s/2 T (s)
 X
        T (s) +        · (2s/2 − 1)T (s) ≤        T (s) +
  s=0
                 λx                        s=0
                                                           λx
                                                               Np −1
                                                                        4L2

                                                                              1{γs > γ} T (s)
                                                               X
                                                           =                1+                              (33)
                                                             s=0
                                                                          λx
                                                                                      23        !
                                                                Cp (T − T init )           8L2 2048ud log( uδ )

                                                           ≤                     +1      + 2                    ,
                                                                    log( uδ )              γ λx     λx


                                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           s
where Equation (33) is due to γs = 2− 2 .

                                                  T
Then, with probability at least 1 − 4 log2 Cp log (u/δ) + 1 δ, we have
                  s                                                             23       !
                                          T L2            Cp (T − T init )           8L2 2048ud log( uδ )

          init
R(T ) ≤ T + 2β 2mT d log 1 +                        +                      +1      + 2                    .
                                        λd + 4L2              log( uδ )             γ λx      λx


                                                  2
                                                                         √
                                                                            2λx
Recall that T init = 16u log uδ + 4u · 8L                 ud
                                                                                  . Let δ = T1 and by the law of

                                               λx log δ        and Cp = 1024ud
total expectations, we have
                          s                                                                     32          !
                                                     T L2              Cp (T − T init )                8L2 2048ud log(uT )

               init
E[R(T )] ≤ T + 2β 2mT d log 1 +                                  +                       +1        + 2
                                                  λd + 4L2                 log( uδ )                  γ λx         λx

                                    T
            + 4 log2 Cp                    +1 δ·T
                              log (u/δ)
                                                                s
                                       8L2                                               T L2

          ≤ 16u log(uT ) + 4u ·             log(udT ) + 2β 2mT d log 1 +
                                        λx                                           λd + 4L2
                                              23             !
                      Cp (T − T init )                8L2 2048ud log(uT )

                                                                                                       T
            +                          +  1       +                              +   4 log 2  C  p           + 1
                          log( uδ )                  γ 2 λx          λx                            log (uT )
                                                1                                    !
                                                                    √
                                          3
                     ud                  ud         2      1
          =O         2  2
                           log(T  ) +             T 3 log 3 (T ) + d mT log(T ) .
                    γ λx                 λx

E    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF SACLUB AND SASCLUB
Lemma 10. Under the smoothed adversary setting, SACLUB and SASCLUB have the following
lower bound on the expected minimum eigenvalue of xat xT
                                                       at :

                                                           σ2
                                  λmin E xat xT

                                              at    ≥ c1       ≜λ
                                                                ex ,
                                                         log K
where c1 is some constant.

Proof. Fix a time t. Let Q be a unitary matrix that rotates θbit ,t to align it with the x-axis, retain-
ing its magnitude but zeroing out all components other than the first component, i.e., Qθbit ,t =
(∥θbit ,t ∥, 0, 0, . . . , 0). Such Q always exists because
                                                            it just rotates
                                                                          the space. According to the
                                                          T
UCB arm selection strategy, xa = arg max
                                   t             a∈At    θ xa + Ca,t , where Ca,t = β∥xa ∥ −1 .
                                                         b
                                                          it ,t                                     M Vt ,t−1
Denote the i-th arm in At as at,i , we have

                T                     T                T

 λmin E xat xat =λmin E xx x = arg max θit ,t xa + Ca,t
                                                      b
                                              a∈At

                                    T       T                T
                     = min w E xx x = arg max θit ,t xa + Ca,t w
                                                            b
                       w:∥w∥=1                      a∈At

                     = min E (wT x)2 x = arg max θbiTt ,t xa + Ca,t
                       w:∥w∥=1                      a∈At

                     ≥ min Var wT x x = arg max θbiTt ,t xa + Ca,t
                       w:∥w∥=1                     a∈At

                     = min Var (Qw)T Qx x = arg max (Qθbit ,t )T Qxa + Ca,t                              (34)
                       w:∥w∥=1                           a∈At

                                          T
                     = min Var w Qx x = arg max θit ,t (Qxa )1 + Ca,t
                                                              b                                          (35)
                         w:∥w∥=1                           a∈At


                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                              "                                                             !#
                                                  T                         Cat,i ,t
                         = min Var w Qε ε = arg max (Qµt,i + Qεt,i )1 +                                          (36)
                          w:∥w∥=1             εt,i :i∈[K]                  ∥θbit ,t ∥
                                  "                                             !#
                                    T                                 Cat,i ,t
                         = min Var w ε ε = arg max (Qµt,i + εt,i )1 +                                            (37)
                          w:∥w∥=1          εt,i :i∈[K]                ∥θbi ,t ∥                         t


where Equation (34) uses the property of unitary matrices: QT Q = I. Equation (35) applies
matrix Q so only the first component is non-zero and we use the fact that minimizing over Qw is
equivalent to over w. Equation (36) follows because each arm x = µ + ε and adding a constant a
to a random variable does not change its variance. Equation (37) is due to the rotation invariance of
symmetrically truncated Gaussian distributions.
Since εt,i ∼ N (0, σ 2 I) conditioned on |(εt,i )j | ≤ R, ∀j ∈ [d], by the property of (truncated) multi-
variate Gaussian distributions, the components of εt,i can be equivalently regarded as d independent
samples from a (truncated) univariate Gaussian distribution, i.e., (εt,i )j ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) conditioned on
|(εt,i )j | ≤ R, ∀j ∈ [d]. Therefore, we have
                                             " d           #   d
                                 T             X              X
                           Var w ε = Var             wi ε i =     wi2 Var [εi ] ,
                                                         i=1            i=1
where the exchanging of variance and summation is due to the independence of εi . Therefore, let
                  Ca ,t
pt,i = (Qµt,i )1 + b t,i , we can write
                  ∥θit ,t ∥
                            "                              #
                min        Var wT ε ε = arg max((εt,i )1 + pt,i )
               w:∥w∥=1                            εt,i :i∈[K]
                           d
                                          "                                               #
                           X
           =    min              wj2 Var   εj ε = arg max((εt,i )1 + pt,i )
               w:∥w∥=1                                   εt,i :i∈[K]
                           j=1
                           (          "                                               #
           =    min          w12 Var      ε1 ε = arg max((εt,i )1 + pt,i )
               w:∥w∥=1                                εt,i :i∈[K]

                   d
                                  "                                         #
                   X                                                         
               +         wj2 Var εj ε = arg max((εt,i )1 + pt,i )
                   j=2           εt,i :i∈[K]             
                            "                                #                  
                                                                Xd              
           = min      w12 Var ε1 ε = arg max((εt,i )1 + pt,i ) +     wj2 Var[εj ]
            w:∥w∥=1                    εt,i :i∈[K]                              
                                                                 j=2
                    (        "                                #             )
           =    min          w12 Var ε1 ε = arg max((εt,i )1 + pt,i ) + (1 − w12 )σ 2
               w:∥w∥=1                                εt,i :i∈[K]
                    (       "                                          #          )
                                                                              2                 σ2
           = min Var ε1 ε = arg max((εt,i )1 + pt,i ) , σ                             ≥ c1          ,
                                           εt,i :i∈[K]                                        log K
where in the last inequality, we use Lemma 15 and Lemma 14 in Sivakumar et al. (2020) and get
       "                                 #       "                      #
                                                                                   σ2
   Var ε1 ε = arg max((εt,i )1 + pt,i ) ≥ Var ε1 ε = arg max(εt,i )1 ≥ c1              .
                    εt,i :i∈[K]                           εt,i :i∈[K]            log K
Lemma 11. Under the smoothed adversarial setting, for algorithms SACLUB
                                                                  √
                                                                              and SASCLUB,
                                                                         2
with probability at least 1 − δ for any δ ∈ (0, 1), if Ti,t ≥ 8(1+ dR)     log(K)
                                                                                  log ud

                                                                    c  σ 2             δ   =
    √                                                                1
8(1+ dR)2
          log ud

                δ   for all users i ∈ [u], we have
    λx
    e

                                                      c1 σ 2 Ti,t   λ
                                                                    ex Ti,t
                                  λmin (Si,t ) ≥                  =         , ∀i ∈ [u],
                                                      2 log K         2
                              e x ≜ c1 σ 2 .
where c1 is some constant and λ     log K


                                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. The proof follows the same techniques as Lemma 2. The main difference lies in√  two aspects:
(1) in the smoothed adversary setting, the length
                                            √     of feature vectors is bounded by 1 + dR instead
of L. Therefore, λmax (xaτ xT aτ ) ≤ (1 +     dR)2 . (2) the computation of µmin needs to refer to
Lemma 10.
Specifically, to compute µmin , by the super-additivity of the minimum eigenvalue (due to Weyl’s
inequality) and Lemma 10, we have
                                            
                         X                         X                                        σ2
                                E[xaτ xT                                 T

       µmin = λmin                     aτ ]  ≥          λ min E[xa τ x aτ ]   ≥ Ti,t c1       .
                                                                                          log K
                      τ ∈[t]:iτ =i                    τ ∈[t]:iτ =i

On the other hand, we have
                                                                            
                                                       X
                                µmax = λmax                       E[xaτ xT
                                                                          aτ ]
                                                                              
                                                    τ ∈[t]:iτ =i

So by Lemma 12, we have for any ε ∈ (0, 1),
                                                σ2

             Pr λmin (Si,t ) ≤ (1 − ε)Ti,t c1           ≤ Pr [λmin (Si,t ) ≤ (1 − ε)µmin ]
                                              log K
                                                                           µmin /(1+√dR)2
                                                                e−ε

                                                        ≤d
                                                             (1 − ε)1−ε
                                                                                     σ2
                                                                  −ε
                                                                            Ti,t c1√
                                                                e          log(K)(1+  dR)2
                                                        ≤d           1−ε
                                                                                           ,
                                                             (1 − ε)
where the last inequality is because e−x is decreasing. Then the proof follows by the same derivation
as Lemma 2, except that λx is replaced by λ  ex ≜ c1 σ2 .
                                                   log K

Theorem 4 (Regret of SACLUB and SASCLUB). Under the smoothed adversarial context setting
(Assumptions 1, 4, 5), the expected regrets of SACLUB and SASCLUB both satisfy:
                                                           √

                                           ud
                         E[R(T )] = O           log(T ) + d mT log(T ) ,
                                          γ2λex
                  2
      ex = c1 σ for some constant c1 .
where λ      log K


Proof. For algorithm SACLUB, similar to the proof of Theorem 1 under the stochastic context set-
ting, we need to derive the counterparts of Lemma 3, Lemma 4, and Lemma 5 under the smoothed
adversary setting according to Lemma 10 and Lemma 11. The proofs use almost the same techniques
with λx replaced by λex . Similarly, the proof for algorithm SASCLUB requires the counterparts of
Lemmas used in the proof of Theorem 2, thus we skip the details.

F   T ECHNICAL I NEQUALITIES
We present the technical inequalities used throughout the proofs. For inequalities from existing
literature, we provide detailed references for readers’ convenience.
Lemma 12 (Matrix Chernoff, Corollary 5.2 in Tropp (2011)). Consider a finite sequence {Xk }
of independent, random, self-adjoint matrices with dimension d. Assume that each random matrix
satisfies
                          Xk ⪰ 0 and λmax (Xk ) ≤ R almost surely.
Define                                                                       !
                       X                                             X
                 Y :=       Xk and µmin := λmin (E[Y ]) = λmin         E[Xk ] .
                        k                                                         k
Then, for any δ ∈ (0, 1),
                    "                     !                   #                        µmin /R
                                                                            e−δ
                              X
                 Pr λmin             Xk       ≤ (1 − δ)µmin        ≤d                            .
                                                                         (1 − δ)1−δ
                                k


                                                      31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 13 (Lemma 8 in Li & Zhang (2018)). Let x1 , x2 , . . . , xn be independent Bernoulli random
variables with mean 0 < p ≤ 21 . Let δ > 0, B > 0, then with probability at least 1 − δ,
                             t
                           X                     16       1       4B
                                 xs ≥ B, ∀t ≥        log       +      .
                           s=1
                                                  p       δ        p
Lemma 14. For a > 0, b > 0, ab ≥ 1, if t ≥ 2a log(ab), then
                                      t ≥ a log(1 + bt).

Proof. Since t increases faster than a log(1 + bt), it suffices to prove t ≥ a log(1 + bt) for t =
2a log(ab). Equivalently, we only need to show:
            2a log(ab) ≥ a log(1 + 2ab log(ab)) = a log(ab) + a log 2 log e−2ab ab ,


which follows by observing that ab ≥ 2 log(e−2ab ab) = ab
                                                       1
                                                          + 2 log(ab) holds when ab ≥ 1.
Lemma 15. Let X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn be a sequence of n independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
random variables, each following a distribution P . Let Y be a random variable that is uniformly
selected from the set {X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn }, then Y follows the same distribution P .

Proof. It suffices to show Pr[Y ∈ A] = Pr[X1 ∈ A] for any measurable set A. By the law of total
probability, we can express the probability that Y falls into the set A as:
                                      Xn
                         Pr[Y ∈ A] =       Pr[Y ∈ A | Y = Xi ] Pr[Y = Xi ]
                                        i=1
                                        n
                                        X
                                    =         Pr[Xi ∈ A] Pr[Y = Xi ]
                                        i=1
                                    = Pr [X1 ∈ A] ,
where we use the fact that Xi are i.i.d. and Pr [Y = Xi ] = 1/n.
Lemma 16 (Determinant-trace inequality, Lemma 10 in Abbasi-Yadkori etPal. (2011)). Suppose
                                                                            t
X1 , X2 , . . . , Xt ∈ Rd and for any 1 ≤ s ≤ t, ∥Xs ∥2 ≤ L. Let V t = λI + s=1 Xs XsT for some
λ > 0. Then,
                                                             d
                                                        tL2

                                       det(V t ) ≤ λ +         .
                                                         d

G     M ORE E XPERIMENTS
G.1   E VALUATION U NDER THE S MOOTHED A DVERSARIAL C ONTEXT S ETTING

To implement the smoothed adversarial contexts, for each arm in the synthetic dataset and three real-
world recommendation system datasets, we add a Gaussian noise vector sampled from N (0, I/10).
As illustrated in Figure 2, for all the datasets, SACLUB and SASCLUB (which are essentially adapted
versions of CLUB and SCLUB) outperform LinUCB-Ind and LINUCB-One. Additionally, under
the smoothed adversarial setting, LinUCB-Ind and LINUCB-One exhibit more significant fluctua-
tions compared to SACLUB and SASCLUB, highlighting the increased complexity of the smoothed
adversarial setting relative to the stochastic setting. This corroborates our theoretical results, show-
ing that with some minor changes, the existing algorithms CLUB and SCLUB can be extended to
the more practical smoothed adversarial setting, which is closer to the original setting of contextual
linear bandits (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011).

G.2   C UMULATIVE R EGRET WITH D IFFERENT A RM S ET S IZES

Under the stochastic context setting, we evaluate the impact of the arm set size |At | = K by ad-
justing K = 80, 100, 120, 140 using the Yelp dataset, since it has the largest number of users. As
demonstrated in Figure 3, there is no substantial amplification of the cumulative regrets as the arm
set size K increases. This observation validates our theoretical results (Theorems 1 and 2), where
the regret upper bounds of UniCLUB and UniSCLUB do not involve K.


                                                   32
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              4
                                             Synthetic Dataset                                     MovieLens Dataset                                   Yelp Dataset                                 Last.fm Dataset
                    8 £10

                    7
Cumulative Regret


                    6

                    5

                    4

                    3

                    2

                    1

                    0
                          0           2000      4000    6000     8000     10000    0        2000      4000    6000     8000   10000   0      2000      4000    6000    8000   10000   0    2000      4000    6000     8000   10000
                                                  Rounds                                                Rounds                                           Rounds                                        Rounds
                                                                                           SACLUB                 SASCLUB                 LinUCB-Ind               LinUCB-One



                          Figure 2: Comparison of cumulative regrets under the smoothed adversarial context setting.


                                  4
                                              Number of arms: 80                                   Number of arms: 100                              Number of arms: 120                       Number of arms: 140
                    3.0 £10

                    2.5
Cumulative Regret


                    2.0

                    1.5

                    1.0

                    0.5

                    0.0
                              0        2000      4000    6000      8000    10000       0     2000      4000   6000     8000   10000   0       2000      4000    6000   8000   10000   0    2000      4000    6000     8000   10000
                                                   Rounds                                                Rounds                                           Rounds                                       Rounds
                                                                   UniSCLUB                   UniCLUB                  CLUB               SCLUB                LinUCB-Ind             LinUCB-One



                                                       Figure 3: Comparison of cumulative regrets with different arm set sizes.


                                  4
                          £10                Number of users: 40                                   Number of users: 50                              Number of users: 60                           Number of users: 70
                    3.5

                    3.0
Cumulative Regret


                    2.5

                    2.0

                    1.5

                    1.0

                    0.5

                    0.0
                              0        2000      4000    6000      8000    10000       0     2000      4000   6000     8000   10000   0       2000      4000    6000   8000   10000   0    2000      4000    6000     8000   10000
                                                   Rounds                                                Rounds                                           Rounds                                       Rounds
                                                                   UniSCLUB                   UniCLUB                  CLUB               SCLUB                LinUCB-Ind             LinUCB-One



                                                Figure 4: Comparison of cumulative regrets with different numbers of users.


                                                                                                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.3                            C UMULATIVE R EGRET WITH D IFFERENT U SER N UMBERS

To examine the effect of the number of users, we adjust the number of users u = 40, 50, 60, 70
while keeping the number of clusters m = 10 using the Yelp dataset. As shown in Figure 4, our
proposed algorithms exhibit significant advantages compared to the baselines. Additionally, as the
number of users increases, the cumulative regrets also increase. This is expected because a larger
number of users poses a greater challenge in learning their preference vectors and identifying the
cluster structures.

G.4                            C OMPARISON WITH N ON -C LUSTERING -BASED BASELINES

In this subsection, we compare our algorithms with two additional graph-based baseline algorithms,
GOB.Lin (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2013) and GraphUCB (Yang et al., 2020), within the stochastic con-
text setting. While both GOB.Lin and GraphUCB leverage user similarities to enhance preference
estimation, their methodologies fundamentally differ from ours (and all the other clustering-based
algorithms) in two aspects: (1) Neither GOB.Lin nor GraphUCB assume the existence of user clus-
ters or explicitly perform clustering, and (2) both algorithms assume prior knowledge of a user
relationship graph. Additionally, it is worth noting that both GOB.Lin and GraphUCB have signif-
icantly higher computational complexity compared to clustering-based algorithms, as they require
operations such as multiplication and inversion of high-dimensional matrices of size Rud×ud for
item recommendation, where u is the number of users and d is the feature dimension. In contrast,
clustering-based algorithms (including ours) only involve matrix manipulations of size Rd×d .
For the experiments, due to the high computational overhead of GOB.Lin and GraphUCB, we ran-
domly select 20 users (instead of 50 as in other experiments) and divide them into 4 clusters. At
each round t, a user it is uniformly drawn from the 20 users, and 20 items are randomly sampled
from the full set of arms to form the arm set At . For GOB.Lin and GraphUCB, the user graph is
constructed by connecting users within the same cluster.
The cumulative regret results are shown in Figure 5. Both LinUCB-One and LinUCB-Ind exhibit
significantly higher cumulative regret than the other algorithms that incorporate user similarity.
Among all the clustering-based algorithms, our algorithms UniCLUB and UniSCLUB consistently
outperform their respective counterparts, CLUB and SCLUB, across all four datasets, demonstrating
the effectiveness of our proposed uniform exploration strategy. When compared to the new base-
lines, UniSCLUB achieves superior performance compared to GOB.Lin and GraphUCB across all
four datasets, and UniCLUB also outperforms GOB.Lin. Although GraphUCB slightly surpasses
UniCLUB on the Last.fm dataset and achieves competitive results on the synthetic dataset, it incurs
higher regret on the Movielens and Yelp datasets compared to UniCLUB. These results align with
expectations, as our setting assumes that users are clustered, which allows clustering-based methods
to explicitly exploit this structure for improved performance.
                        £103          Synthetic Dataset                             MovieLens Dataset                               Yelp Dataset                               Last.fm Dataset
                    5
Cumulative Regret


                    4

                    3

                    2

                    1

                    0
                         0     2000     4000    6000      8000   10000   0   2000      4000   6000      8000   10000   0    2000    4000   6000    8000   10000   0     2000     4000   6000     8000   10000
                                          Rounds                                         Rounds                                       Rounds                                       Rounds
                                  UniSCLUB                  UniCLUB            CLUB                  SCLUB             LinUCB-Ind            LinUCB-One               GraphUCB              GOB.Lin



                                                   Figure 5: Comparison of cumulative regrets with more baselines.

To demonstrate computational complexity, we also measure the average running time of all algo-
rithms across datasets, with the results summarized in Table 2. As shown in the table, GOB.Lin and
GraphUCB exhibit significantly higher average running times, exceeding those of other baselines by
more than an order of magnitude. In contrast, our algorithms, UniCLUB and UniSCLUB, achieve
computational efficiency comparable to that of the other baseline methods.


                                                                                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Table 2: Comparison of average running time (in seconds).
Time(s)     Algorithms
                         LinUCB-One   LinUCB-Ind   CLUB    SCLUB    UniCLUB    UniSCLUB    GraphUCB    GOB.Lin
Datasets
Synthetic                      2.79         2.61    3.02     7.70       3.02        8.28      128.32     204.55
MovieLens                      9.78         9.62   10.11    16.96       9.96       16.80      117.25     214.96
Yelp                           9.81         9.59   10.17    15.05      10.19       12.13      119.86     216.35
Last.fm                        4.66         1.44    5.00    12.18       5.00       12.42      106.04     231.25


                                                    35
