Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Single-Agent Poisoning Attacks Suffice to
Ruin Multi-Agent Learning
 Fan Yao ∗                                                          Yuwei Cheng ∗
 Department of Computer Science                                     Department of Statistics
 University of Virginia                                             University of Chicago
 Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA                                     Chicago, IL 60637, USA
 fy4bc@virginia.edu                                                 yuweicheng@uchicago.edu

 Ermin Wei                                                          Haifeng Xu
 Electrical and Computer Engineering                                Department of Computer Science
 Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences                     University of Chicago
 Northwestern University                                            haifengxu@uchicago.edu
 ermin.wei@northwestern.edu



                                            Abstract

            We investigate the robustness of multi-agent learning in strongly monotone
            games with bandit feedback. While previous research has developed learn-
            ing algorithms that achieve last-iterate convergence to the unique Nash
            equilibrium (NE) at a polynomial rate, we demonstrate that all such al-
            gorithms are vulnerable to adversaries capable of poisoning even a single
            agent’s utility observations. Specifically, we propose an attacking strat-
            egy such that for any given time horizon T , the adversary can mislead any
            multi-agent learning algorithm to converge to a point other than the unique
            NE with a corruption budget that grows sublinearly in T . To further un-
            derstand the inherent robustness of these algorithms, we characterize the
            fundamental trade-off between convergence speed and the maximum tol-
            erable total utility corruptions for two example algorithms, including the
            state-of-the-art one. Our theoretical and empirical results reveal an intrin-
            sic efficiency-robustness trade-off: the faster an algorithm converges, the
            more vulnerable it becomes to utility poisoning attacks. To the best of our
            knowledge, this is the first work to identify and characterize such a trade-off
            in the context of multi-agent learning.


1       Introduction
In recent years, multi-agent learning (MAL) systems have become increasingly prevalent,
finding applications in diverse fields such as autonomous systems, distributed optimization,
and economic markets (Leo et al., 2014; Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016; Jin et al., 2018; Qiu
et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022). These systems, characterized by agents act-
ing independently to maximize their own utilities in a non-cooperative environment, offer
significant potential but also introduce unique vulnerabilities to potential adversarial at-
tacks. Consider, for example, autonomous vehicles that communicate to coordinate traffic
flow or financial trading algorithms that interact to optimize individual profits (Sharif &
Marijan, 2022; Ataiefard & Hemmati, 2023; Shah et al., 2024). In both cases, each agent
(vehicle or trader) aims to maximize its own utility without direct collaboration. However,
these systems can be highly susceptible to manipulation, as a single compromised or ma-
licious agent can significantly influence the overall outcome. While it may be difficult for
an adversary to directly attack or control multiple agents, targeting a single vulnerable or
insider agent can be more feasible (Lin et al., 2020). This raises an intriguing question of
whether an adversary can still create a disruptive outcome by simply poisoning the utility
of one agent.
    ∗
        Equal contribution.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This scenario—where a single agent in an MAL system is targeted for a utility poisoning
attack—presents a new and critical challenge. Prior research has primarily focused on
two related but distinct areas: adversarial attacks on individual agents in online learning
environments (Bogunovic et al., 2021a; Jun et al., 2018; Garcelon et al., 2020), and many-
agent attacks on MAL systems (McMahan et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023;
Ma et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023; Liu & Lai, 2023). However, the impact of single-agent
attacks specifically in the multi-agent learning context remains underexplored. In this work,
we address this gap by investigating the robustness of MAL dynamics against single-agent
utility poisoning attacks. We show that even when one agent is compromised, the system
can be disrupted, revealing a stark vulnerability that has been overlooked in prior studies.
To study the effect of single-agent poisoning in multi-agent systems, we use NE-finding
dynamics in monotone games as our benchmark. Monotone games (Rosen, 1965), which
include well-known models like Cournot competition (Cournot, 1838), Kelly auctions (Kelly
et al., 1998), and Tullock contests (Tullock, 2008), represent a broad class of multi-agent
strategic systems. In these games, agents’ utility functions are concave, and many well-
established MAL dynamics converge to their unique NE (Even-Dar et al., 2009; Farina
et al., 2022; Bravo et al., 2018; Ba et al., 2024; Tatarenko & Kamgarpour, 2020; Cai & Zheng,
2023), making them ideal benchmarks for studying the effects of single-agent poisoning on
system-wide behavior.
Our theoretical results demonstrate that single-agent poisoning attacks can drive the dy-
namics away from the original NE, using an imperceptible, sublinear budget with respect
to the time horizon. This holds for all MAL algorithms in this setting. We also investi-
gate the robustness of two representatives of such MAL algorithms (Ba et al., 2024; Bravo
et al., 2018) and show that by sacrificing convergence speed, one can increase the system’s
tolerance to corruption, revealing a fundamental trade-off between efficiency and robustness.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows: (1) We propose a utility poisoning strategy
that can mislead any MAL dynamics in strongly monotone games to converge to a new
NE with a sublinear corruption budget, even when only targeting a single agent. (2) We
analyze the robustness of MAL algorithms against general utility poisoning attacks, showing
that adjusting the learning rate introduces inherent robustness. (3) Our findings uncover
an efficiency-robustness trade-off in MAL dynamics, where faster-converging dynamics are
more vulnerable to utility poisoning. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to
reveal this trade-off in multi-agent learning systems.
Related Work.        Adversarial attacks on multi-agent learning—often termed “steering”
or “policy teaching”—have been extensively studied under various assumptions about the
attacker’s knowledge, objectives, and strategies. For instance, Liu & Lai (2023) show that
in certain Markov games, neither action poisoning nor reward poisoning alone can be both
efficient and successful, even with complete knowledge of the environment (“white-box”
setting), highlighting challenges in designing effective attacks. Similarly, Wu et al. (2023)
investigate reward poisoning attacks on offline multi-agent reinforcement learners, demon-
strating how adversaries can manipulate outcomes in offline settings.
Another line of research focuses on designing incentives to guide multi-agent dynamics to-
ward a desirable equilibrium, known as “equilibrium steering” (Zhang et al., 2023; Canyak-
maz et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024). Ma et al. (2021) consider game redesign where a
designer, operating in a white-box setting, aims to induce players to choose targeted actions
in a normal-form game using a sublinear cost, assuming the players employ no-regret learn-
ing. The most relevant work to ours is Zhang et al. (2023), which shows that a sublinear
total incentive can induce a predetermined equilibrium against no-regret agents. However,
their approach can only steer the game to an existing equilibrium and cannot achieve a
non-equilibrium outcome without incurring a cost of Ω(T ).

2   Preliminaries
Our study focuses on strategic games with a finite number of agents [n] = {1, · · · , n} and
continuous action sets {Xi }ni=1 associated with agents i ∈ [n]. During play, each agent i
chooses an action (i.e., a pure strategy) xi ∈ Xi ⊂ Rdi , where di is the dimension of action
space of agent i, and forms the joint action profile x = (xi ; x−i ) ≡ (x1 , · · · , xn ). We


                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                           Qn
denote d := maxi∈[n] di . Let X = i=1 Xi be the game’s strategy space, and each agent’s
reward is determined by a utility function ui : X → R. Without loss of generality we
assume the range of each ui is a bounded region [0, 1]. We do not require agents know their
utility functions and only assumes that they can observe the point-wise feedback ui (x), also
known as bandit feedback in online learning literature. Such a game is denoted by a tuple
G ≡ G(n, X , {ui }ni=1 ). The commonly adopted solution concept for such strategic games is
Nash equilibrium (NE), an action profile where no agent can deviate unilaterally to improve
her utility. The formal definition of NE is given by the following:
Definition 1. A joint strategy profile x∗ = (x∗1 , · · · , x∗n ) forms a Nash equilibrium (NE)
of a game G, if for every agent i, x∗i is a best response to the opponents’ strategies x∗−i ;
formally,
                          ui (x∗i , x∗−i ) ≥ ui (xi , x∗−i ) for every xi ∈ Xi .            (1)

2.1 Monotone Games
Much of this paper’s theoretical development focuses on an important class of games called
strictly monotone games (strictly MG). This focus is due to at least two reasons. First, from
computational perspective, strictly monotone games are one of the most general classes of
continuous games that admit efficient algorithms for NE; it includes most popular continuous
games such as Cournot competition (Cournot, 1838), Tullock contest (Tullock, 2008; He
et al., 2024) and its variants that model content creation competitions (Yao et al., 2024a;b;c).
Additionally, our framework encompasses all strictly convex-concave zero-sum games and
any game with a strictly concave potential. Second, strictly monotone games turn out to
admit fast converging (to NE) multi-agent learning algorithms (Bravo et al., 2018). Both
conditions are important for our theoretical analysis. The concept of “monotonicity”, first
introduced by Rosen (1965), refers to games where each agent has a concave utility function,
along with a global condition known as diagonal strict concavity (DSC). A stronger version of
the DSC condition defines a sub-class known as strongly monotone games. Formal definitions
of these are provided below.
Definition 2 (Strictly/strongly monotone games). A continuous multi-agent game
G(n, {Xi }ni=1 , {ui }ni=1 ) is strictly monotone if for any x = (x1 , · · · , xn ), x′ = (x′1 , · · · , x′n ) ∈
X , it satisfies the diagonal strict concavity (DSC) property:
                            n
                            X
                                  (x′i − xi )⊤ (vi (x′i , x′−i ) − vi (xi , x−i )) < 0,                     (2)
                            i=1

where vi (x) = ∇xi ui (x) is the first-order
                                     Pn      derivative of ui with respect to xi . In addition, the
game G is β-strongly monotone if i=1 (x′i − xi )⊤ (vi (x′i , x′−i ) − vi (xi , x−i )) ≤ −β∥x′ − x∥22 .
When discussing strongly monotone game in this paper, we treat β as a small constant
and sometimes omit it in bounds unless there is a need to emphasize the dependence on β.
Notably, the DSC property readily implies the strict concavity of uk with respect to xk for
any fixed x−k . This can be observed by taking x′ = (x1 , · · · , xk−1 , x′k , xk+1 , · · · , xn ) in
Eq. (2). As a result, the following best response mapping for each agent-k is well-defined1 :
                Best response mapping:                BRk (x−k ) ≜ arg max uk (xk , x−k ).                  (3)
                                                                            xk ∈Xk

Moreover, the following notion of game Hessian matrix will be useful throughout the paper:
                              Game Hessian:              HG = [∇j ∇i ui (x)]i,j .                           (4)
The following smoothness property of agents’ utility functions will be useful for our analysis.
Definition 3 (Second-order L-smooth utilities). Given any game G, we say an agent k’s
utility function uk is second-order L-smooth if there exists a feasible set F ⊆ Rd such that
for any δ ∈ F, the following function hk (·, δ) : Rnd → Rd defined as
                                             vk (xk + δ, x−k ) − vk (xk , x−k )
                             hk (x; δ) ≜                                        ,                           (5)
                                                           ∥δ∥
is L-Lipschitz continuous; that is, for any x, x′ ∈ X , it holds that
                                   ∥hk (x; δ) − hk (x′ ; δ)∥ ≤ L∥x − x′ ∥.                                  (6)
   1
       Because the maximizer of a strictly concave function always exists and is unique.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Second-order smoothness requires that, for a given agent k, while holding other agents’
strategies fixed, the marginal change in k’s utility with respect to her own strategy xk is
Lipschitz continuous with respect to the joint strategies x of all agents. This is a relatively
mild assumption, as it essentially demands the smoothness of the second-order derivatives of
                                                                                     2
the agent’s utility. To see this connection, by letting δ → 0, we have hk (x; δ) → ∂∂xu2k · ∥δ∥
                                                                                             δ
                                                                                                .
                                                                                       k
Hence, in this case Condition Eq. (6) becomes the Lipschitz continuity on the Hessian matrix
∂ 2 uk
 ∂x2
       of hk , which is why it is called second-order smoothness.
    k

A few remarks are worth mentioning. First, our attack poison’s only a single agent and its
success is guaranteed so long as this single agent’s utility is second-order smooth. Second,
the smooth parameter L in Definition 3 turns out to affect how “controllable” the attack
outcome is. Our results will show that clever adversaries would tend to poison an agent
with small L parameter. Third, many well-known strongly monotone games exhibit this
smoothness property. For example, the n-agent Cournot√ competition is second-order 0-
smooth, where n-agent Tullock contest is second-order O( n)-smooth (see Appendix A for
full descriptions of these games and proofs of these claims in Proposition 2 and 3).
2.2 The (α, p)-Multi-Agent Learning Dynamics under Bandit Feedback
Monotone games are known to have a unique Nash equilibrium, hence a substantial body
of recent work develops equilibrium-converging dynamics, including (Bravo et al., 2018;
Tatarenko & Kamgarpour, 2020; Cai & Zheng, 2023; Ba et al., 2024). These studies demon-
strate that in a strictly monotone game if each agent independently follows such an algo-
rithm, the joint strategies of all agents converge in last iterate to the NE at a polynomial
rate. Among these, we are particularly interested in algorithms that operate in a bandit
feedback environment, where agents do not have access to their utility functions neither
utility gradients, and can only observe the utilities (possibly noisy) resultant from the ac-
tions they take at that round. This feedback setting is challenging yet realistic, as it reflects
un-coupled learning situations where agents are unaware of their opponents’ existence and
simply optimize their own utilities selfishly. The following notion is crucial to our analysis.
Definition 4 ((α, p)-MAL Dynamics). We say a (possibly randomized) multi-agent learning
(MAL) dynamics A = (A1 , · · · , An ) for an n-agent game G with bandit feedback is an (α, p)-
                                                                                        (t)
MAL dynamics if when each agent i uses algorithm Ai to determine her strategy xi at
time t, then their joint strategy sequence {x(t) }∞
                                                  t=1 converges to a Nash Equilibrium x in
                                                                                          ∗

the following sense: there exists positive constants C, T0 such that for any t > T0 we have

                                 E[∥x(t) − x∗ ∥p2 ] ≤ C p · t−pα .                           (7)

In other words, an (α, p)-MAL dynamics leads to last iterate convergence to some NE of
the game G in the sense that the p-th power of the strategy profile difference, evaluated
under the L2 norm, has a polynomial convergence rate α > 0. In the following section,
we shall see that the α, p parameter in (α, p)-MAL algorithms fundamentally affects the
algorithm’s robustness to adversarial corruptions. In the literature of multi-agent learning
for monotone games, various (α, p)-MAL dynamics have been developed. For instance, the
Multi-Agent Mirror Descent with Bandit Feedback (MAMD) proposed by Bravo et al.
(2018) leads to a ( 61 , 2)-MAL algorithm, while the Multi-Agent Mirror Descent with Self-
Concordant Barrier Bandit Learning (MD-SCB) introduced in Ba et al. (2024) leads to
a ( 14 , 2)-MAL dynamics. Notably, while these designs often let every agent use the same
learning algorithm, neither our definition of the (α, p)-MAL dynamics nor our designed
attack later require this restriction — all we assume is that the learning dynamics converge.

3       Vulnerability of MAL to Utility Poisoning in MG
In this section, we examine the vulnerability of multi-agent learning (MAL) dynamics.
Our main result is the design of a single-agent utility poisoning attack, which is provably
successful to any (α, p)-MAL algorithm for β-strongly monotone games. Our results also
quantitatively characterize how the attack costs and outcome depend on parameters β, α, p.
The risk of having a poisoned agent within a community is very realistic, hence our attack
raises serious concerns regarding naively applying MAL dynamics to setting with potential


                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


adversaries. We conclude this section by showing how the attack can lead to worse outcomes
when the adversary can poison even more agents.
3.1 Poisoning a Single agent Suffices to Steer the Equilibrium Away
We design an explicit implementation of such a utility poisoning attack, referred to as the
Single-agent Utility Shifting Attack (SUSA). SUSA first selects a victim agent k to poison,
and computes a corrupted utility function ũk for this agent. Then during MAL process,
at each round SUSA simply shift the realized utility of agent k from uk to the ũk with
attacking cost c = |ũk − uk | (hence the name “utility shifting”). The formal definition of
SUSA is provided below.
Definition 5 (Single-agent Utility Shifting Attack). A Single-agent Utility Shifting At-
tack (SUSA) against a strategic game instance G is specified by a tuple (k, δ, ∆), which is
implemented by the following two stages:
  1. [Preparation Stage] Pre-compute a corrupted utility function for “victim agent” k:
                        ũk (xk , x−k ) = uk (xk + δ, x−k ) + ∆(x−k , δ),           (8)
                                                                                 2
     where ∆ : X → R is a function depending on the joint strategy x−k and δ ∈ Xk .
  2. [Attacking Stage] During the execution of an MAL algorithm at round t, add a
     corruption
                                           (t)  (t)         (t)  (t)
                                ct = ũk (xk , x−k ) − uk (xk , x−k )
     to agent-k’s utility observation.

In addition, we denote the corrupted game instance as G̃(k, δ, ∆), in which the k-th agent’s
utility function is replaced with ũk .
A few remarks are worth clarifying. First, ct is introduced after observing the current round
action. This type of corruption is often referred as “strong” corruption in the literature (Liu
& Shroff, 2019; Jun et al., 2018; Bogunovic et al., 2021b). Second, SUSA is applicable to any
MAL learning dynamics in any games with continuous utility functions, though below we
only show that the success of such attacks can be guaranteed for strongly monotone games
under certain conditions. Third, SUSA only poisons agent k’s utility observations and does
not interfere with her actions, though the poisoning amount depends on an action shifting
term δ. Essentially, it makes k believe her utilities are drawn from a modified function ũk .
Notably, SUSA does not attack any other agents, but will nevertheless steer their equilibrium
behaviors through influencing the victim k’s behaviors. Since agents do not know their true
utility functions but only observe the bandit feedback about utilities, this form of corruption
not only disrupts the sequential strategy updates of the victim agent k, but also influences
the dynamical behaviors of all other agents involved.
The following Lemma 1 reveals a nice property of SUSA. That is, if the target game G is
strongly monotone, SUSA preserves the strongly monotone property as long as the l2 -norm
of the deviation ∥δ∥2 is upper bounded by a constant depending on the game parameters.
Lemma 1. Consider any β-strongly monotone game G(n, {Xi }ni=1 , {ui }ni=1 ). If uk is second-
order L-smooth, then under SUSA the corrupted game G̃(k, δ, ∆) with ∥δ∥2 < β/L remains
strongly monotone.
Lemma 1 indicates that the corrupted game preserves strong monotonicity as long as the
norm of the shifting offset δ is reasonably bounded. This is useful because MAL dynamics
retains convergence in the corrupted game (still strongly monotone). As mentioned in
Section 2.1, Cournot competition is O(1)-strongly monotone and 0-smooth, so a SUSA
                  √ its monotonicity. In contrast, the Tullock contest is O(1)-strongly
using any δ preserves                                                               √
monotone but O( n)-smooth, hence the adversary is limited to using ∥δ∥ < O(1/ n).
This means that as the number of agents increases, it becomes more difficult for SUSA to
preserve the monotone property. The proof of Lemma 1 can be found in Appendix B.1.
Our following main theorem of this section, which formally characterizes SUSA’s capability.
   2
     Rigorously, we need to extend the domain Xk to ensure uk (xk + δ, x−k ) is well-defined. In fact,
any concave extension would suffice, and it does not affect the validity of our theoretical results.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 1. Let G(n, {Xi }ni=1 , {ui }ni=1 ) be any β-strongly monotone game (with unique NE
x∗ ) and A be any (α, p)-MAL dynamics. Suppose a victim agent-k’s utility function uk is
second-order L-smooth. Consider SUSA(k, δ, ∆) constructed as
               ∆(x−k , δ) = −uk (BRk (x−k ), x−k ) + uk (BRk (x−k ) − δ, x−k )                (9)
where δ is any vector satisfying ∥δ∥2 < β/L and BRk (x−k ) ≜ arg maxxk ∈Xk uk (xk , x−k )
is the best response mapping of agent-k. Then the resulting dynamics induced by A and
SUSA(k, δ, ∆) converges to some x̃∗ , such that

  1. [Attack Success] The deviation to the original NE satisfies
                        ∥x̃∗ − x∗ ∥2 ≥ β∥δ∥2 / sup{ρ(HG (x)) : x ∈ [x∗ , x̃∗ ]},             (10)
     where ρ(HG (x)) represents the spectral norm of the game’s Hessian HG at x, and
     [x∗ , x̃∗ ] denotes the segment (with a slight abuse of notation) λx̃∗ +(1−λ)x∗ , λ ∈ [0, 1].
  2. [Sublinear Attack Costs] The expected total budget satisfies
                                " T       #
                                 X                      pα
                              E      |ct | ≤ C0 · T 1− p+1 ,                                 (11)
                                         t=1

     where the constant C0 = CL1 (4L2 + 5) + 2, L1 is the Lipschitz constant of all ui w.r.t.
     xi and L2 is the Lipschitz constant of victim agent k’s best response BRk w.r.t. x−k .

As described in Eq. (10) and Eq. (11), the success of a SUSA relies on achieving two goals
simultaneously: (1) steering the convergence to a joint strategy profile that is at least a
constant distance away from the original NE, and (2) ensuring that the total budget required
is o(T ). Theorem 1 guarantees both even when the adversary only targets a single agent.
One might wonder, beyond the NE shifting distance guarantee Eq. (10), whether an adver-
sary can have any control over the shifting direction, especially if it aims to influence specific
agents’ strategies. Our answer is affirmative: although rigorously characterizing the direc-
tion x̃∗ − x∗ is challenging, we can approximate it as HG−1 [:, k][∇kk uk ]δ (see Appendix B.3),
where HG−1 [:, k] is the k-th block column of the inverse of HG , and ∇kk uk is the Hessian of
uk w.r.t. xk . This suggests that if an adversary possesses some additional global knowledge
about the game’s Hessian HG , it can further steer the NE deviation in a desired direction.
To get a better sense of the attack success guarantee, we derive constants in Theorem 1 for
two examples as follows. The proof can be found in Proposition 2 and 3 in Appendix A.
Remark 1. For n-person Cournot competition, the corresponding parameters L0 , L1 , L2 , β
and HG specified in Theorem 1 satisfy
                                        √
           L0 = 0, L1 = O(1), L2 = O( n), β = O(1), sup {ρ(HG (x))} = O(n),
                                                           x∈X

therefore, for an arbitrary δ, SUSA can induce an NE shift ∥x̃∗ − x∗ ∥2 ≥ O(n−1 ). For
n-person Tullock contest, we have
                √                     √            √
       L0 = O( n), L1 = O(1), L2 = O( n), β = O(1/ n), sup {ρ(HG (x))} = O(n),
                                                                  x∈X
                                                                            5
                           −1
and thus for ∥δ∥ < O(n      ), SUSA
                                 hP can induce   ∥x̃ − x ∥2 ≥ O(n− 2 ). Both results are
                                                       ∗      ∗
                                   T
                                            i    √ 1− pα
obtained within a total budget E   t=1 |ct | ≤ O( nT
                                                        p+α ).


We observe that while some of the constants in the bounds are O(1), some of them inevitably
depend on n and the specific guarantees vary across different game structures. In our two
examples, Cournot games are clearly more vulnerable to attacks compared to Tullock games.
One might also wonder the induced deviation from the original NE may be too small when
n gets large. As we will discuss in Section 3.2, the adversary can improve the deviation in
Eq. (10) by removing the factor sup{ρ(HG )} and may even force the NE deviation to an
arbitrary direction if allowed to poison multiple agents.
Next, we discuss the implications of the necessary requirements in Theorem 1, which provide
insight into why SUSA can be successful. The first condition demands that the l2 -norm of


                                                6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the deviation ∥δ∥, must be bounded by a constant. This is to ensure that the corrupted
game remains strongly monotone and thus allows A to converge to x̃∗ , the unique NE of
the corrupted game, as indicated by Lemma 1. The second condition provides an explicit
construction of the offset function, which is essential for maintaining a sub-linear total
budget. In fact, the rationale behind the design of ∆ is to satisfy that for the target agent-k
and any x−k ∈ X−k , maxxk ∈Xk ũk (xk , x−k ) = uk (BR   ˜ k (x−k ), x−k ), where BR˜ k (x−k ) =
arg maxx∈Xk ũk (x, x−k ) = BRk (x−k ) − δ is the best response function for agent-k under
the corrupted utility uk . In other words, regardless of the opponents’ strategies, the best
response of any agent under their corrupted utility ũk aligns with the intersection of ũk and
the original utility uk . This means that as an agent gradually learns the best response to their
opponents’ strategies–particularly when converging to x̃∗ –the adversary’s budget decreases
to zero, ultimately resulting in a total budget that is sub-linear in T . The proof for Eq. (10)
requires establishing a connection between the Jacobian of best response mapping and the
game’s Hessian and applying Lagrange mean-value theorem for vector-valued functions (Hall
& Newell, 1979). The proof for Eq. (11) follows from a careful analysis of the expected budget
E[|ct |] at each round. In fact, we can show that the same convergence rate applies to the
corrupted game G̃ and as the joint strategy approaches x̃ at rate t−α , E[|ct |] decreases at
          pα
rate t− p+1 . For detailed proof, please refer to Appendix B.2.

3.2   Potential Power of Poisoning Many Agents
Theorem 1 demonstrates the significant impact of attacking even a single agent. A natural
follow-up question is whether an adversary can gain additional power by poisoning multiple
agents. While this is not the primary focus of our work—since it is unclear how realistic
or feasible it would be for an adversary to poison many agents—we provide preliminary
evidence that such an adversary would indeed have significantly more influence. We illustrate
this through an example in the Cournot competition, as detailed below.
Proposition 1. Under the same assumptions stated in Theorem 1, consider an adversary
performing SUSA(k, δk , ∆k ) against all agents k ∈ [n] in an n-person Cournot competition.
Then, the required attacking budget for each agent is still bounded as Eq. (11), and the
shifted NE under attack satisfies x̃∗ − x∗ = HG−1 Dδ, where HG is the game Hessian defined
in Eq. (4), and D is a diagonal block matrix with the i-th diagonal block being the Hessian
of ui w.r.t. xi . As a result,

      1. picking δ = D−1 HG v can induce an arbitrary NE deviation direction v,

      2. picking δ aligning with the direction associated with the largest eigenvalue of HG−1 D
         induces the largest possible NE deviation distance ∥x̃∗ − x∗ ∥, which is at least ∥δ∥.

Although limited to Cournot games, Proposition 1 offers a preview of the additional advan-
tages of attacking multiple agents, namely more refined control over both the magnitude
and direction of NE deviation. Compared to Remark 1, attacking multiple agents increases
the magnitude of the NE deviation from O(1/n) to O(1), and allows for arbitrary directional
deviation. We are able to derive a closed-form solution of x̃∗ − x∗ thanks to the quadratic
utility function in Cournot games which yields a constant game Hessian and a linear best
response mapping. For more general game structures, we can show that similar results hold,
albeit in an approximate sense, as a strongly convex function can always be approximated
by a quadratic form, and the best response mapping can be linearized near x∗ . However, a
rigorous exploration of this is beyond the scope of our current work.

4     Intrinsic Trade-Off Between Efficiency and Robustness
Our main result in previous sections (i.e. Theorem 1) reveals an intriguing trade-off between
the efficiency and robustness of MAL dynamics: the faster an algorithm converges (i.e., a
larger α), the smaller corruption needed for inducing an NE shift. For simplicity, we name
such outcome as NE Shifting Attack (NSA). While such a trade-off is well-documented
in single-agent online learning (Cheng et al., 2024), we are the first to identify it in the
multi-agent context. In this section, we explore whether sacrificing the convergence rate of
specific MAL dynamics can improve robustness against utility poisoning attacks. We focus
on two dynamics: MD-SCB (Ba et al., 2024), the fastest-converging state-of-the-art MAL


                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


algorithm, and MAMD (Bravo et al., 2018), the foundational MAL algorithm for strongly
concave games with bandit feedback.
Essentially, our key insight is that the robustness of these dynamics can be improved (i.e.,
become more resilient to NSA) by simply adjusting the learning rate. Theorem 2 shows
how the learning rate of MD-SCB (see Appendix C.1 for details) influences its robustness
against general utility poisoning attacks. Originally
                                                    √     proposed by Ba et al. (2024), MD-SCB
achieves an optimal convergence rate of O(d/ T ) without adversarial attacks, if choosing
                                 1
the learning rate ηt ∝ t− 2 At each round t, we consider a general adversary who selects
a set of agents Ĩt to attack: any agent ĩ ∈ Ĩt will receive an altered utility observation
  (t)
µ̃ĩ ← µĩ (xt ) + ct,ĩ (xt ). Theorem 2 highlights how the algorithm’s convergence under such
a generic utility poisoning attack depends on both the learning rate ηt and the total attack
budget ρ.
Theorem 2. ConsiderPt P  an adversary that attacks a set of agents Ĩt at round t with a total
                                                    ρ
budget satisfying    j=1     ĩ∈Ĩj |cj,ĩ | ≤ O(t ) for all t and some ρ ∈ [0, 1]. By choosing
                                      1 −ϕ
a learning rate sequence ηt = 2d         t , for sufficiently
                                                            n large T the last-iterate convergence  o
                                                                                            1
rate of MD-SCB satisfies E ∥x̂T − x ∥2 ≤ max O(dT ϕ−1 ), O(dT −ϕ ), O(dT ρ− 2 (ϕ+1) ) .
                                              ∗ 2

                                         2(ρ−1)
Specifically, E ∥x̂T − x∗ ∥22 ≤ O dT 3                can be achieved by choosing ϕ = 32 (ρ + 12 ).



Theorem 2 delivers a strong message: for a given sublinear total budget O(T ρ ), even as
ρ → 1, we can always adjust the learning rate decay to recover last-iterate convergence,
making MD-SCB absolutely resilient to NSA3 , although at the cost of potentially slower
convergence speed. The proof of Theorem 2 quantifies the bias introduced by attacks in the
                                                 (t)
utility observations of the gradient estimator ṽi , and tracks the propagation of this bias
throughout the convergence analysis (see Appendix C). We will later use a similar approach
to establish an analogous result for Algorithm 3 as well.
Theorem 2 provides a potential defense strategy for an algorithm designer, assuming they can
estimate the upper bound of the total corruption. To clarify the inherent trade-off between
efficiency and robustness in MAL dynamics, we compare this result with our findings in
Section 3 from a unified perspective. For this comparison, let ADV represent all possible
utility poisoning strategies, and define the following quantity:
         ρ(C, A) = inf{ρ ∈ [0, 1]|C with budget O(T ρ ) always achieve NSA against A.},
                 = sup{ρ ∈ [0, 1]|C with budget O(T ρ ) cannot achieve NSA against A.},
where C ∈ ADV represents a generic utility poisoning adversary. Now, a fundamental
question from both the attacker and defender’s perspectives is to quantify the following two
functions (with p = 2 fixed):
            ρ− (α) =    inf      sup       ρ(C, A),       ρ+ (α) =      sup      inf     ρ(C, A).   (12)
                       C∈ADV A∈M AL(α,2)                             A∈M AL(α,2) C∈ADV

Function ρ− (α) represents the optimal strategy of a utility poisoning adversary: for any
MAL dynamics known to enjoy convergence rate α, ρ− (α) denotes the minimum budget level
ρ required for NSA. In contrast, ρ+ (α) describes the optimal defense from the perspective
of the algorithm designer: given a required convergence rate α, ρ+ (α) identifies the most
robust algorithm that can withstand NSA of level ρ from any utility poisoning adversary.
The well-known max-min inequality also implies the following basic fact.
Fact 1. ρ− (α) ≥ ρ+ (α) for any α ∈ [0, 1/4].

Note that we restrict α ∈ [0, 41 ] because α = 14 is proven to be the optimal convergence rate
under p = 2 in the non-corrupted setting (Ba et al., 2024). In general, one should expect
strict inequality in this context (i.e., ρ− (α) > ρ+ (α)), unless ρ(C, A) has particular special
properties. For instance, if ρ(C, A) is convex in C and concave in A, the equality must hold,
as seen in the well-known minimax theorem from v. Neumann (1928); Sion (1958). In our
problem, however, both C, A represent algorithms and it is unclear how ρ changes w.r.t.
   3
       As NSA necessarily leads to divergence, last-iterate convergence must imply resilience to NSA.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C and A. Thus, an intriguing open question remains: does the equality hold in Fact 1?
In other words, does the adversary gain a strict advantage (i.e., ρ− (α) > ρ+ (α)) by first
observing the dynamics A and then designing the attack C?
To better understand the strength of the adversary, our main results in Theorems 1 and 2
provide insights by establishing upper and lower bounds of ρ− (α), ρ+ (α), respectively, as
summarized in Corollary 1.
Corollary 1. Given the definitions of ρ− (α) and ρ+ (α) in Eq. (12), for some particular
MAL algorithm A0 and adversary C0 ∈ ADV , we further define
        ρ(A0 (α)) = inf ρ(C, A = A0 (α)), ρ(α, C0 ) =       sup     ρ(C = C0 , A),
                                 C∈ADV                                 A∈M AL(α,2)

where A0 (α) denotes algorithm A0 with a set of hyper-parameters that guarantees M AL(α, 2)
convergence. Then for any α ∈ [0, 41 ], it holds that
                                                                            2α
            1 − α ≤ ρ(MD-SCB(α)) ≤ ρ+ (α) ≤ ρ− (α) ≤ ρ(α; SUSA) ≤ 1 −          .      (13)
                                                                             3
We defer the proof of Corollary 1 to Appendix D.1 as it is straightforward: the three
middle inequalities follow directly from the definitions of ρ− , ρ+ and Fact 1. The two outer
inequalities are derived from a restatement of Theorem 1 and 2. In fact, Theorem 1 quantifies
the capability of a particular adversary (i.e., SUSA) and thus establish the upper bounds
of ρ(α; SUSA). Theorem 2, on the other hand, characterizes the robustness of a particular
algorithm (i.e. MD-SCB), thus gives the lower bounds of ρ(MD-SCB(α)).
                                                      Although the bounds in Corollary 1 are not tight, they
    1.00
            Efficiency-Robustness Trade-off           highlight an intrinsic trade-off between efficiency and ro-
                                                      bustness: MAL dynamics with higher convergence rates
  0.95                    Vulnerable                  become more vulnerable—they can withstand less cor-
                           to Attack
                                                      ruption, and adversaries need a smaller budget to at-
  0.90
                                                      tack them. Figure 1 illustrates this trade-off. The yel-
  0.85
                                                      low dashed line represents ρ− (α); above it, a budget of
          ( ; SUSA)
                                                      O(T ρ ) suffices for a powerful adversary to induce NSA
                                          N/A     OP1
  0.80
           ( )
                         Resilient                OP2
                                                      in  any M AL(α, 2) dynamics. The red region, a subset
          +( )
          (MD SCB( ))    to Attack
                                                  OP3
                                                      of  this area, corresponds to the actual budget required
  0.75
     0.00  0.05     0.10    0.15     0.20    0.25
                                                      for  NSA   using our specific attack strategy, SUSA. Con-
                                                      versely, the blue dashed line represents ρ+ (α); below it,
                                                      the most robust M AL(α, 2) dynamics can withstand cor-
                                                      ruption of O(T ρ ) against any adversary. For a specific
Figure 1: Illustration of the four MAL dynamics like MD-SCB, the green region shows the
quantities in Corollary 1, re- budget within which it remains resilient to NSA. We only
vealing the intrinsic efficiency- present ρ ∈ [0.75, 1] because the MAL dynamics with the
robustness trade-off under NSA. best convergence rate in such a setting (α = 0.25)(Ba
et al., 2024) can withstand a corruption level of ρ = 0.75 (see Theorem 2). The three gaps
in Figure 1 correspond to three open problems: OP1. what is the most budget-efficient
adversary for any MAL dynamics; OP2. does an adversary have a strict advantage by ob-
serving the dynamics A first and then design the attack C; and OP3. what is the most
robust MAL dynamics resilient to any adversary? We left these for future research.
Such an efficiency-robustness trade-off extends to more general contexts. For example,
the MAL algorithm MAMD (detailed in Algorithm 3 in Appendix C.4) exhibits a similar
phenomenon. We establish a corresponding result in analogous to Theorem 2 in Proposition
4 in Appendix C.4, showing how to adjust MAMD’s learning rate to enhance its robustness.
Moreover, this trade-off applies to a broader notion of robustness beyond just resilience to
NSA attacks. In Appendix D, we present similar results for a stronger form of robustness
that not only ensures resilience to NE shifting but also prevents any possible dampening of
the convergence speed.

5          Experiments
In this section, we validate our theoretical results from Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 by
implementing SUSA against MD-SCB on n-person Cournot games, whose formal definition
is given in Appendix A. Additional results for Algorithm 3 are provided in Appendix E.

                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Experimental Setup: For the n-person Cournot game instance, we set a = 10, b = 0.05,
and the cost ci = 1 for all agents i ∈ [n]. The action space is set to Xi = [0, 50] and the
unique NE of such games can be verified as x∗i = n+1 180
                                                         , i ∈ [n]. We let each agent run MD-
SCB with tha game size n ∈ {10, 50, 100}. The learning rate schedule of MD-SCB is set to
(ηt ∝ t−ϕ , ϕ = 0.5, 0.7, 0.9), corresponding to convergence rates α = 0.25, 0.15, 0.05, p = 2
when no attack is present. We implement SUSA against agent 1, with a fixed δ = 10.0. For
each game instance specified by n and the attacked algorithm specified by the convergence
rate α, we compare the dynamics’ behavior both without attack and under SUSA, and
report the actual total budget used.
Result: The left panel of Figure 2 plots the convergence curve of the L2 square error for
n = 10, serving as a sanity check to confirm that different learning rate schedules induce
different convergence rates for MD-SCB in absence of an adversary. The middle panel
shows the outcome of SUSA against MD-SCB with α = 0.25, with the y-axis representing
L2 distance between xt and NE. The dashed lines display the convergence curve without the
adversary, while the solid lines represent the dynamics under SUSA, with different colors
indicating results for various game sizes n. As shown, for different values of n, the attacked
dynamics exhibit divergence, as the solid lines saturate and stop decreasing, indicating that
the dynamics are being steered to converge to a new point. Additionally, we observe that
the induced NE deviation decreases with respect to n, which aligns with our theoretical
predictions inPTheorem1 and Remark 1. The right panel shows the cumulative attack
                t
budget Ct = τ =1 |cτ | at each time step t against MD-SCB with different values of α. As
the results indicate, although all exhibit a sublinear trend, a faster-converging dynamics
(α = 0.25) requires a smaller attack budget, corroborating our findings in Theorem 1 and
2. Results for additional parameter settings are provided in Appendix E.

                             Convergence with n=10                                 NE Manipulation Power with = 0.25                                Cumulative Attack Budget with n=10
            5000                                         =0.25               104                   n = 100   n = 100, no attack                     = 0.25
                                                         =0.15                                     n = 50    n = 50, no attack         400000       = 0.15
                                                         =0.05                                     n = 10    n = 10, no attack                      = 0.05
            4000                                                             103
                                                                                                                                       300000
xt x * 22


                                                                 xt x * 22


            3000
                                                                             102
                                                                                                                                  Ct


                                                                                                                                       200000
            2000

            1000                                                             101                                                       100000

              0                                                              100                                                           0
                   0   2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500                                103                    104                         0   2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500
                                   Iteration                                                  Iteration                                                         Iteration


Figure 2: Left: square error of MD-SCB with varying convergence rates. Middle: square
error of MD-SCB on different sizes of game instances against SUSA. Right: cumulative
attack budget used by SUSA against MD-SCB with varying convergence rates. Error bars
represent the 1-σ region from 20 independent simulations.

6                  Discussion
In addition to the three open problems regarding the fundamental limits of attack efficiency
and defense robustness raised in Section 4, we discuss more potential limitations and future
directions here. One limitation of our setting is that, although SUSA does not require
the adversary to have full knowledge of the entire game (such as knowing every agent’s
utility function, as assumed in some prior literature (Ma et al., 2021)), it does rely on
the assumption that the adversary has complete knowledge of the victim agent’s utility
function. We believe this assumption can be further relaxed. A promising direction for
future work is to enhance the applicability and practicality of SUSA by developing methods
that assume the adversary has no prior knowledge of the victim agent’s utility function and
must instead learn it from observed trajectories. Another key question we did not address
is the societal impact of utility poisoning attacks, particularly its potential for “steering for
social good”: as although SUSA could be used by adversaries to induce a harmful NE, it also
opens up opportunities for a benevolent social planner to guide the system toward a better
social outcome, simply by incentivizing a single agent. These intriguing open problems offer
valuable avenues for future exploration.
Acknowledgment. This work is supported by Army Research Office Award W911NF23-
1-0030, ONR Award N00014-23-1-2802 and NSF Awards CCF-2303372, CNS-2030251,


                                                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ECCS-2216970, CMMI-2024774, IIS-2128019. Fan Yao conducted this research while he
is visiting the University of Chicago.

References
Foozhan Ataiefard and Hadi Hemmati. Gray-box adversarial attack of deep reinforcement
  learning-based trading agents. In 2023 International Conference on Machine Learning
  and Applications (ICMLA), pp. 675–682. IEEE, 2023.
Wenjia Ba, Tianyi Lin, Jiawei Zhang, and Zhengyuan Zhou. Doubly optimal no-regret
 online learning in strongly monotone games with bandit feedback, 2024. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2112.02856.
Ilija Bogunovic, Arpan Losalka, Andreas Krause, and Jonathan Scarlett. Stochastic linear
   bandits robust to adversarial attacks. In International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
   gence and Statistics, pp. 991–999. PMLR, 2021a.
Ilija Bogunovic, Arpan Losalka, Andreas Krause, and Jonathan Scarlett. Stochastic linear
   bandits robust to adversarial attacks. In Arindam Banerjee and Kenji Fukumizu (eds.),
   Proceedings of The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
   volume 130 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 991–999. PMLR, 13–15 Apr
   2021b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v130/bogunovic21a.html.
Mario Bravo, David Leslie, and Panayotis Mertikopoulos. Bandit learning in concave n-
 person games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Yang Cai and Weiqiang Zheng. Doubly optimal no-regret learning in monotone games.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13120, 2023.
Ilayda Canyakmaz, Iosif Sakos, Wayne Lin, Antonios Varvitsiotis, and Georgios Piliouras.
   Steering game dynamics towards desired outcomes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01066,
   2024.
Yuwei Cheng, Fan Yao, Xuefeng Liu, and Haifeng Xu. Learning from imperfect human
  feedback: a tale from corruption-robust dueling, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2405.11204.
Antoine Augustin Cournot. Recherches sur les Principes Mathématiques de la Théorie
 des Richesses. L. Hachette, Paris, 1838. URL https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/
 bpt6k8804262.
Eyal Even-Dar, Yishay Mansour, and Uri Nadav. On the convergence of regret minimization
  dynamics in concave games. In Proceedings of the forty-first annual ACM symposium on
  Theory of computing, pp. 523–532, 2009.
Gabriele Farina, Ioannis Anagnostides, Haipeng Luo, Chung-Wei Lee, Christian Kroer, and
 Tuomas Sandholm. Near-optimal no-regret learning dynamics for general convex games.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:39076–39089, 2022.
Evrard Garcelon, Baptiste Roziere, Laurent Meunier, Jean Tarbouriech, Olivier Teytaud,
  Alessandro Lazaric, and Matteo Pirotta. Adversarial attacks on linear contextual bandits.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:14362–14373, 2020.
Wenbo Guo, Xian Wu, Sui Huang, and Xinyu Xing. Adversarial policy learning in two-player
 competitive games. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th
 International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine
 Learning Research, pp. 3910–3919. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.
 mlr.press/v139/guo21b.html.
William S Hall and Martin L Newell. The mean value theorem for vector valued functions:
 a simple proof. Mathematics Magazine, 52(3):157–158, 1979.
Yu He, Fan Yao, Yang Yu, Xiaoyun Qiu, Minming Li, and Haifeng Xu. The complexity of
  tullock contests. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06444, 2024.


                                             11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiawei Huang, Vinzenz Thoma, Zebang Shen, Heinrich H Nax, and Niao He. Learning to
  steer markovian agents under model uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10207, 2024.
Junqi Jin, Chengru Song, Han Li, Kun Gai, Jun Wang, and Weinan Zhang. Real-time
  bidding with multi-agent reinforcement learning in display advertising. In Proceedings of
  the 27th ACM international conference on information and knowledge management, pp.
  2193–2201, 2018.
Kwang-Sung Jun, Lihong Li, Yuzhe Ma, and Jerry Zhu. Adversarial attacks on stochastic
 bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Frank P Kelly, Aman K Maulloo, and David Kim Hong Tan. Rate control for communication
  networks: shadow prices, proportional fairness and stability. Journal of the Operational
  Research society, 49:237–252, 1998.
R Leo, RS Milton, and A Kaviya. Multi agent reinforcement learning based distributed
  optimization of solar microgrid. In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Computational
  Intelligence and Computing Research, pp. 1–7. IEEE, 2014.
Jieyu Lin, Kristina Dzeparoska, Sai Qian Zhang, Alberto Leon-Garcia, and Nicolas Paper-
  not. On the robustness of cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In 2020 IEEE
  Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW), pp. 62–68. IEEE, 2020.
Fang Liu and Ness Shroff. Data poisoning attacks on stochastic bandits. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4042–4050. PMLR, 2019.
Guanlin Liu and Lifeng Lai. Efficient adversarial attacks on online multi-agent reinforcement
 learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:24401–24433, 2023.
Yuzhe Ma, Young Wu, and Xiaojin Zhu. Game redesign in no-regret game playing, 2021.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.11763.
Jeremy McMahan, Young Wu, Xiaojin Zhu, and Qiaomin Xie. Optimal attack and defense
  for reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  38(13):14332–14340, Mar. 2024. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v38i13.29346. URL https://ojs.
  aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/29346.
Dawei Qiu, Jianhong Wang, Junkai Wang, and Goran Strbac. Multi-agent reinforcement
  learning for automated peer-to-peer energy trading in double-side auction market. In
  IJCAI, pp. 2913–2920, 2021.
J Ben Rosen. Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium points for concave n-person games.
  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 520–534, 1965.
Mian Ibad Ali Shah, Abdul Wahid, Enda Barrett, and Karl Mason. Multi-agent systems
 in peer-to-peer energy trading: A comprehensive survey. Engineering Applications of
 Artificial Intelligence, 132:107847, 2024.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Shaked Shammah, and Amnon Shashua. Safe, multi-agent, reinforce-
  ment learning for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.03295, 2016.
Aizaz Sharif and Dusica Marijan. Adversarial deep reinforcement learning for improving the
  robustness of multi-agent autonomous driving policies. In 2022 29th Asia-Pacific Software
  Engineering Conference (APSEC), pp. 61–70. IEEE, 2022.
Maurice Sion. On general minimax theorems. 1958.
Tatiana Tatarenko and Maryam Kamgarpour. Bandit learning in convex non-strictly mono-
  tone games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.04258, 2020.
Gordon Tullock. Efficient rent seeking. In 40 Years of Research on Rent Seeking 1, pp.
 105–120. Springer, 2008.
J v. Neumann. Zur theorie der gesellschaftsspiele. Mathematische annalen, 100(1):295–320,
  1928.


                                             12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jibang Wu, Haifeng Xu, and Fan Yao. Multi-agent learning for iterative dominance elimi-
  nation: Formal barriers and new algorithms. In COLT, pp. 543, 2022.
Young Wu, Jeremy McMahan, Xiaojin Zhu, and Qiaomin Xie. Reward poisoning attacks on
  offline multi-agent reinforcement learning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.
  01888.
Fan Yao, Chuanhao Li, Denis Nekipelov, Hongning Wang, and Haifeng Xu. Human vs.
  generative ai in content creation competition: Symbiosis or conflict? In International
  Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2024a.
Fan Yao, Yiming Liao, Jingzhou Liu, Shaoliang Nie, Qifan Wang, Haifeng Xu, and Hongning
  Wang. Unveiling user satisfaction and creator productivity trade-offs in recommendation
  platforms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024b.
Fan Yao, Yiming Liao, Mingzhe Wu, Chuanhao Li, Yan Zhu, James Yang, Qifan Wang,
  Haifeng Xu, and Hongning Wang. User welfare optimization in recommender systems
  with competing content creators. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference
  on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2024c.
Brian Hu Zhang, Gabriele Farina, Ioannis Anagnostides, Federico Cacciamani, Stephen Mar-
  cus McAleer, Andreas Alexander Haupt, Andrea Celli, Nicola Gatti, Vincent Conitzer,
  and Tuomas Sandholm. Steering no-regret learners to a desired equilibrium. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.05221, 2023.
Ming Zhou, Jun Luo, Julian Villella, Yaodong Yang, David Rusu, Jiayu Miao, Weinan
 Zhang, Montgomery Alban, Iman Fadakar, Zheng Chen, et al. Smarts: An open-source
 scalable multi-agent rl training school for autonomous driving. In Conference on robot
 learning, pp. 264–285. PMLR, 2021.


                                            13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix to Single-Agent Poisoning Attacks Suffice to
             Ruin Multi-Agent Learning
A    Examples of Second-Order Smooth Monotone Games
In this section, we provide two explicit examples of second-order L-smooth and β-strongly
monotone games introduced in Definition 3. These examples offer a concrete sense of what
we can expect regarding the outcome of a utility poisoning attack in such games. The two
cases we will discuss are the n-person Cournot Competition Cournot (1838) and the Tullock
contest Tullock (2008) (a.k.a. resource allocation auctions with costs).
Cournot competition is an economic model describing a number of firms independently
competing on the amount of output they will produce. Each agent-i’s pure strategy xi is
the quantity of product, and the payoff is determined by the marginal    Pn return of a unit of
product which decreases w.r.t. the opponents’ total production (a−b i=1 ), and a marginal
cost ci . The utility of agent-i is given by
                                                            
                                                        n
                                                        X
                             ui (xi , x−i ) = xi a − b   xj  − ci xi .                  (14)
                                                     j=1


Tullock contest involves n agents competing for a unit amount of prize in a “winner-takes-
all” framework. Each agent i’s pure strategy is to choose an effort level xi ∈ [0, 1], and
the winning probability is proportional to each agent’s effort level. The prize is awarded to
the contestant with the highest relative effort, and the payoff of each agent is the expected
reward minus a cost given by some function of the invested effort. Specifically, the payoff
functions of agent-i is given by
                                                  x
                             ui (xi , x−i ) =    Pni     − ci (xi ),                     (15)
                                              a + j=1 xj
where a > 0 models the exogenous factor that affects the outcome of the contest, and
ci : R≥0 → R≥0 is an increasing cost function.
According to Rosen (1965), a sufficient condition to verify whether a game is β-strongly
monotone (a.k.a. β-diagonal strict concavity, i.e., β-DSC) can be summarized in the follow-
ing Lemma 2.
Lemma 2. A sufficient condition for a game G(n, {Xi }, {ui }) to be β-DSC is that
     1. Each Xi is compact and convex, and ui (xi , x−i ) is concave in xi and convex in x−i .
     2. G’s negative symmetric game Hessian defined as −H(x) = − 21 HG (x) + HG⊤ (x)

        is negative definite and its smallest eigenvalue is at least β.
And to verify the second-order L-smooth condition, we only need to directly apply Definition
3. The following two propositions formalize our claims.
Proposition 2. An n-person Cournot competition G with payoff functions defined by
Eq. (14) satisfies:
     1. each agent’s utility function ui is (a + b + ci )-Lipschitz in xi ;
                √
                 n−1
     2. uk is     2 -Lipschitz in x−k ;

     3. G is 2b-strongly monotone;
     4. the spectral norm of the G’s Hessian (defined in Eq. (4)) satisfies ρ(HG ) ≤ (n + 1)b;
     5. all agents’ utility functions are second-order 0-smooth;

Proof. Because ui is continuous     Pn in xi ,        an Lipschitz constant
                                                                     Pn      can be
maxx∈X |∇xi ui (xi , x−i )| ≤ |a − b j=1 xj − bxi − ci |. Since a − b j=1 xj ≥ 0 and
                               Pn
bxi ≥ 0, ci ≥ 0, we have |a − b j=1 xj − bxi − ci | ≤ a + b + ci .


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                              P
                                                                        a−b    j̸=k xj −ck
The best response mapping has a closed form BRk (x−k ) =                          2b             and we can verify
                                                                         √
                                          1 X ′                              n−1
         |BRk (x−k ) − BRk (x′−k )| =        b (xj − xj ) ≤                      ∥x−k − x′−k ∥.
                                          2b                                  2
                                               j̸=k
                   √
                       n−1
Therefore, uk is       2 -Lipschitz in x−k .
For strongly monotonicity, simple calculation shows the Hessian of n-person Cournot game
has the following form
                                  −Hij (x) = b(1 + δij ),                            (16)
where δij = I[i = j]. We can easily verify that H = b(I + 11⊤ ) and the smallest and largest
eigenvalues of H are 2b and (n + 1)b. Therefore, the game is 2b-strongly monotone, and
ρ(HG ) = ρ(H) = (n + 1)b.
To verify second-order smoothness, we directly compute function hi (x; δ) for agent-i from
Eq. (5), which gives
             vi (xi , x−i ) − vi (xi + δi , x−i )
                      Pn      δ                   Pn
             (a − b j=1 xj − ci − bxi ) − (a − b j=1 xj − bδ − ci − bxi − bδ)
         =                                                                                          = 2b,
                                               δ
which means for any x ∈ X and δ ̸= 0, hi (x; δ) is a constant function. Therefore, the game
is second-order smooth for any L ≥ 0.


Proposition 3. Consider an n-person Tullock contest G with payoff functions defined by
Eq. (15) in which each agent’s cost function ci is βi -strongly convex with its r-th order
derivative bounded in [−Mr , Mr ], 1 ≤ r ≤ 3. Then G satisfies:

     1. each agent’s utility function ui is a1 + M1 -Lipschitz in xi ;


              √
     2. uk is n − 1 a32βk + a21βk -Lipschitz in x−k ;

                                 a
     3. G is mini∈[n] {βi } + (a+n) 3   -strongly monotone;

     4. the spectral norm of the G’s Hessian (defined in Eq. (4)) satisfies ρ(HG ) ≤ n+1
                                                                                      a2 +
        maxi∈[n] {βi };
                                                        √      √
     5. all agents’ utility functions are second-order 4a3n + 6a4n + a23 + M3 -smooth;

Proof. We prove these claims one by one.

1. Because ui is continuous in xi , an Lipschitz constant can be
                                                      P
                                                   a + j̸=i xj
                  max |∇xi ui (xi , x−i )| = max      Pn        2
                                                                  − ∇ci
                   x∈X                       x∈X (a +   j=1 xj )
                                                         1                             1
                                           ≤            Pn           + |∇ci | ≤          + M1 .
                                               |a +      j=1 xj |                      a

2. From the implicit function theorem,
                                                                                        −1
                                                                 ∂ 2 uk (xk , x−k )              ∂ 2 uk (xk , x−k )

                       ∂ arg maxt uk (t, x−k )
     ∇x−k BRk (x−k ) =                         =−                                            ·                      .
                              ∂x−k                                      ∂x2k                         ∂xk ∂x−k
                                                                                                                  (17)


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   From Lagrange mean value theorem for multi-variable functions, there exists some y−k ∈
   X−k such that
                    BRk (x−k ) − BRk (x′−k ) = ∇⊤                     ′
                                                x−k BRk (y−k )(x−k − x−k ).

   As a result,       a Lipschitz constant for function BRk (x−k )                                                     can    be
   maxy−k ∈X−k |∇x−k BRk (y−k )|. Direct calculation shows that for any i, j,
                                                         !−3
                                      X              Xn
                 ∇ii ui (x) = −2 a +
                                         xj    a+     xi     − ∇2 ci (xi ),                                                (18)
                                                       j̸=i                      i=1
                                                              !−3
                                    Xn        n
                                              X            n
                                                           X
                    ∇j ∇i ui (x) =    xi − 2   xj − a a+   xi     .                                                        (19)
                                               i=1              j̸=i                       i=1

   Since uk is βk -strongly concave, we have |∇ii ui (xi , x−i )| ≥ βi , and |∇j ∇i ui (x)| ≤
    2    1
   a3 + a2 . Substitute them into Eq. (17) we obtain
                                            √

                                                         2        1
                         |∇x−k BRk (x−k )| ≤ n − 1           + 2       .
                                                      a 3 βk    a βk

                                       a
3. To see why G is mini∈[n] {βi } + (a+n)3   -strongly monotone, we need to show −HG is
   positive definite and then pin down its smallest eigenvalue. From Eq. (18) and Eq. (19)
   we can derive
                                      P               P                          2                           
                   n
                         !−3 2(a + i̸=1 xi ) a + i∈{1,2}     /       xi . . .      ∇ c1 (x1 )     0       ...
                                     P                    P
                             · a + i∈{1,2}   xi 2(a + i̸=2 xi ) . . .               0       ∇2 c2 (x2 ) . . .
                  X
   −HG = a +          xi                 /                                      +
                                                                                 
                                                                                      ..          ..
                                                                                                                
                                        ..                  ..             ..                             ..
                  i=1
                                         .                   .                .        .           .          .
                   n
                         !−3
                  X
         ≜ a+         xi     · M (a, x) + diag(∇2 c1 (x1 ), · · · , ∇2 cn (xn )).              (20)
                  i=1


   For any y = (y1 , · · · , yn ) ∈ Rn , we have

                                                                                                       
                             n
                             X                       X                 X                         X
      −y ⊤ M (a, x)y = 2            yi2 a +                xj  + 2             yi yj a +             xk 
                             i=1                     j̸=i                  i<j                k∈{i,j}
                                                                                               /
                                                                      2                                           !2 
                            n
                            X           X             n
                                                      X           X           Xn                         n
                                                                                                         X
                        =         yi2          xj +           xi   yj   +a    yi2 +                          yi          (21)
                            i=1         j̸=i          i=1           j̸=i                   i=1            i=1

                        ≥ a∥y∥22 .
   Therefore, λmin (−M (a, x)) ≥ a and
                                                         a                                a
                        λmin (−HG ) ≥                   Pn                 + β0 ≥               + β0 ,                       (22)
                                                (a +          i=1 xi )
                                                                       3               (a + n)3
   where β0 = mini∈[n] {βi }.
                      √       √
4. G is second-order 4a3n + 3a4n -smooth:

   Direct calculation shows that
                vi (xi , x−i ) − vi (xi + δ, x−i )
    hi (x; δ) =
                                 δ
                     1               1             xi     xi       ∇ci (xi + δ) − ∇ci (xi )
              =             +              −          − 2        +                          ,
                (A + δ)2       A(A + δ) A(A + δ)2      A (A + δ)              δ


                                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                 Pn
   where A = a + i=1 xi . From the mean value theorem for vector-valued functions Hall
   & Newell (1979), there exists y = x′ + λ(x − x′ ) such that
                           ∥hi (x; δ) − hi (x′ ; δ)∥2 ≤ ∥J(y)∥ · ∥x − x′ ∥2 ,
   where J(y) is the Jacobian matrix of hi at y, and ∥ · ∥ denotes the spectral norm of a
   matrix, defined as                             q
                             ∥M ∥ = sup ∥M x∥2 =                            σmax (M T M ).                               (23)
                                          ∥x∥2 =1

   Therefore, the smallest constant L such that G is second-order smooth is
                           ∥J(y)∥ ≤ ∥J0 ∥ + ∥J1 ∥ + ∥J2 ∥ + ∥J3 ∥ + ∥J4 ∥,                                               (24)
                                                                                 1
   where J0 , J1 , J2 , J3 , J4 are the Jacobian matrices of functions f (x) = (A+δ)2 , f (x) =

      1                xi                 xi             ∇ci (xi +δ)−∇ci (xi )
   A(A+δ) , f (x) = A(A+δ)2 , f (x) = A2 (A+δ) , f (x) =           δ           .
                                                                           For a single-valued
                                                       ⊤
   functions f , J(f ) = ∇f and thus ∥J(f )∥ = ∥∇f ∇f ∥. From straightforward calculation
   we obtain
                                          √
                            2            2 n
                 ∥J0 ∥ =          ∥x∥ ≤       ,
                         (A + δ)3         a3
                                             √
                           2A + δ           2 n
                 ∥J1 ∥ = 2           ∥x∥ ≤       ,
                         A (A + δ)2          a3
                                                                       √
                              3A2 + 4Aδ + 2δ 2           1            3 n      1
                 ∥J2 ∥ = −xi                    x  +           ei   ≤       + 3,
                                 A2 (A + δ)4         A(A + δ)2         a4     a
                                                                  √
                              3A2 + 2Aδ             1           3 n      1
                 ∥J3 ∥ = −xi 4            x +             e i ≤       + 3,
                              A (A + δ)2       A2 (A + δ)         a4    a
                 ∥J4 ∥ ≤ ∥∇3 ci ∥ ≤ M3 .


                                                 √       √
                                                 4 n    6 n   2
   Hence, the game is second order                a 3 +  a4 + a3 + M 3   -smooth.

5. Upperbound of ρ(HG ).
   From Eq. (21) it holds that
                                                                            2                                  !2 
                            n
                            X           X             n
                                                      X              X                   n
                                                                                         X             n
                                                                                                       X
        −y ⊤ M (a, x)y =          yi2          xj +         xi             yj  + a          yi2 +         yi     
                            i=1         j̸=i          i=1            j̸=i                i=1           i=1
                            "              n
                                                      #
                                           X
                          ≤ (n + 1)              xi ∥y∥22 + a(n + 1)∥y∥22
                                           i=1
                            "                         n
                                                                 !#
                                                      X
                          = (n + 1) a +                     xi        ∥y∥22 ,
                                                      i=1

   therefore, by Eq. (20) we have
                                              n+1
                        ∥y ⊤ HG y∥ ≤           Pn        ∥y∥22 + max{βi }∥y∥22
                                          (a + i=1 xi )2         i∈[n]

                                            n+1
                                        ≤       + max{βi } ∥y∥22 .
                                             a2   i∈[n]


   Hence, an upperbound of ρ(HG ) is n+1
                                      a2 + maxi∈[n] {βi }.


                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     Proofs in Section 3

In this section, we present the missing proofs from Section 3, including the proofs of Lemma
1 and Theorem 1 which fully characterize the theoretical guarantees of SUSA, and the proof
of Proposition 1 along with an extended argument regarding an additional attack success
guarantee of SUSA.
Notably, we establish these results under a broader setting where the adversary can attack
multiple agents, rather than being restricted to a single agent. Specifically, we consider
an adversary targeting a subset of agents V ⊆ [n], and for each victim agent-k ∈ V, the
adversary performs SUSA(k, δk , ∆k ) on agent-k. We specify such an utility poisoning at-
tack as the tuple (V, {δk }k∈V , {∆k }k∈V ), and we denote the corresponding adversary as
SUSA(V, {δk }k∈V , {∆k }k∈V ).
The proofs provided in this section apply to any SUSA(V, {δk }k∈V , {∆k }k∈V ), and thus also
apply to the special case when V = {k}, which is the setting considered in the main paper.
For simplicity of notations, we denote the vector δ = (δ1 , · · · , δn ) ∈ Rnd , where δi = δi if
i ∈ V, and δi = 0 if i ∈
                       / V. In the following, we restate the generalized versions of our results
in Section 3 under SUSA(V, {δk }k∈V , {∆k }k∈V ) and then present their proofs.


B.1    Proof of Lemma 1

We prove the following generalized version of Lemma 1 as follows:

Lemma 3. For any β-strongly monotone and second-order L-smooth                                     game
G(n, {Xi }ni=1 , {ui }ni=1 ) under SUSA(V, {δk }k∈V , {∆k }k∈V ),  the corrupted                   game
G̃(V, {δk }k∈V , {∆k }k∈V ) with ∥δ∥2 < β/L remains strongly monotone.


Proof. By the definition of strongly monotonicity, for any x = (x1 , · · · , xn ), x′ =
(x′1 , · · · , x′n ) ∈ X , it holds that

                     n
                     X
                       (x′i − xi )⊤ (vi (x′i , x′−i ) − vi (xi , x−i )) ≤ −β∥x′ − x∥22 ,           (25)
                     i=1


where vi (x) = ∇xi ui (x). Without loss of generality let’s assume the SUSA targets at all
agents (for a agent i ∈   / V, simply let δi = 0 and ∆i ≡ 0). Then for agent-1’s corrupted
utility function ũ1 , it holds that ṽ1 (x) = ∇x1 ũ1 (x) = v1 (x1 + δ1 , x−1 ). By the definition of
strictly monotonicity, what we need to show is that there exists a β0 > 0 such that

             n
             X
                   (x′i − xi )⊤ (vi (x′i + δi , x′−i ) − vi (xi + δi , x−i )) < −β0 ∥x′ − x∥22 .   (26)
             i=1



According to the second-order L-smooth condition, for any i ∈ [n] and δi ∈ Rd , the function
hi (x) : Rnd → Rd defined as

                                           vi (xi , x−i ) − vi (xi + δi , x−i )
                                hi (x) =                                                           (27)
                                                           ∥δi ∥

is L-Lipschitz in x. As a result, we have


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        |LHS of Eq. (25) − LHS of Eq. (26)|
         Xn
      ≤     (x′i − xi )⊤ (vi (x′i , x′−i ) − vi (x′i + δi , x′−i ) + vi (xi + δi , x−i ) − vi (xi , x−i ))
          i=1
          n
          X
      =         ∥δi ∥ · (x′i − xi )⊤ (hi (x′ ) − hi (x))
          i=1
          Xn
      ≤         ∥δi ∥ · ∥x′i − xi ∥ · ∥hi (x′ ) − hi (x)∥
          i=1
          n
          X
      ≤         ∥δi ∥ · ∥x′i − xi ∥ · L∥x′ − x∥
          i=1
                         n
                         X
      =L∥x′ − x∥ ·             ∥δi ∥ · ∥x′i − xi ∥
                         i=1
                           n
                                           ! 12        n
                                                                            ! 12
                           X                           X
      ≤L∥x′ − x∥ ·                ∥δi ∥2                     ∥x′i − xi ∥2
                            i=1                        i=1
                             n
                                            ! 12
                             X
      ≤L∥x′ − x∥2 ·                ∥δi ∥2          .
                             i=1

        Pn           1   β                                            Pn          1
Since     i=1 ∥δi ∥
                   2 2
                       < L , there must exist a β0 ∈ (0, β] such that  i=1 ∥δi ∥
                                                                                2 2
                                                                                    ≤ β−β
                                                                                       L .
                                                                                          0


As a result, the difference between the LHS of Eq. (25) and the LHS of Eq. (26) does
not exceed (β − β0 )∥x′ − x∥2 . Hence, Eq. (26) holds and the corrupted game G̃ remains
β0 -strongly monotone.



B.2    Proof of Theorem 1

We prove the following generalized version of Theorem 1:
Theorem 3 (Vulnerability of MAL algorithms for strongly monotone games under
SUSA(V, {δk }k∈V , {∆k }k∈V )). Consider a SUSA(V, {δk }k∈V , {∆k }k∈V ) to a β-strongly
monotone game G(n, {Xi }ni=1 , {ui }ni=1 ) (with unique NE x∗ ). Suppose the victim agent-k’s
utility function uk is second-order L0 -smooth for all k ∈ V. All agents run an (α, p)-MAL
algorithm A for T rounds. If the following conditions are satisfied:
      1. ∥δ∥2 < β/L0 ,
      2. ∆(x−k , δ) = −uk (BRk (x−k ), x−k ) + uk (BRk (x−k ) − δ, x−k ), ∀k ∈ V, where
         BRk (x−k ) ≜ arg maxxk ∈Xk uk (xk , x−k ) is the best response mapping of agent-k,
      3. ui is L1 -Lipschitz in xi , ∀i ∈ [n] and BRk is L2 -Lipschitz in x−k , ∀k ∈ V.
Then, the resulting dynamics induced by A converges to some x̃∗ , such that
      1. The deviation to the original NE satisfies
                                      ∥x̃∗ − x∗ ∥2 ≥ β∥δ∥2 /                       sup   {ρ(HG (x))},        (28)
                                                                            x∈[x∗ ,x̃∗ ]

          where ρ(HG (x)) represents the spectral norm of the game’s Hessian HG at x.
      2. The expected total budget satisfies
                                       " T        #
                                         X                      pα
                                     E       |ct | ≤ C0 · T 1− p+1 ,                                         (29)
                                                             t=1


                                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          where the constant C0 = [CL1 (4L2 + 5) + 2] · |V|.

Proof. From Lemma 3 we know that the corrupted game G̃ is strongly monotone and thus
also has a unique NE x̃∗ . We first give an estimation of the distance between x∗ and x̃∗ .
Define the best response mapping fi (x−i ) = arg maxt ui (t, x−i ) for any i ∈ [n]. Then by
the definition of NE, x∗ = (x∗1 , · · · , x∗n ) is the unique stationary point of the system
                              
                              
                                 x1 = f1 (x2 , x3 , · · · , xn ),
                              x2 = f2 (x1 , x3 , · · · , xn ),
                              
                                  ..                                                         (30)
                              
                              
                                  .
                                   xn = fn (x1 , x2 , · · · , xn−1 ),
                              

while x̃∗ = (x̃∗1 , · · · , x̃∗n ) is the unique stationary point of the system
                                      
                                      
                                       x1 = f1 (x2 , x3 , · · · , xn ) − δ1 ,
                                      x2 = f2 (x1 , x3 , · · · , xn ) − δ2 ,
                                      
                                        ..                                                                   (31)
                                      
                                      
                                        .
                                         xn = fn (x1 , x2 , · · · , xn−1 ) − δn ,
                                      

where       δi          =         0       if       i        ∈/        V.                If    we   let  F (x)    =
(f1 (x2 , x3 , · · · , xn ), f2 (x1 , x3 , · · · , xn ), · · · , fn (x1 , x2 , · · · , xn−1 )) as an n-valued func-
tion and G(x) = F (x) − x, Eq. (30) and Eq. (31) can be further expressed as
                                         G(x∗ ) = 0,
                                         G(x̃∗ ) = (δ1 , δ2 , · · · , δn ).

When G is twice differentiable, from the mean value theorem for vector valued functions
(Hall & Newell, 1979), there exists λ ∈ [0, 1] such that
                  ∥G(x∗ ) − G(x̃∗ )∥ ≤ max ρ(J(λx̃∗ + (1 − λ)x∗ )) · ∥x∗ − x̃∗ ∥,                            (32)
                                            λ∈[0,1]

where J(x) is the Jacobian of G at x, and ρ(J) ≜ sup∥u∥2 =1 ∥Ju∥2 is the spectral norm of
J. Let ρmax (J) ≜ maxλ∈[0,1] (ρ(J(λx̃∗ + (1 − λ)x∗ ))), we immediately obtain
                                        ∥x∗ − x̃∗ ∥ ≥ ∥δ∥/ρmax (J).                                          (33)

Next we estimate the upper bound of ρ(J). In fact, from implicit function theorem, we can
derive the (i, j)-th element of J as
      Ji,i = −1, 1 ≤ i ≤ n,
                                                          2                  −1 2
           ∂fi (x−i )   ∂ arg maxt ui (t, x−i )            ∂ ui (xi , x−i )      ∂ ui (xi , x−i )
      Ji,j =          =                           =−                           ·                  .
              ∂xj               ∂xj                             ∂x2i               ∂xi ∂xj
                                  h 2                i
Note that the n-by-n matrix H = ∂ u∂x   i (xi ,x−i )
                                           i ∂x j
                                                       is exactly the Hessian of G (i.e., HG ), and
the diagonal matrix D = diag(HG ). Thus, the Jacobian J can be represented as
                                                 J = D−1 HG .                                                (34)
Since G is β-strongly monotone, each diagonal element of D is lower bounded by β > 0.
Hence, the spectral norm of J can be upper bounded by
                                                          ρmax (HG )
                                           ρmax (J) ≤                ,                                       (35)
                                                              β
and
                                      ∥x∗ − x̃∗ ∥ ≥ β∥δ∥/ρmax (HG ),
where ρmax (HG ) ≜ maxλ∈[0,1] (ρ(HG (λx̃∗ + (1 − λ)x∗ ))).


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, we derive a upper bound of the total corruption budget needed by an SUSA adver-
sary. Since A is an (α, p)-MAL algorithm and G̃ is strictly monotone, the resulting playing
sequence {xt } converges to the unique NE of G̃ with a polynomial rate specified by
                                          E[∥xt − x̃∗ ∥p2 ] ≤ C p · t−pα .
Let γ be any number such that 0 < γ < pα. From Chebyshev’s inequality, with probability
                                 p
at least 1 − t−pα+γ , ∥xt − x̃∗ ∥2 ≤ C p · t−γ , and the following bounds also hold:
                                                p
                                  ∥xt,i − x̃∗i ∥2 ≤ C p · t−γ , ∀i ∈ [n], t ∈ [T ].                               (36)

Denote the attacking cost at round t for a agent i ∈ V as ct,i , which is given by ct,i =
|ũi (xt,i , xt,−i ) − ui (xt,i , xt,−i )|. By the choice of ∆i , it holds that
                                                    ˜ i (x−i ), x−i ), ∀x−i ∈ X−i .
                         max ũi (xi , x−i ) = ui (BR                                                             (37)
                         xi ∈Xi

Hence, we can estimate an upper bounded of ct,i as the following:
 ct,i = |ũi (xt,i , xt,−i ) − ui (xt,i , xt,−i )|
      ≤ |ui (xt,i , xt,−i ) − ui (BR˜ i (xt,−i ), xt,−i )| + |ũi (xt,i , xt,−i ) − ui (BR
                                                                                         ˜ i (xt,−i ), xt,−i )|
                                  ˜ i (xt,−i ), xt,−i )| + |ũi (xt,i , xt,−i ) − max ũi (xt,i , xt,−i )|. (38)
     = |ui (xt,i , xt,−i ) − ui (BR
                                                                                      xi ∈Xi


Since ui is L1 -Lipschitz in xi , and BR     ˜ i (·) = BR(·) − δi is L2 -Lipschitz, the first part of of
RHS of Eq. (38) can be upper bounded by
                             ˜ i (xt,−i ), xt,−i )| ≤ L1 ∥xt,i − BR
  |ui (xt,i , xt,−i ) − ui (BR                                    ˜ i (xt,−i )∥
                                                                                  ˜ i (x∗ ) − BR
                                                       = L1 ∥xt,i − x̃∗i ∥ + L1 ∥BR            ˜ i (xt,−i )∥
                                                                                        −i
                                                                      ∗              ∗
                                                       ≤ L1 ∥xt,i − x̃i ∥ + L1 L2 ∥x−i − xt,−i ∥
                                                       ≤ CL1 (1 + L2 )t−γ/p .                                     (39)

For the second part, we have
                |ũi (xt,i , xt,−i ) − max ũi (xt,i , xt,−i )|
                                       xi ∈Xi
              ≤|ũi (xt,i , xt,−i ) − ũi (x∗i , x∗−i )| + |ũi (x∗i , x∗−i ) − max ũi (xt,i , xt,−i )|.         (40)
                                                                             xi ∈Xi


Because ũi (xi , x−i ) = ui (xi + δi , x−i ) − ui (BRi (x−i ), x−i ) + ui (BRi (x−i ) − δi , x−i ) and
ui , BRi are L1 , L2 -Lipschitz continuous, ũi is (L1 + 2L1 (1 + L2)) = L1 (2L2 + 3)-Lipschitz
continuous. Therefore, the first part of the RHS of Eq. (40) can be upper bounded by

                         |ũi (xt,i , xt,−i ) − ũi (x∗i , x∗−i )| ≤ CL1 (2L2 + 3)t−γ/p .                         (41)

To upper bound the second term of the RHS of Eq. (40), just observe that
  max ũi (xi , x−i ) = max ui (xi + δi , x−i ) − ui (BRi (x−i ), x−i ) + ui (BRi (x−i ) − δi , x−i )
 xi ∈Xi                   xi ∈Xi
                       = ui (BRi (x−i ), x−i ) − ui (BRi (x−i ), x−i ) + ui (BRi (x−i ) − δi , x−i )
                       = ui (BRi (x−i ) − δi , x−i ).                                                (42)

Using Eq. (42), we can obtain

                          ũi (x∗i , x∗−i ) − max ũi (xt,i , xt,−i )
                                             xi ∈Xi


                      = max ũi (xi , x∗−i ) − max ũi (xt,i , xt,−i )
                          xi ∈Xi                      xi ∈Xi

                      = ui (BRi (x∗−i ) − δi , x∗−i ) − ui (BRi (xt,−i ) − δi , xt,−i )
                      ≤L1 (∥BRi (x∗−i ) − BRi (xt,−i )∥ + ∥x∗−i − xt,−i ∥)
                      ≤CL1 (L2 + 1)t−γ/p .                                                                        (43)


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Assembling Eq. (39), Eq. (41), Eq. (40) and Eq. (43) together, from Eq. (38) we conclude
that with probability at least 1 − t−pα+γ , it holds that
               ct,i ≤ CL1 (1 + L2 )t−γ/p + CL1 (2L2 + 3)t−γ/p + CL1 (L2 + 1)t−γ/p
                   = CL1 (4L2 + 5)t−γ/p .                                                                    (44)

On the other hand, in the event (with a probability at most t−pα+γ ) that Eq. Eq. (36) do
not hold, we can use the fact that ui ∈ [0, M ] to give a trivial upper bound of ct,i as follows:
ct,i = |ũ1 (xt,i , xt,−i ) − u1 (xt,i , xt,−i )|
     = |ui (xt,i + δi , xt,−i ) − ui (BRi (xt,−i ), xt,−i ) + ui (BRi (xt,−i ) − δi , xt,−i ) − ui (xt,i , xt,−i )|
     ≤ |ui (xt,i + δi , xt,−i ) − ui (BRi (xt,−i ), xt,−i )| + |ui (BRi (xt,−i ) − δi , xt,−i ) − ui (xt,i , xt,−i )|
     ≤ 2M.                                                                                                (45)

Putting Eq. (44) and Eq. (45) together, the expected corruption on agent-i the adversary
needs at round t can be thus upper bounded by
                     E[ct,i ] ≤ (1 − t−pα+γ ) · CL1 (4L2 + 5)t−γ/p + t−pα+γ · 2M
                                                                pα
                             ≤ [CL1 (4L2 + 5) + 2M ]t− p+1 ,
                                                         2
                                             p
and the optimal order is achieved when γ = p+1 ·α. As a result, the total expected corruption
is upper bounded by
                     " n T         #
                       XX                                              pα
                   E           ct,i ≤ [CL1 (4L2 + 5) + 2M ]|V| · T 1− p+1 .              (46)
                            i=1 t=1


B.3    A General Argument of Attacking Ability and Proof of Proposition 1

We first provide an argument regarding the relationship between δ and x̃∗ − x∗ in gen-
eral games, and then present the proof of Proposition 1, which rigorously establishes the
corresponding results for the case of Cournot competition.
As pointed out in the proof of Theorem 1, the converged point x̃∗ = (x̃∗1 , · · · , x̃∗n ) under
SUSA(V, {δk }k∈[n] , {∆k }k∈[n] ) can be described by the solution to the following system:
                            
                            
                             x1 = f1 (x2 , x3 , · · · , xn ) − δ1 ,
                            x2 = f2 (x1 , x3 , · · · , xn ) − δ2 ,
                            
                              ..                                                            (47)
                            
                            
                              .
                               xn = fn (x1 , x2 , · · · , xn−1 ) − δn ,
                            

where the function fi (x−i ) = arg maxt ui (t, x−i ) is the best response mapping for agent i.
And x∗ = (x∗1 , · · · , x∗n ) is the solution to
                                    
                                    
                                     x1 = f1 (x2 , x3 , · · · , xn ),
                                    x2 = f2 (x1 , x3 , · · · , xn ),
                                    
                                      .                                                  (48)
                                    ..
                                    
                                    
                                      xn = fn (x1 , x2 , · · · , xn−1 ).
                                    

Let F (x) = (f1 (x2 , x3 , · · · , xn ), f2 (x1 , x3 , · · · , xn ), · · · , fn (x1 , x2 , · · · , xn−1 )) as an n-
valued function and G(x) = F (x) − x, we have
                                         G(x∗ ) = 0,
                                         G(x̃∗ ) = (δ1 , δ2 , · · · , δn ).

For a small perturbation ∆x , we can approximate the system G around x∗ with a linearized
version:


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    G(x∗ + ∆x ) = G(x∗ ) + J(G(x∗ ))∆x + O(∥∆x ∥2 ).                      (49)
                                       ∗       ∗
If we view the target point to steer x̃ as x + ∆x , it holds that
δ = G(x̃∗ ) = G(x∗ )+J(G(x∗ ))(x̃∗ −x∗ )+O(∥∆x ∥2 ) = J(G(x∗ ))(x̃∗ −x∗ )+O(∥(x̃∗ −x∗ )∥2 ).
                                                                                       (50)
From Eq. (34) we know that J(G(x∗ )) = D−1 (x∗ )HG (x∗ ), where HG (x∗ ) is the game
Hessian at x = x∗ , and D−1 (x∗ ) is the block diagonal matrix with each block element
being the inverse Hessian of ui w.r.t. x∗i . Therefore, we argue the following in the sense of
approximation:

     1. if the adversary wants to induce a particular deviation direction v, it can simply
        pick δ to be D−1 (x∗ )HG (x∗ )v;
     2. if the goal is to induce largest deviation as possible, it can pick δ to align with the
        direction corresponding to the smallest eigenvalues of D−1 (x∗ )HG (x∗ ).

And for the special case when SUSA only has one victim agent k, it need to pick
                               δk = diag([∇−1     n
                                           ii ui ]i=1 )HG [:, k]v                         (51)
                                           ∗   ∗
in order to induce an NE shift v = x̃ − x , and for any δ, it will cause an NE shifting
characterized by
                                v = HG−1 [:, k][∇kk uk ]δ,                         (52)
which echoes our argument after Theorem 1. In addition, since β-strongly monotonicity
implies that each diagonal element of D is lower bounded by β > 0, we know the smallest
eigenvalue of J can be upper bounded by
                                      ρmin (HG )        β
                         ρmin (J) ≤               =             ≤ 1,                      (53)
                                      mink∈[n] βk   mink∈[n] βk
where ρmin (HG ) = β because G is β-strongly monotone, and βk is a constant such that uk
is βk -strongly concave, meaning βk ≥ β. As a result, we have
                         ∥x̃∗ − x∗ ∥ = ρmin (J(G(x∗ )))−1 ∥δ∥ ≥ ∥δ∥.                      (54)

We note that such an argument is not rigorous and only holds in the sense of approximation,
as we omit the high-order term O(∥∆x ∥2 ) in Eq. (49). However, this argument becomes a
rigorous proof for Cournot competition, as the Jacobian of system G becomes a constant
matrix and the high-order term O(∥∆x ∥2 ) in Eq. (49) disappears.

Proof. For Cournot competition, since the Jacobian of G is a constant matrix and we do
not have the high-order term O(∥∆x ∥2 ) in Eq. (49). Hence, from Eq. (49) we have

                            G(x∗ + ∆x ) = G(x∗ ) + D−1 HG ∆x ,                            (55)
which means that for any particular δ, it will induce
                                      x̃∗ − x∗ = HG−1 Dδ.                                 (56)
As a result, to induce a particular NE deviation direction v, we only need to pick δ =
D−1 HG v. To induce the largest possible deviation distance ∥x̃∗ − x∗ ∥, it need to pick δ
such that δ aligns with the direction corresponding to the largest eigenvalues of HG−1 D,
which is also the direction corresponding to the smallest eigenvalues of D−1 HG .

C    Technical Details for Section 4
In this section, we provide the technical details related to Section 4 that we do not have
space to include in the main paper. These include essential details for Algorithm 1 and 3,
as well as the proofs of Theorem 2, Proposition 4, and Corollary 1.


                                               23
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     C.1    Essential Details for Algorithm 1

     In this subsection, we outline all the necessary details for Algorithm 1. The algorithm
     requires selecting a self-concordant barrier Ri (see Definition 6) and using a specific prox-
                      (t)  (t)
     mapping, PRi (xi , ṽi , ηt , λi , β) (see Definition 7), to update the action for the subsequent
     round.

     Algorithm 1: MD-SCB under Utility Poisoning Attack (Ba et al., 2024)
                                −ϕ
  Input: step-size ηt = t2d , weight λi > 0, game’s strongly concave parameter β > 0,
           and self-concordant barrier Ri : int(Xi ) → R
                    (t)
1 Initialize: Let xi    = arg minxi ∈Xi Ri (xi ) for all i ∈ [n]
2 for t ∈ [T ] do
3     for i ∈ [n] do
                (t)             (t)                    1
4         Set Ai ← (∇2 Ri (xi ) + ηt β(t+1)
                                         λi     Idi )− 2
                                 (t)
5           Draw direction zi uniformly from unit sphere Sdi
                          (t)  (t)   (t) (t)
6           Play action x̂i ← xi + Ai zi
                    (t)                                         (t)
7       Receive µ̃ĩ ← µĩ (x̂t ) + ct,ĩ (x̂t ) for ĩ ∈ Ĩt , µ̃i ← µi (x̂t ) for i ∈ [n] \ Ĩt
8       for i ∈ [n] do
                                   (t)            (t)   (t)        (t)
9          Compute gradient ṽi ← di µ̃i (Ai )−1 zi
                              (t+1)                 (t)   (t)
10         Update action xi          ← PRi (xi , ṽi , ηt , λi , β)

     Definition 6 (Self-concordance). A function R : int(A) → R is self-concordant if it satisfies

           1. R is three times continuously differentiable, convex, and approaches infinity along
              any sequence of points approaching the boundary of int(A).
                                                                                                3
           2. For every h ∈ Rd and x ∈ int(A), |∇3 R(x)[h, h, h]| ≤ 2 h⊤ ∇2 R(x)h 2 holds,
                                              3
              where |∇3 R(x)[h, h, h] := ∂t1∂∂tR2 ∂t3
                                                      (x + t1 h + t2 h + t3 h)|t1 =t2 =t3 =0 .

     In addition to these two conditions, if for every h ∈ Rd and x ∈ int(A), |∇R(x)⊤ h ≤
       1               1
     ν 2 (h⊤ ∇2 R(x)h) 2 | for a positive real number ν, R is ν-self-concordant.
     Definition 7 (Specific Prox-mapping). The prox-mapping exploited in Algorithm 1 is de-
     fined as
                                                                ηβ(t + 1)
                 PR (x, v̂, λ, η) = arg min⟨v̂, x − x′ ⟩ +                ∥x − x′ ∥22 + DR (x′ , x),
                                        x′ ∈x                      2λ
     where DR (x′ , x) is the Bregman divergence that measures the difference between the values
     of a convex R at two points, x and x′ , combined with the local linear approximation of R
     around x, described by the following equation
                                DR (x′ , x) = R(x′ ) − R(x) − ⟨∇R(x), x′ − x⟩.

     C.2    Proof of Theorem 2

     Theorem (Theorem 2 restated). Consider an adversary that attacks a set of agents
                                                      Pt P                            ρ
     Ĩt at round t with a total budget satisfying      j=1     ĩ∈Ĩj |cj,ĩ | ≤ O(t ) for all t and
                                                                                 1 −ϕ
     some ρ ∈ [0, 1]. By choosing a learning rate sequence ηt = 2d t  , for sufficiently
                                                                                              ∗ 2

     largen T the last-iterate convergence rateo of Algorithm 1 satisfies E ∥x̂T −           2(ρ−1)≤
                                                                                            x  ∥ 2
                                        1
     max O(dT ϕ−1 ), O(dT −ϕ ), O(dT ρ− 2 (ϕ+1) ) . Specifically, E ∥x̂T − x∗ ∥22 ≤ O dT 3


     can be achieved by choosing ϕ = 23 (ρ + 12 ).

     Proof. The proof outlined below is motivated by the observation that we can quantify the
     bias caused by adversarial attack in utility observation in the a Simultaneous Perturbation


                                                           24
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Stochastic Approximation (SPSA) estimator, which shares a similar spirit to the gradient
  estimation under corruption lemma in Cheng et al. (2024). In particular, we can extend
  Lemma 3.5 in Ba et al. (2024) to incorporate adversarial attacks as follows.
  Lemma 4 (Extended Lemma 3.5 in (Ba et al., 2024)). Suppose that µi is a concave function
  and Ai ∈ Rdi ×di is an convertible matrix for each i ∈ [n], we define the smoothed version
  of µi with respect to Ai by µ̂i (x) = Ewi ∼Bdi Ez−i ∼Q Sdj [µi (xi + Ai wi ; x̂−i )] where Sdi is
                                                                   j̸=i

  a di dimensional unit sphere, Bdi is a di -dimensional unit ball and x̂i = xi + Ai zi for all
  i ∈ [n]. Then, the following statement hold true
                               ∇i µ̂i (x) + bi = E[di µi (x̂i ; x̂−i )(Ai )−1 zi |x],
  where bi = di E[ci (x̂i ; x̂−i )(Ai )−1 zi |x].
  Remark 2. The key difference between utility shifting attack and random noise is bi ̸= 0.
  This is because the corruption ci (x̂i ; x̂−i ) depends on the randomly sampled vector zi through
  x̂i , which makes
                      E[ci (x̂i ; x̂−i )(Ai )−1 zi |x] ̸= E[ci (x̂i ; x̂−i )(Ai )−1 |x]E[zi |x].
  Thus, we need to control the cumulative impact of the bias in gradient caused by adversarial
  attack.

  We then carry this bias bi throughout the analysis, closely following the original proof
  developed by Ba et al. (2024). Finally, we derive a result demonstrating how the decreasing
  speed of the learning rate affects convergence and its associated robustness to adversarial
  attacks.
  To prepare for the proof, we first extend the Lemma 2.12 and Lemma 3.10 in Ba et al.
  (2024) to incorporate adversarial attacks.

  Lemma 5 (Extended Lemma 2.12 in (Ba et al., 2024)). Suppose that the iterate {x(t) }t≥1
  is generated by Algorithm 2 and let each corrupted utility value µ̃t satisfy that |µ̃t (x)| ≤ 1
                              1
  for all x ∈ X and 0 < ηt ≤ 2d , we have
                   ηt β(t + 1) (t+1)                     ηt β(t + 1)
  DR (p, xt+1 )+              ∥x     −p∥2 ≤ DR (p, xt )+             ∥xt −p∥2 +2ηt2 ∥A(t) ṽ t ∥2 +ηt ⟨ṽ t , x(t) −p⟩,
                        2                                     2
  where p ∈ X and the sequence {ηt }t≥1 is assumed to be non-increasing.


  Algorithm 2: Single Agent Mirror Descent Self-Concordant Barrier with Bandit Feed-
  back under Utility Shifting Attack
  Input: step size ηt > 0, module β > 0, and barrier R : int(X ) → R
                 (1)
1 Initialize x       = arg mina∈X R(x)
2 for t ∈ [T ] do

3     set A(t) ← (∇2 R(x(t) ) + ηt β(t + 1)Id )−1/2
4     draw z (t) ∼ Sd
5     play x̂(t) ← A(t) z (t)
6     receive µ̃(t) ← µ(t) (x̂(t) ) + ct (x̂(t) )
7     set ṽ (t) ← v̂ (t) + dct (x̂(t) )(A(t) )−1 z (t) , v̂ t = nµ(t) (x̂(t) )(A(t) )−1 z (t)
8     update x(t+1) ← PR (x(t) , ṽ (t) , ηt )

  Remark 3. Algorithm 2 is the single agent version of Algorithm 1. The proof Lemma 5 is
  similar to the proof in Appendix A of the paperBa et al. (2024), with a simple modification
  for λ(x(t) , g) = ηt ∥ṽ (t) ∥x(t) ,∗ = dηt |µ̃(t) (x̂(t) )|∥z (t) ∥2 ≤ dηt ≤ 21 , which still holds.

  Lemma 6 (Extended Lemma 3.10 in Ba et al. (2024)). Suppose that the iterate {x(t) }t≥1
                                                                                        (t)
  is generated by Algorithm 1 and let each corrupted utility value µ̃ti satisfy that |µ̃i (x)| ≤ 1


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            1
for all x ∈ X and 0 < ηt ≤ 2d , we have
                                                                                !
X                  (t+1)    ηt β(t + 1)              X       (t+1)
                                                                                        X                     (t)
        λi DR (p, xi     )+                                ∥xi     − pi ∥2          ≤           λi DR (pi , xi )
                                        2
i∈[n]                                                i∈N                                i∈[n]
                                                                                 
  ηt β(t + 1)  X (t)                   X      (t) (t)
                                                                 X       (t)  (t)
+                ∥xi − pi ∥2  + 2ηt2    λi ∥Ai ṽi ∥2  + ηt    λi ⟨ṽi , xi − pi ⟩ ,
       2
                     i∈[n]                                     i∈[n]                                  i∈[n]

where pi ∈ Xi and the sequence {ηt }t≥1 is assumed to be non-increasing.

Now, we will prove Theorem 2. Taking the expectation of both sides for equation proved in
Lemma 6 conditioned on x(t) , we have
                                                                                          
              X                 (t+1)           ηt β(t + 1)     X        (t+1)
         E        λi DR (p, xi       )|xt  +              E         ∥xi        − pi ∥2 |xt  ≤
                                                     2
             i∈[n]                                              i∈[n]
                                                                       
          X                 (t)      η t β(t + 1)    X      (t)
               λi DR (pi , xi ) +                        ∥xi − pi ∥2 
                                           2
         i∈[n]                                      i∈[n]
                                                                                        
                                  (t) (t)                              (t)   (t)
                      X                                     X
         + 2ηt2 E         λi ∥Ai ṽi ∥2 |xt  + ηt E           λi ⟨ṽi , xi − pi ⟩|xt  .
                             i∈[n]                                          i∈[n]

                              (t)
By the definition of ṽi             and using Lemma 3.5 in Ba et al. (2024), we have
                                                          (t) (t)
                                                   E(∥Ai v̂i ∥2 |xt ) ≤ d2i .
In addition, using Lemma 3.5 in Ba et al. (2024) again and the Young’s inequality, we have
                                                                         
                                                      2

     (t)  (t)

                                       (t)        λi li  X         (t)        β   (t)         (t)⊤ (t)
E ⟨v̂i , xi − pi ⟩|xt ≤ ⟨∇i µi (xt ), xi − pi ⟩ +           (σmax (Ai ))2  +    ∥x − pi ∥2 + bi (xi − pi ),
                                                  2β                          2λi i
                                                                                i∈[n]
                                                                            h         i
                      (t)                         (t)                     (t)    (t)      (t)
where we have bi            equals the following bi = ni E ct,i (x̂(t) )(Ai )−1 zi |xt . bi ̸= 0, this
                                                    (t)
is because ct,i (x̂) is a function of zi . Since ∇2 Ri (x) is positive definite for all x ∈ X and
                                                                                                     
    X         (t)   (t)
                                     X
                                                     (t)  (t)               1          X         X
                                                                                                     2  2
E      λi ⟨ṽi , xi − pi ⟩|xt  ≤       λi ⟨∇i µi (x ), xi − pi ⟩ +                     λi     λ i li 
                                                                     2ηt β 2 (t + 1)
    i∈[n]                                      i∈[n]                                                                i∈[n]      i∈[n]

  β   (t)             X
                                (t)⊤     (t)
+     ∥xi − pi ∥2 +         λi bi (xi − pi )
  2
                      i∈[n]
                                         
         1          X          X
                                      2 2      β   (t)        2
                                                                   X
                                                                           (t)⊤   (t)
                                                                                                X                   (t)
≤                    λ i
                                  λ i l i   −    ∥x i − pi ∥    +  λ i b i    (xi   − p i ) +   λi ⟨∇i µi (pi ), xi − pi ⟩.
  2ηt β 2 (t + 1)                               2
                        i∈[n]            i∈[n]                                             i∈[n]                            i∈[n]

In this way, we have
                                                                                                                      
     X                  (t+1)      ηt+1  β(t   + 1)      X       (t+1)
                                                                                              X                    (t)
E        λi DRi (pi , xi      ) +                    E       ∥xi      − pi ∥2  ≤ ηt E          λi ⟨∇i ui (p), xi − pi ⟩
                                             2
    i∈[n]                                                i∈[n]                               i∈[n]
                                                                                        
        X                    (t)    ηt βt  X (t)                                X
 + E        λi DRi (pi , xi ) +           E         ∥xi − pi ∥2  + 2ηt2           d2i λi 
                                      2
       i∈[n]                                    i∈[n]                           i∈[n]
                                                                               
          1        X               X                      X        (t)⊤  (t)
 + 2                     λi        λ2i ℓ2i  + ηt E        λi bi (xi − pi ) .
   2β (t + 1)
                     i∈[n]             i∈[n]                        i∈[n]



                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Summing up the above inequality over t = 1, 2, . . . , T − 1, we have
                                                                                                          
                                                                   T −1
    X                   (t)      η T βT       X (t)                 X             X                    (t)
E       λi DRi (pi , xi ) +            E        ∥xi − pi ∥2  ≤        ηt E        λi ⟨∇i ui (p), xi − pi ⟩
                                     2                              t=1
   i∈[n]                                     i∈[n]                               i∈[n]
                                                                             
                                                                                     −1
                                                        !                          T
                                                                                            !
   X                   (1)     η1 β X (1)                         X                X
+       λi DRi (pi , xi ) +                 ∥xi − pi ∥2 + 2           d2i λi          ηt2
                                2                                                  t=1
  i∈[n]                                i∈N                       i∈[n]
                                                                                          
                                           −1
                                         T
                                                    ! T −1
    1  X   X 2 2 X 1                                X          X          (t)⊤   (t)
+ 2            λi             λi ℓi                   +     ηt E       λi bi (xi − pi )
  2β                                     t=1
                                              t+1       t=1
            i∈[n]         i∈[n]                                           i∈[n]

We should notice that for each round, there is freedom for the adversary to choose who
to attack. To be consistent with the lower bound, in this upper bound, we assume that
the adversary consistently choose i := ĩ to attack. Before proceeding afterwards, now let’s
analyze the cumulative impact of bias on the convergence of action profile. Notice that for
          (t)
i ̸= ĩ, bi = 0. Therefore we can use Cauchy Schwartz to bound the following inequality
                                 
   T −1                                   p TX −1
                      (t)⊤ (t)                     3/2 √
   X            X                                                                            p
         ηt E    λi bi (xi − pi ) ≤ C̃ ′ β      ηt     t + 1|ct,ĩ (x̂t )|, C̃ ′ = C̃dB max λi ,
                                                                                                        i∈[n]
   t=1          i∈[n]                                     t=1


                                       of Xi . In particular, C̃ is the constant such that for
where B = maxi∈[n] Bi , Bi is the radius
                          (t)
all t, σmax ∇2 Rĩ (xĩ ) + ηt β(t+1)  λĩ   Idĩ ≤ C̃ ηt β(t+1)
                                                            λĩ   . Therefore, we have
                                                                                                              
                                                                         T −1
     X                   (t)       η  T βT         X (t)                 X            X                    (t)
E        λi DRi (pi , xi ) +               E         ∥xi − pi ∥2  ≤       ηt E        λi ⟨∇i ui (p), xi − pi ⟩
                                        2                                t=1
    i∈[n]                                         i∈[n]                              i∈[n]
                                                                                 
                                                                                          −1
                                                                                        T
                                                                                                   !
    X                   (1)     η1 β  X (1)                            X               X
+        λi DRi (pi , xi ) +                     ∥xi − pi ∥2  + 2          d2i λi           ηt2
                                  2                                                     t=1
   i∈[n]                                   i∈[n]                       i∈[n]
                                    
                                               −1                     −1
                                             T
                                                          !
     1      X             X                  X       1            p TX     3/2 √
+ 2            λi           λ2i ℓ2i                     + C̃ ′ β     ηt       t + 1|ct,ĩ (x̂t )|.
    2β                                       t=1
                                                   t +  1            t=1
            i∈[n]         i∈[n]
           hP                            i
                                    (t)
Since E      i∈[n] λ i D Ri
                            (pi , x i   )  > 0, we have the following equation
                                                                                    
                                          T −1
     X (t)                          2     X            X                    (t)
E        ∥xi − pi ∥2  ≤                      ηt E        λi ⟨∇i ui (p), xi − pi ⟩
                                ηT βT t=1
    i∈[n]                                             i∈[n]
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                               −1
                                                                                                            T
                                                                                                                      !
      2     X                     (1)        η1     X       (1)        2          4     X
                                                                                                 2 
                                                                                                             X
                                                                                                                    2
 +               λi DRi (pi , xi ) +                      ∥xi − pi ∥        +                   di λ i             ηt
    ηT βT                                   ηT T                                ηT βT                        t=1
           i∈[n]                                    i∈[n]                                 i∈[n]
                                         
                                                 T −1                               −1
                                                             !                    T
       2  X   X 2 2 X 1                                            2                3/2 √
                                                                                  X
                                                                                ′
 +      3
                     λ i              λ  ℓ
                                       i i                      +      √     C̃        ηt     t + 1|ct,ĩ (x̂t )|.
    ηT β T                                       t=1
                                                       t+1         ηT βT          t=1
                 i∈[n]           i∈[n]
                                                                                                                  (57)
                                (1)                                                (1)
By the initialization xi = arg minx∈X Ri (x), we have ∇Ri (xi ) = 0 which implies that
           (1)                 (1)
DRi (pi , xi ) = Ri (pi ) − R(xi ). Then, let us inspect each coordinate of a unique Nash
               ∗
equilibrium x and set p coordinate by coordinate in 57; indeed, we consider the following
two cases:

         • A point x∗i ∈ Xi satisfies that πx1 (x∗i ) ≤ 1 − √1T . By Lemma 2.4 (Ba et al., 2024),
                                      (1)                      (1)
           we have DRi (x∗i , xi ) = Ri (x∗i )−Ri (xi ) ≤ νi log(T ). In this case, we set pi = x∗i .


                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • A point x∗i ∈ Xi satisfies that πx1 (x∗i ) > 1 − √1T . Thus, we can find x̄i ∈ Xi such
         that ∥x̄i − x∗i ∥ = O( √1T ) and πx1 (x̄i ) ≤ 1 − √1T . By Lemma 2.4 (Ba et al., 2024),
                                    (1)                            (1)
            we have DRi (x̄i , xi ) = Ri (x̄i ) − Ri (xi ) ≤ νi log(T ). In this case, we set pi = x̄i .

                                                             1 −ϕ
Therefore, we have the following equation. By choosing ηt = 2d t , we have
                                                      
   X (t)                     X       (t)
E     ∥xi − x∗i ∥2  ≤ E        ∥xi − x∗i ∥∥x∗i − x̄i ∥                                             (58)
    i∈[n]                                i∈[n]\I
                                                                                             
         T −1
    4d X   X              (t)
                                          X                 X             (t)
+             ηt E   λi ℓi ∥xi − x∗i ∥    ∥x∗i − x̄i ∥ +   λi ∥∇i ui (xI , x̄N \I )∥∥x∗i − x̄i ∥
  βT 1−ϕ t=1
                                 i∈[n]                              i∈[n]\I                 i∈[n]
                                                                                                       (59)
                          
      1         X
+                     Bi2                                                                            (60)
    T 1−ϕ
               i∈[n]
                          
                             T −1
      2       X              X
+                 d 2 
                     i λ i        t−2ϕ                                                                 (61)
  dβT 1−ϕ                    t=1
             i∈[n]
                                     
  4d log T  X   X 2 2 
+                  λi             λi ℓi                                                                (62)
  βT 1−ϕ
                  i∈[n]          i∈[n]
         T −1
   2C̃ ′ X      1   3
+ √ 1−ϕ       t 2 − 2 ϕ |ct,ĩ (x̂t )|                                                                 (63)
 d βT    t=1
           T −1
     2C̃ ′ X        3
+ √ 1−ϕ          t− 2 ϕ |ct,ĩ (x̂t )|                                                                 (64)
  d βT     t=1
    4d X
+            νi λi log T                                                                               (65)
  βT 1−ϕ
              i∈[n]
                                                         hP                   i
                                                                   (t)    ∗ 2
We will analyze the convergence of E                      i∈[n] ∥x i   − xi ∥   by bounding the convergence
of the right-hand size one by one. By
                                      Lemma 2.4 (Ba et al., 2024), we have Eq. (58) and
Eq. (59) are upper bounded by O                    √d                                         d
                                                         . Eq. (60) is upper bounded by O( T 1−ϕ ). Eq. (61)
                                                     T
                                                                                d
is upper bounded by O( Tdϕ ). Eq. (62) and Eq. (65) are upper bounded by Õ( T 1−ϕ ). Now
it remains to analyze the convergence rate for Eq. (63), which we regard as the impact
of observation error. Note that Eq. (65) can never be the dominant term, therefore, we
drop it from the analysis. Since t−ϕ − (t + 1)−ϕ ≤ t−(ϕ+1) for integer t and ϕ > 0 and if
Pt                       ρ
   j=1 |cj,ĩ (x̂j )| ≤ t holds for all t, then we can bound
                                       T −1
                                 2C̃ ′ X      1   3                            1
                                √ 1−ϕ       t 2 − 2 ϕ |ctĩ (x̂(t) )| ≤ O(T ρ− 2 (ϕ+1) ).
                               d βT    t=1
Noticing that
                                                                                   P
                           X (t)  (t)                      (t)
                                                              X      2d i∈[n] λi
                  E      ∥x̂i − xi ∥2  ≤ E      (σmax (Ai ))2  ≤
                                                                       βT 1−ϕ
                    i∈[n]                     i∈[n]

We have the following
                               
             X (t)                     n                              1
                                                                              o
         E       ∥x̂i − x∗i ∥2  ≤ max O(dT ϕ−1 ), O(dT −ϕ ), O T ρ− 2 (ϕ+1) ,
                  i∈[n]
which completes the proof.


                                                              28
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     C.3    Essential Details for MAMD (Bravo et al., 2018)

     At the beginning of this section, we provide necessary details for Muti-Agent Mirror Descent
     (MAMD), initially developed by Bravo et al. (2018) for multi-agent learning (see Algorithm
     3). We attempt to evaluate the robustness of Algorithm 3 under utility shifting attack,
     highlighted by the red line (Line 7 of Algorithm 3).

     Algorithm 3: MAMD (Bravo et al., 2018) under Utility Shifting Attack
  Input: step-size ηt,1 = γt−3ϕ , query radius ηt,2 = δt−ϕ , safety ball Bri (pi ) ⊂ Xi for all
           agents
                      (0)
1 Initialize action xi    ∈ Xi for each agent i ∈ [n]
2 for t ∈ [T ] do
3     for i ∈ [n] do
                              (t)
4         Draw direction zi uniformly from Sdi
                 (t)     (t)        (t)
5         Set wi ← zi − ri−1 (xi − pi )
                  (t)     (t)       (t)
6         play x̂i ← xi + ηt,2 wi
                     (t)                                         (t)
7        Receive µ̃ĩ ← µĩ (x̂t ) + ct,ĩ (x̂t ) for i ∈ Ĩt , µ̃i ← µi (x̂t ) for i ∈ [n] \ Ĩt
8        for i ∈ [n] do
                  (t)                (t) (t)
9           Set v̂i ← (di /ηt,2 )µ̃i z   i
                           (t+1)                  (t)   a
10           Update xi             ← Px(t) ηt,1 v̂i
                                         i


        a
           The proximal mapping PX (y) := argx′ ∈X min{y ⊤ (x − x′ ) + D(x′ , x)}, where DR (x′ , x) is the
     Bregman divergence, where DR (x′ , x) = R(x′ ) − R(x) − ∇R(x)⊤ (x′ − x), for some strongly convex
     function R. Additionally, Algorithm 3 creates a safety ball Bri (pi ), with δ/ri < 1, and generate
       (t)                                                    (t)
     x̂i bases on the adjusted randomly sampled direction zi to ensure the feasibility.

     C.4    Proof of Proposition 4

     Proposition 4. ConsiderPt anPadversary that attacks a set of agents Ĩt at round t with a
     total budget satisfying j=1 ĩ∈Ĩj |cj,ĩ | ≤ O(tρ ) for all t and some ρ ∈ [0, 1]. By choosing
     parameters ηt,1 := γt−3ϕ and ηt,2 := δt−ϕ , for constants γ > 3β      1
                                                                             and δ > 0, 14 < ϕ ≤
     1
     3 , running Algorithm  3 a sufficiently large T , the last-iterate convergence rate satisfies:
     E ∥x̂T − x∗ ∥2 ≤ O(d2 max{T −ϕ , T ρ−2ϕ }).



     Proof. Similar to the proof structure in Appendix C.2, at core of the proof of Proposition
     4 is to quantify the bias, bi , caused by utility shifting attack in gradient estimation for a
     SPSA estimator developed by Bravo et al. (2018), resulting the following lemma.
                                                                                           (t)
     Lemma 7 (Extended Lemma C.1 in (Bravo et al., 2018)). Consider v̂i (defined in Line 9
     of Algorithm 3) and Let µ̂i (x) := Ewi ∼Bdi Ez−i ∼Q Sdj [µi (xi + ηt,2 wi ; x̂−i )], then we have
                                                                   j̸=i


                                               E(v̂i |x) := ∇i µ̂i (x) + bi ,

     where bi := ηdt,2
                    i
                       E (ci (x̂)zi |x).


     Using Lemma 7, by choosing ηt,1 = γt−p , ηt,2 = δt−q , we can extend Equation D.13 (see
     Eq. (66)) in Bravo et al. (2018) to incorporate bias (see term C in Eq. (67)), where we use
                                                                        ∗
     D̄t to denote the average Bergman divergence
                                                P 2E(Dt ) between x and xt induced by some
                                             2
     K-strongly convex function R, and V = i di , we have

                                                                V 2 γ 2 δ2

                                          βγ       γ δ
                            D̄t+1 ≤ (1 − p )D̄t + p          +             ,                (66)
                                           t       t    tq     2K t2(p−q)

                                                            29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                        
                                                                  V 2 γ 2 δ2

                          βγ        γ δ                    (t)
                                                               X
              D̄t+1 ≤ (1 − p )D̄t + p   q
                                           + ηt,1        bi  +      2(p−q)
                                                                             .                          (67)
                           t    } |t {zt }                       |2K t{z }
                      |   {z                        i∈[n]
                          A           B      |       {z        }      D
                                                               C

To analyze the convergence rate of D̄t+1 , we need further extend the convergence lemma
(Lemma D.2 in Bravo et al. (2018)) from smooth decaying bt ∼ O( t1q ) to only a sublinear
summation bound (see Eq. (68)) to incorporate utility shifting attack.

Lemma 8 (Extended Lemma D.2 in (Bravo et al., 2018)). Let an be a non-negative sequence
satisfying that

                                         P       Q
                         at+1 ≤ at 1 − p + p · bt ,
                                         t       t

                                     T
                                     X
                                           bt < T α , ∀T > 0.                                           (68)
                                     t=1

where P, Q > 0, p ∈ (0, 1], α ∈ [ 12 , 1), bt ∈ [0, 1]. Then, there exists a constant C > 0 such
that for sufficiently large t, we have

     1. there exists positive constants C, T0 such that for any t > T0 ,
                                                         C
                                                at ≤        ,
                                                       tp−α

     2. if the sequence {bt }∞
                             t=0 is non-increasing starting from t = t0 , there exists positive
        constants C, T0 such that for any t > T0 ,
                                                         C
                                                at ≤        .
                                                       t1−α

Proof. For the first situation, it holds that

                               P       Q
            at+1 ≤ at 1 − p + p · bt
                               t       t

                                       P              Q                  P   Q
                  ≤ at−1 1 −                p
                                                +         p
                                                            · bt−1   1 − p + p · bt
                                    (t − 1)       (t − 1)               t    t
                  ≤ ···
                         t−1
                             "             k                      #
                         X        bt−k Y                 P
                  =Q·                           1−                                                      (69)
                                (t − k)p i=1        (t − i + 1)p
                         k=0
                          tα
                             "             k                      #
                         X          1    Y               P
                  ≤Q·                           1−                                                      (70)
                                (t − k)p i=1        (t − i + 1)p
                         k=0
                          tα
                         X          1
                  ≤Q·
                               (t − k)p
                          k=0
                         α−p
                  ≤ Qt      ,
                                                       n            Qk                         o∞
                                                              1                       P
where Eq. (70) holds because the sequence                  (t−k)p    i=1       1 − (t−i+1)p          is non-
                                                                                               k=0
increasing when p ∈ (0, 1]. Therefore, the maximum possible value of the RHS of Eq. (69)
is achieved when bt = · · · = bt−tα +1 = 1. When {bt } is non-increasing, the RHS of Eq. (69)
achieves its maximum possible value when b1 = · · · = bt = tα−1 . Therefore, it holds that


                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 t−1
                                       "       k                    #
                                 X    bt−k Y               P
                    at+1 ≤ Q ·                     1−
                                    (t − k)p i=1      (t − i + 1)p
                               k=0
                                   t−1
                                       "           k                     #
                            α−1
                                   X         1    Y             P
                         ≤t     Q·                    1−
                                         (t − k)p i=1      (t − i + 1)p
                                       k=0
                                 α−1
                         ≤ O(t         ).



Armed P with Lemma      8, we can analyze the convergence of Eq. (67). Firstly, we note that
               (t)
ηt,1    i∈[n] bi     ≤ O(dT ρ−q ). Second, we need to choose p, q > 0 such that the cumulative
sum with respect to the term A, B, C, D converge to a constant. To satisfy this constraint,
we need 14 < q ≤ 13 and we choose q to make the order of term B and D equal, we get p = 3q.
In this way, the convergence rate is determined by O(d2 max{t−q , tρ−2q }), completing the
proof.


D    Additional Discussion about Absolute Robustness

In Section 4, we explored the efficiency-robustness trade-off based on a specific concept of
robustness—whether a utility poisoning adversary can induce NSA. However, this is not
the only measure of robustness. In this section, we introduce a new concept called absolute
robustness and establish a formal efficiency-robustness trade-off, analogous to our results in
Section 4, under this broader notion of robustness.
To introduce the notion of absolute robustness, we need to first define a generalized con-
cept of utility poisoning attack outcome, named γ-Successful Attack (γ-SA), as shown in
Definition 8. Intuitively, γ-SA depicts a broader and milder goal (i.e., slowing down the
convergence rate or causing non-convergence) compared to NSA.
Definition 8 (γ-Successful Attack and Absolute Robustness). We say an adversary suc-
cessfully implements a γ-Successful Attack (γ-SA) for some γ ∈ [0, 1] to an (α, p)-MAL
dynamics running a game if it induces a joint strategy sequence {x(t) }Tt such that for any
sufficiently large T , the cumulative error
                           T
                           X
                                 E[∥x(t) − x∗ ∥p2 ] = Ω T 1−pα(1−γ) .                      (71)
                           t=1

In addition, we say an MAL dynamics A is absolutely robust to a utility poisoning adversary
C with budget O(T ρ ) if C with budget O(T ρ ) cannot induce γ-SA for any γ > 0.

Naturally, NSA is a form of 1-SA, as shifting the NE inevitably results in a linearly growing
cumulative error. Therefore, γ-SA is a weaker concept in terms of the attack’s impact, while
absolute robustness represents a stronger defensive notion, since it implies that not only can a
new convergence point not be imposed, but the original convergence rate remains unaffected.
Our next result shown in Corollary 2 indicates that if an adversary aims to achieve γ-SA
for some γ ∈ (0, 1), it requires a smaller total budget, as expected. To accomplish this, the
adversary can divide the time horizon into different phases, alternating between performing
SUSA and doing nothing. By adjusting the lengths of these phases, the adversary can
balance the attack budget and the desired level of regret.
Corollary 2. Under the same conditions as stated in Theorem 1, an adversary can imple-
ment a γ-SA within a total budget
                          " T      #
                                               pα

                               |c | = O T (1− p+1 )(1−pα(1−γ)) .
                            X
                        E              t                                          (72)
                              t=1


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                    PT
Proof. Define the p-th moment regret Regp (T ) = t=1 E[∥xt − x∗ ∥p2 ]. Then from Theorem
1, we know that   for  any sufficiently large T0 , the adversary can use an expected total
                     pα
                 1− p+1

budget of O T0           to incur a regret Ω(T0 ). Consequently, for any given T , setting
                                                  pα

T0 = T 1−pα(1−γ) , the adversary can use O T (1− p+1 )(1−pα(1−γ)) total budget in expectation
to incur a regret of the order Ω(T 1−pα(1−γ) ) by performing SUSA for the initial T0 rounds.
For the remaining rounds, the adversary can refrain from injecting corruptions and allow
the agents to run their MAL algorithm without interference.  In this way, the adversary

                                                                       pα
can incur at least Ω(T 1−pα(1−γ) ) regret while using at most O T (1− p+1 )(1−pα(1−γ)) total
expected budget.

Theorem 1 and Corollary 2 together highlight an intriguing trade-off between the efficiency
and robustness of MAL learning dynamics. That is, the faster an MAL algorithm converges
(i.e., a larger α), the smaller the total corruption budget required to implement a successful
attack (either NSA or γ-SA). Next, we establish an analogous result to Corollary 1 under
a new (and stronger) robustness concept, that is, whether an MAL dynamics is absolutely
robust to a utility poisoning adversary with certain budget, as defined below:


        ρ̄(C, A) = inf{ρ ∈ [0, 1]|C with budget O(T ρ ) can achieve γ-SA against A.},
                 = sup{ρ ∈ [0, 1]|A is absolutely robust to C with budget O(T ρ ).},
where C ∈ ADV represents a generic utility poisoning adversary. Similarly, we fix p = 2
and define the following quantities:
         ρ̄− (α) =    inf          sup    ρ(C, A),        ρ̄+ (α) =       sup          inf   ρ(C, A).   (73)
                     C∈ADV A∈M AL(α,2)                                A∈M AL(α,2) C∈ADV

Here, the function ρ̄− (α) defined in Eq. (73) represents the optimal strategy of a utility
poisoning adversary. Specifically, for any MAL algorithm known to enjoy convergence rate
α, ρ̄− (α) denotes the minimum budget level ρ required for a successful γ-SA by the adversary.
In contrast, the function ρ̄+ (α) characterizes the optimal defense from the perspective of the
algorithm designer. Given a required convergence rate α, ρ̄+ (α) identifies the most robust
algorithm that can withstand γ-SA of level ρ from any utility poisoning adversary. From
minimax theorem (v. Neumann, 1928; Sion, 1958) we still have ρ̄− (α) ≥ ρ̄+ (α), ∀α ∈ [0, 41 ].
Furthermore, Corollary 2 and Theorem 2 lead to the following result
Corollary 3. Given the definitions of ρ̄− (α) and ρ̄+ (α) in Eq. (73), for some particular
MAL algorithm A0 and adversary C0 ∈ ADV , we further define
        ρ̄(A0 (α)) =        inf   ρ(C, A = A0 (α)),       ρ̄(α, C0 ) =      sup        ρ(C = C0 , A),
                       C∈ADV                                             A∈M AL(α,2)

where A0 (α) denotes algorithm A0 with a set of hyper-parameters that guarantees M AL(α, 2)
convergence. Then for any α ∈ [0, 14 ], it holds that

                                                                       2α
   1 − 3α ≤ ρ̄(MD-SCB(α)) ≤ ρ̄+ (α) ≤ ρ̄− (α) ≤ ρ̄(α; SUSA) ≤ 1 −           (1 − 2α). (74)
                                                                        3

The proof of Corollary 3 follows exactly from the idea of Corollary 1, and thus we put them
together in Appendix D.1.
Figure 3 illustrates this trade-off. The yellow dashed line represents ρ̄− (α); above it, a bud-
get of O(T ρ ) suffices for a powerful adversary to induce γ-SA in any M AL(α, 2) dynamics.
The red region, a subset of this area, corresponds to the actual budget required for γ-SA
for the specific attacking strategy outlined in Corollary 2. Conversely, the blue dashed line
represents ρ̄+ (α); below it, the most robust M AL(α, 2) dynamics is absolutely robust to any
adversary with a total corruption of O(T ρ ). For a specific MAL dynamics like MD-SCB, the
green region shows the budget within which it remains absolutely robust. We only present
ρ ∈ [0.25, 1] because the MAL dynamics with the best achievable convergence rate in such
a setting (alpha = 0.25)(Ba et al., 2024) can withstand a corruption level of ρ = 0.25 (see
Theorem 2). The three gaps in Figure 3 correspond to three open problems similar to those
we proposed in Figure 1.


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.1   Proof of Corollary 1 and Corollary 3

Proof. By the definitions of ρ− (α), ρ+ (α), ρ̄− (α), ρ̄+ (α) and minimax theorem, it holds that
                      ρ(MD-SCB(α)) ≤ ρ+ (α) ≤ ρ− (α) ≤ ρ(α; SUSA),
                      ρ̄(MD-SCB(α)) ≤ ρ̄+ (α) ≤ ρ̄− (α) ≤ ρ̄(α; SUSA).
Taking p = 2 in Theorem 1, we have ρ(α; SUSA) ≤ 1 − 2α
                                                     3 , and taking p = 2 in Corollary 2,
we have ρ̄(α; SUSA) ≤ 1 − 2α
                           3  (1 − 2α).
Next, we show that ρ(MD-SCB(α)) ≥ 1 − α and ρ̄(MD-SCB(α)) ≥ 1 − 3α. By Theorem
2, we know that for MD-SCB, in order to incorporate a corruption O(T ρ ) with ρ > 0, we
have to slow down the learning rate by increase ϕ. Therefore, for any particular choice of
ϕ, the resultant convergence rate α = 1−ϕ 2 . Hence, only when −ρ + 2
                                                                        ϕ+1
                                                                            ≥ 1 − ϕ, this
                                                                3    1
choice does not affect the convergence rate, and we obtain ρ ≤ 2 ϕ − 2 = 1 − 3α, meaning
ρ̄(MD-SCB(α)) ≥ 1 − 3α. On the other hand, if ρ ≥ 1 − 3α, as long as ρ − ϕ+1 2 < 0 (i.e.,
ρ < 1 − α), NSA is impossible to induce as MD-SCB will still converge although at a slower
speed. This implies that ρ(MD-SCB(α)) ≥ 1 − α.

Notably, the efficiency-robustness trade off also exists in
Algorithm 3 for γ-SA. Eq. (67) suggest that as long as
                  1                                                      Efficiency-Robustness Trade-off
1 − ρ − q > q, tp+q , will be the dominant order in decid-      1.0

ing the convergence E(∥xT − x∗ ∥22 ). This implies that         0.9
                                                                                            Vulnerable
ρ̄(MAMD(α)) ≥ 1 − 4α, which also shows as long as                                            to Attack
                                                                0.8
ρ < 1−4α, the convergence rate of Algorithm 3 will not be
                                                                0.7
affected – robust to γ-SA. However, since q is restricted to
1         1                                               1
4 < q ≤ 3 to ensure the convergence of D̄t , when ρ > 2 ,
                                                                0.6
                               ρ−2q
the dominant order will be t        and we can see optimal      0.5
                                                                          ( ; SUSA)
choice of q = 13 , implying ρ(MAMD(α)) ≥ 23 , which we          0.4
                                                                           ( )
                                                                                                                N/A
                                                                          +( )
do not observe such a efficiency-robustness trade-off of                  (MD SCB( ))      Resilient
                                                                0.3                        to Attack
Algorithm 3 for SUSA, theoretically.
                                                                  0.00     0.05     0.10     0.15        0.20         0.25


E     Additional Experiments
                                                               Figure 3: Illustration of the four
E.1   Experiment Result for MAMD                               quantities in Corollary 3, re-
                                                               vealing the intrinsic efficiency-
In this section, consider the same experimental setup as robustness trade-off under γ-
of Section 5 and evaluate the performance of Algorithm SA.
3. We let each agent run MAMD with the game size n ∈
{10, 50, 100}. The learning rate schedule of MAMD is set
to ηt,1 ∝ t−3ϕ , and ηt,2 ∝ t−ϕ , ϕ = 0.33, 0.30, 0.25, corre-
sponding to convergence rates α = 0.165, 0.15, 0.125, p =
2 when no attack is present. We implement SUSA against
agent 1, with a fixed δ = 10.0. For each game instance specified by n and the attacked algo-
rithm specified by the convergence rate α, we compare the dynamics’ behavior both without
attack and under SUSA, and report the actual total budget used.
Result: In the upper row of Figure 4, the left panel plots the convergence curve of the L2
square error for n = 10, serving as a sanity check to confirm that different learning rate
schedules induce different convergence rates for MAMD in absence of an adversary. The
middle panel shows the outcome of SUSA against MAMD with α = 0.165, with the y-axis
representing L2 distance between xt and NE. The dashed lines display the convergence
curve without the adversary, while the solid lines represent the dynamics under SUSA, with
different colors indicating results for various game sizes n. As shown, for different values of
n, the attacked dynamics exhibit divergence, as the solid lines saturate and stop decreasing,
indicating that the dynamics are being steered to converge to a new point. However, the
trend between induced NE deviation magnitude with respect to n is unclear for MAMD,
possibly because the lower bound proved in Eq. (10) of Theorem 1 is not tight. The right
                                                  Pt
panel shows the cumulative attack budget Ct = τ =1 |cτ | at each time step t against MAMD


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with different values of α. As the results indicate, although all exhibit a sublinear trend,
a faster-converging dynamics (α = 0.165) requires a smaller attack budget, corroborating
our findings in Theorem 1 and 2. The bottom row of Figure 4 evaluates the performance of
MAMD under a different sets of parameters nevertheless conveys a similar message.

                                    Convergence with n=10                                    NE Manipulation Power with = 0.165                                           Cumulative Attack Budget with n=10
            4000                                                =0.165                 104                    n = 100    n = 100, no attack                              = 0.165
                                                                =0.15                                         n = 50     n = 50, no attack          150000               = 0.15
            3500                                                =0.125                                        n = 10     n = 10, no attack                               = 0.125
            3000                                                                       103                                                          125000
xt x * 22


                                                                           xt x * 22
            2500                                                                                                                                    100000
            2000                                                                       102


                                                                                                                                               Ct
                                                                                                                                                    75000
            1500
                                                                                                                                                    50000
            1000                                                                       101
             500                                                                                                                                    25000
               0                                                                       100                                                                  0
                    0       2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500                                      103                     104                                 0    2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500
                                           Iteration                                                     Iteration                                                                        Iteration

                                    Convergence with n=100                                    NE Manipulation Power with = 0.15                             1e6         Cumulative Attack Budget with n=100
            70000                                                                      104                                                            4.0
                                                                  =0.165                                       n = 100    n = 100, no attack                            = 0.165
            60000                                                 =0.15                                        n = 50     n = 50, no attack           3.5               = 0.15
                                                                  =0.125                                       n = 10     n = 10, no attack                             = 0.125
                                                                                       103                                                            3.0
            50000
                                                                                                                                                      2.5
xt x * 22


                                                                           xt x * 22

            40000
                                                                                       102                                                            2.0


                                                                                                                                                Ct
            30000                                                                                                                                     1.5
            20000                                                                                                                                     1.0
                                                                                       101
            10000                                                                                                                                     0.5
               0                                                                       100                                                            0.0
                        0    2500   5000   7500 10000 12500 15000 17500                                 103                      104                            0       2500      5000   7500 10000 12500 15000 17500
                                            Iteration                                                    Iteration                                                                        Iteration


Figure 4: Left: square error of MAMD with varying convergence rates. Middle: square
error of MAMD on different sizes of game instances against SUSA. Right: cumulative attack
budget used by SUSA against MAMD with varying convergence rates. Error bars represent
the 1-σ region from 20 independent simulations.

E.2                     Additional Results for MD-SCB

Figure 5 evaluates the performance of MD-SCB under a different sets of parameters never-
theless conveys a similar message as of Figure 6.

                                    Convergence with n=100                                    NE Manipulation Power with = 0.15                             1e6         Cumulative Attack Budget with n=100
                                                                   =0.25               104                     n = 100    n = 100, no attack                            = 0.25
                                                                   =0.15                                       n = 50     n = 50, no attack           1.2               = 0.15
            40000                                                  =0.05                                       n = 10     n = 10, no attack                             = 0.05
                                                                                       103                                                            1.0
            30000
xt x * 22


                                                                           xt x * 22


                                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                       102
                                                                                                                                                Ct


            20000                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                       101
            10000
                                                                                                                                                      0.2
               0                                                                       100                                                            0.0
                        0    2500   5000   7500 10000 12500 15000 17500                                 103                      104                            0       2500      5000   7500 10000 12500 15000 17500
                                            Iteration                                                    Iteration                                                                        Iteration


Figure 5: Left: square error of MD-SCB with varying convergence rates when n = 100.
Middle: square error of MD-SCB on different sizes of game instances against SUSA with
α = 0.15. Right: cumulative attack budget used by SUSA against MD-SCB with varying
convergence rates when n = 100. Error bars represent the 1-σ region from 20 independent
simulations.


F                   Experiments
In this section, we validate our theoretical results from Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 by
implementing SUSA against MD-SCB  on n-person Cournot            games, in which each player-i
                                                Pn
has a utility function ui (xi , x−i ) = xi a − b j=1 xj − ci xi . The formal definition is given
in Appendix A. We also direct readers to Appendix E for additional results for attacks
against another algorithm MAMD (see Algorithm 3). We run simulations on two types
of Cournot game instances. In the first type (homogeneous), all players share the same
marginal cost ci , resulting in a symmetric game. In the second type (heterogeneous), players
have varying costs. The results for the homogeneous case are presented in the main paper,


                                                                                                       34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


while those for the heterogeneous case are included in Appendix E.2, as they basically convey
the same message.
Homogeneous n-person Cournot Game Experimental Setup: We set a = 10, b =
0.05, and we consider the cost ci = 1 for all agents i ∈ [n]. The action space is set
to Xi = [0, 50] and the unique NE of such games can be verified as x∗i = n+1  180
                                                                                  , i ∈ [n].
We let each agent run MD-SCB with the game size n ∈ {10, 50, 100}. The learning rate
schedule of MD-SCB is set to (ηt ∝ t−ϕ , ϕ = 0.5, 0.7, 0.9), corresponding to convergence
rates α = 0.25, 0.15, 0.05, p = 2 when no attack is present. We implement SUSA against
agent 1, with a fixed δ = −10.0. For each game instance specified by n and the attacked
algorithm specified by the convergence rate α, we compare the dynamics’ behavior both
without attack and under SUSA, and report the actual total budget used.

                                 Convergence with n=10                                       NE Manipulation Power with = 0.25
             6000
                                                              =0.25                                         n = 100      n = 100, no attack
                                                              =0.15               105                       n = 50       n = 50, no attack
             5000                                             =0.05                                         n = 10       n = 10, no attack
             4000                                                                 104
 xt x * 22


                                                                      xt x * 22
             3000                                                                 103

             2000                                                                 102

             1000                                                                 101

               0                                                                  100
                    0   2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500                                     103                          104
                                       Iteration                                                         Iteration
                         Cumulative Attack Budget with n=10                   160
                                                                                    Comparative Welfare Analysis: With VS without Attacks
                        = 0.25
     400000             = 0.15
                        = 0.05                                                140 W(x * )
     300000
                                                                              120 W(x )
                                                                                     *
                                                                      W(xt)
Ct


     200000
                                                                              100
     100000
                                                                                  80
               0                                                                                                      W(x * )         W(x * )
                    0   2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500                           2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500
                                       Iteration                                                         Iteration

Figure 6: This figure displays results for Homogeneous n-person Cournot Game. Top left:
square error of MD-SCB with varying convergence rates. Top right: square error of MD-
SCB on different sizes of game instances against SUSA. Bottom left: cumulative attack
budget used by SUSA against MD-SCB with varying convergence rates. Bottom right:
social welfare W (xt ) under SUSA and without attack for n = 10. The red dashed line
denote the social welfare under NE without attack, W (x∗ ), while the red solid line denote
the social welfare under manipulated NE under SUSA, W (x̃∗ ). We plot 0.1-σ region from
20 independent simulations for social welfare (the bottom right figure) and 0.5-σ region for
the rest figures.

Result: The top left panel of Figure 6 plots the convergence curve of the L2 square error
for n = 10, serving as a sanity check to confirm that different learning rate schedules induce
different convergence rates for MD-SCB in absence of an adversary. The top right panel
shows the outcome of SUSA against MD-SCB with α = 0.25, with the y-axis representing
L2 distance between xt and NE. The dashed lines display the convergence curve without the
adversary, while the solid lines represent the dynamics under SUSA, with different colors
indicating results for various game sizes n. As shown, for different values of n, the attacked
dynamics exhibit divergence, as the solid lines saturate and stop decreasing, indicating
that the dynamics are being steered to converge to a new point. Additionally, we observe
that the induced NE deviation decreases with respect to n, which aligns with our theoretical
predictions in Theorem 1 and Remark 1. The bottom left panel shows the cumulative attack


                                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



              Pt
budget Ct = τ =1 |cτ | at each time step t against MD-SCB with different values of α. As
the results indicate, although all exhibit a sublinear trend, a faster-converging dynamics
(α = 0.25) requires a smaller attack budget, corroborating our findings in Theorem 1 and
2. The bottom right panel plots the social welfare W (xt ) without attack (indicated by the
dashed line) and under SUSA (indicated by the solid line). The panel shows that SUSA
with δ = −10 can lead the learning dynamic to a new NE with a lower social welfare,
aligning with our theoretical results. These observations also hold for Cournot games with
heterogeneous costs, and the corresponding results are presented in Appendix E.2.
Heterogeneous n-person Cournot Game Experimental Setup: Similar to the ho-
mogeneous n-person Cournot game, we set a = 10, b = 0.05, n ∈ [10, 50, 100], α =
[0.25, 0.15, 0.05], and Xi ∈ [0, 50], ∀i ∈ [n]. However, in the heterogeneous setting, we
consider different configurations of ci based on the value of n. For n = 10, the costs are
assigned as follows: c1 = 0.5, ci = 0.6 for i ∈ [2, 7], and ci = 0.7 for i ∈ [8, 10]. For larger
values of n, specifically n = 50 and n = 100, we replicate the structure of the n = 10 case,
dividing the sequence into 5 groups when n = 50 and into 10 groups when n = 100. Each
group follows the same pattern of costs assignments as in the n = 10 case. We implement
SUSA against agent 1 with δ = −15.
Result: Figure 7 suggests that all results hold in the heterogeneous setting just as they do
in the homogeneous setting.

                                 Convergence with n=10                                            NE Manipulation Power with = 0.25
             6000
                                                              =0.25                                             n = 100      n = 100, no attack
                                                              =0.15               105                           n = 50       n = 50, no attack
             5000                                             =0.05                                             n = 10       n = 10, no attack
             4000                                                                 104
 xt x * 22


                                                                      xt x * 22


             3000                                                                 103

             2000                                                                 102

             1000                                                                 101

               0                                                                  100
                    0   2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500                                          103                         104
                                       Iteration                                                              Iteration
                         Cumulative Attack Budget with n=10                   160
                                                                                    Comparative Welfare Analysis: With VS without Attacks
     700000             = 0.25
                        = 0.15                                                          W(x * )
     600000             = 0.05                                                140
                                                                                        W(x * )
     500000
                                                                              120
     400000
                                                                      W(xt)
Ct


     300000
                                                                              100
     200000
     100000                                                                       80
               0                                                                                                          W(x * )         W(x * )
                    0   2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500                               2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500
                                       Iteration                                                              Iteration

             Figure 7: This figure displays results for Heterogeneous n-person Cournot Game.


                                                                  36
