Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M ULTI - OBJECTIVE
                ANTIBODY DESIGN WITH CON -
STRAINED PREFERENCE OPTIMIZATION

 Milong Ren3,4 , Zaikai He1,3,4 , Haicang Zhang1,2∗
 1
   Medicinal Bioinformatics Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
 2
   Central China Research Institute of Artificial Intelligence
 3
   Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
 4
   University of Chinese Academy of Sciences


                                                A BSTRACT

              Antibody design is crucial for developing therapies against diseases such as can-
              cer and viral infections. Recent deep generative models have significantly ad-
              vanced computational antibody design, particularly in enhancing binding affinity
              to target antigens. However, beyond binding affinity, antibodies should exhibit
              other favorable biophysical properties such as non-antigen binding specificity and
              low self-association, which are important for antibody developability and clin-
              ical safety. To address this challenge, we propose AbNovo, a framework that
              leverages constrained preference optimization for multi-objective antibody de-
              sign. First, we pre-train an antigen-conditioned generative model for antibody
              structure and sequence co-design. Then, we fine-tune the model using binding
              affinity as a reward while enforcing explicit constraints on other biophysical prop-
              erties. Specifically, we model the physical binding energy with continuous re-
              wards rather than pairwise preferences and explore a primal-and-dual approach
              for constrained optimization. Additionally, we incorporate a structure-aware pro-
              tein language model to mitigate the issue of limited training data. Evaluated on
              independent test sets, AbNovo outperforms existing methods in metrics of binding
              affinity such as Rosetta binding energy and evolutionary plausibility, as well as in
              metrics for other biophysical properties like stability and specificity.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Antibodies are vital immune proteins that bind to target antigens and trigger the adaptive immune re-
sponse. Antibody design is critical in developing therapeutic drugs for a wide range of diseases such
as cancer, autoimmune deficiency, and virus infections, with over a hundred antibody drugs currently
approved (Kaplon et al., 2022). Structurally, antibodies consist of conserved framework regions and
highly variable complementarity-determining regions (CDRs). The framework regions maintain
the overall antibody structure, whereas CDRs exhibit significant variability in both structure and
sequence and mainly determine antigen binding. Thus, the primary objective of computational an-
tibody design is to design CDRs that bind the target antigens and possess favorable biochemical
properties.
Recent deep generative models have achieved remarkable success in computational antibody de-
sign, particularly in enhancing antigen-specific binding affinity (Luo et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2024;
Martinkus et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024). For example, DiffAb (Luo et al., 2022)
employs a denoising diffusion probabilistic model for antibody structures and sequences co-design.
AbX (Zhu et al., 2024) utilizes a score-based diffusion model and incorporates geometric, physical,
and evolutionary constraints to guide the design process. Notably, the recent method ABDPO (Zhou
et al., 2024) integrates physical energy as guidance for binding affinity within the framework of
direct preference optimization.
While binding affinity is crucial, antibodies should exhibit other favorable biophysical properties
such as high target specificity and low self-association, which is important for downstream devel-
opability and clinical safety. For example, non-specific (off-target) binding can potentially trigger
     ∗
         Correspondence should be addressed to H. Zhang (zhanghaicang@sjtu.edu.cn)


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


unintended immune responses, causing inflammation or other syndromes (Nicholson et al., 1991;
Ferrigno, 2016; Makowski et al., 2022). High self-association, mainly due to a large amount of
charged aminos on CDRs, leads to antibody aggregation and results in decreased efficacy (Sule
et al., 2011; Makowski et al., 2024). In wet-lab experiments, a common strategy is to generate a
diverse set of candidates and then filter them based on desired properties (Watson et al., 2023; Ben-
nett et al., 2023). However, this post-filtering approach is inefficient and has a lower success rate in
designing antibodies that satisfy all specified constraints.
To address these challenges and bridge the gap between in silico design and real-world applica-
tions, we propose AbNovo, a framework that leverages constrained preference optimization for
multi-objective antibody design. We first pre-train a score-based diffusion model for antibody struc-
ture and sequence co-design. We then employ constrained preference optimization to fine-tune the
model using metrics of binding affinity—such as Rosetta binding energy and evolutionary plau-
sibility—as objectives, while incorporating biophysical properties related to non-specific binding,
self-association, and stability as constraints. During training, we utilize a primal-dual approach to
iteratively optimize the policy model. In contrast to the previous framework of constrained direct
preference that leverages pairwise preferences, we model the physical binding energy as continuous
rewards and collect both reward and constraint values offline. We introduce additional techniques to
improve training stability and performance, such as incorporating a structure-aware protein language
model to alleviate the issue of scarcity of training data.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

       • We propose AbNovo, a deep generative model for multi-objective antibody design that
         incorporates explicit constraints representing biophysical properties critical for real-world
         antibody development.
       • We extend the recent framework of constrained preference optimization from language
         model alignment to diffusion-based generative models. This includes developing a corre-
         sponding training algorithm, supported by theoretical derivations and analysis.
       • We introduce additional simple yet effective techniques to enhance performance. For in-
         stance, we incorporate a structure-aware protein language model trained on massive struc-
         tural data beyond antibodies to alleviate overfitting issues due to the scarcity of antibody-
         antigen training data.
       • Experiment results show that AbNovo achieves state-of-the-art performance in metrics of
         binding affinity while also satisfying other biophysical properties.

2     R ELATED W ORKS
2.1   C OMPUTATIONAL A NTIBODY D ESIGN

Antibody design is to optimize the antibody structure and sequences, particularly the CDRs, to
bind to target antigens while meeting other biophysical properties. Traditional methods rely on
computationally intensive Monte Carlo-based simulations to optimize the antibody-antigen binding
energy (Adolf-Bryfogle et al., 2018).
Recent deep learning-based methods for antibody design can be broadly categorized into discrimina-
tive models and generative models. Discriminative models typically leverage graph neural networks
to learn the presentations of antigen structure and to predict the most likely antibody structure and
sequence (Kong et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024). In contrast, generative models such as the denoising
diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM) (Luo et al., 2022; Martinkus et al., 2024; Tan et al., 2024)
and score-based diffusion models (Zhu et al., 2024; Kulytė et al., 2024) build an antigen-conditioned
generative process of antibody sequences and structure.
Another trend is incorporating guidance into the generative process. AbX(Zhu et al., 2024) lever-
ages evolutionary, physical, and geometric constraints to narrow down the plausible structure and
sequence sampling space. The method most related to our work is AbDPO (Zhou et al., 2024),
which applies preference optimization to enhance binding affinity. Our method differs from Ab-
DPO in terms of framework and training objective. First, AbDPO focuses on optimizing towards
a lower Rosetta energy using the framework of direct preference optimization (DPO), whereas our
method employs constrained preference optimization that optimizes binding affinity while imposing


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


constraints related to specificity and self-association. Second, regarding the preference objective,
AbDPO uses pairwise preferences, whereas our method employs continuous rewards to model the
physical binding energy.

2.2    P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION OF G ENERATIVE M ODELS

In natural language processing, large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable progress in
natural language generation (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024). To better
align these models with human values and preferences, various preference optimization frameworks
(Azar et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024b; Ethayarajh et al., 2024; Rafailov et al., 2024b; Meng et al.,
2024; Zeng et al., 2024) have been developed. For example, Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback (RLHF) pre-trains an explicit reward model and then fine-tunes the base models through
reinforcement learning (Ouyang et al., 2022). Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al.,
2024b) derives a closed form for the optimal policy and directly fine-tunes the base model with
preferences data rather than an explicit reward model. More recently, DPO has been adapted from
LLMs alignment to the diffusion-based generative models for image generation (Wallace et al.,
2024).
However, RLHF presents several challenges in practice. First, the overoptimization issue arises
(Gao et al., 2023; Coste et al., 2023; Eisenstein et al., 2023), as the reward models often serve as
an imperfect proxy for true human preferences. Second, a single reward with scalar output is often
inadequate to capture multiple aspects of human preferences, such as helpfulness and harmlessness,
which are not always easily compatible (Ouyang et al., 2022; Ganguli et al., 2022; Thoppilan et al.,
2022). To mitigate these issues, constrained RLHF (Moskovitz et al., 2023) has been proposed,
which fine-tunes LLMs by maximizing a target reward while imposing explicit constraints on aux-
iliary safety objectives like harmlessness. More recently, the framework of constrained DPO (Liu
et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024) has also been proposed for LLMs alignment.
Our method is closely related to constrained DPO, but we extend it from LLMs alignments to the
diffusion-based generative models, providing rigorous theoretical derivation. Furthermore, by in-
tegrating noise contrastive estimation with constrained DPO, we model physical binding energy
using continuous rewards instead of relying on pairwise preference data. Specifically, we evaluate
both reward and constraint values for sampled antibodies using existing models that assess antibody
biophysical properties.

3     M ETHODS


      Stage 1: Training Base Model                                    Stage 2: Preference Optimization

                                                                    Sample 1                      Sample 2                       Sample N
                  Masked sequence recovery loss,            Rewards: 1.60                  Rewards: 1.13                  Rewards: 1.44
                                                            Constrain function values:     Constrain function values:     Constrain function values:
                     Structure prediction loss              0.10, 0.50, 0.96               0.30, 0.48, 0.11               0.78, 0.87, 0.45
                                                                                              (collect offline data)
                                Structure-
                                aware LM
                                                                          A Q ... V
                                                                         0.71 0.60 ... 0.25
                                                                               Language                                 Non-target
                                                     Antigen                     Model
       AFDB (2M) + PDB(200k)
                                                                           A Q ... V
                    Structure/Sequence DSM loss,       Binding             Evolutionary                Self-              Non-specific
                                                                                                    association                                        Stability
                     Violation loss, Auxilary loss     Affinify             Plausibility                                    Binding
                                                                  Objectives                                              Constraints
                          Folding Trunk
                              & IPA

                               Structure-                         Folding Trunk                       Folding Trunk
                               aware LM ❄                             & IPA ❄                             & IPA

                                                                   Structure-                           Structure-
                                                                   aware LM ❄                           aware LM ❄

           SAbDab (7k)                                         Reference model                         Policy model


Figure 1: The overview of AbNovo. In the first stage, we train the base model, a diffusion-based
generative model for the co-design of antibody CDR sequences and structures. In the second stage,
we update the policy model guided by biophysical properties, using a reference model initialized
from the base model as a regularization term during this update.


                                                                                3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As illustrated in Figure 1, AbNovo comprises two main phases during training. First, we train an
antigen-conditioned generative model for the co-design of antibody structure and sequence. We refer
to this co-design model as the base model. Next, we fine-tune the base model using constrained
preference optimization. In this process, we refer to the network being optimized as the policy
model. The policy model is optimized based on biophysical properties such as Rosetta Binding
Energy and self-association, while a reference model is used as a regularization term during this
process, preventing over-optimization. The reference model is initialized from the base model. We
briefly introduce the preliminaries and notations used in our methods in Section 3.2. Subsequently,
we describe the base model and the framework of constrained preference optimization in Sections
3.2 and 3.3, respectively.
3.1 P RELIMINARIES

Each antibody consists of two identical heavy (H) chains and two identical light (L) chains. The vari-
able domain of each chain is divided into framework regions and three complementarity-determining
regions (CDRs): H1, H2, and H3 in the heavy chain, and L1, L2, and L3 in the light chain.
Following previous works (Luo et al., 2022; Campbell et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024), the structure
is represented as elements of SE(3) to capture the local frame along the backbone (Jumper et al.,
2021). For antigen-antibody complexes of total length N , each residues can be represented as Ti =
(xi , ri , ai ), where i = 1, . . . , N . Here, xi ∈ R3 is the coordinate of the Cα of the i-th residue,
ri ∈ SO(3) is the rotation matrix of local frame respect to global frame, and ai ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 20} ∪
{[mask]} is one of 20 types residues or the mask state [mask]. We assume that all CDRs to be
generated has m residues in total, which can be represented by PCDR = {(xi , ri , ai )|i = n +
1, . . . , n + m}. The antibody framework and antigen can be represented by PFC = {(xi , ri , ai )|i =
{1, 2, . . . , N }\{n + 1, . . . , n + m}}. Formally, our goal is to model the distribution of PCDR
conditioned on PFC . We provide all the notions and their corresponding descriptions in Table 4.
3.2   A NTIBODY S TRUCTURE AND S EQUENCE CO - DESIGN
Diffusion Process for Sequence and Structure.          Following previous works (Yim et al., 2023;
Campbell et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024), we use a multi-modal diffusion model to jointly design
antibody sequence and structure. Specifically, we use the Continuous Time Markov Chain (CTMC)-
based diffusion model for discrete sequence and score-based SE(3) diffusion model for structure,
respectively.
                    (t)               (t)   (t)   (t)
We use T(t) = {Tn }n+m                              n+m
                       i=n+1 = {(xi , ri , ai )}i=n+1 to represent the antibody’s structure and
sequence at time t and T(0:1) = (T(0) , T(∆t) , ..., T(1) ) to represent the diffusion path. Here, t
follows a uniform distribution U(0, 1) and we apply distinct noise schedules on t for translation
 (t)           (t)                 (t)
xi , rotation ri , and sequence ai , as described in Appendix A.4.2. The forward diffusion for
  (t) (t) (t)
(xi , ri , ai ) can be written as following:

                           (t)      (0)
                          xi ∼ N xi e−t/2 , (1 − e−t )Id3 ,

                           (t)             (0)
                          ri ∼ IG SO(3) ri , t ,                                                    (1)

                           (t)           (0) (t)            (1) (t)
                          ai ∼ Cat δ{ai , ai }(1 − t) + δ{ai , ai }t .

Here, δ{i, j} is the Kronecker delta function which is 1 when i equals to j and is 0 other-
wise. N , IG SO(3) , and Cat represent the Gaussian, Isotropic Gaussian, and Categorical distri-
butions, respectively. We use sxθ , srθ , and saθ to represent the score network of translation, ro-
tation, and sequence, respectively. We select the prior distribution of structure and sequence as
          (1) (1)                                                                  (1)
px,r                                 ⊗N
                                         ) ⊗ IG SO(3) (0, Id)⊗N and paprior (ai ) = {[mask]}⊗N , re-

  prior (xi , ri ) = P# (N (0, Id3 )
spectively. Then, the reverse diffusion process can be written as follows:
                                1
                 (t−∆t)                     (t)              (t)
                xi      ∼ P# N ∆t · xi + ∆t · sxθ (xi , T(t) , PFC , t), ∆t · Id3 ,
                                   2
                 (t−∆t)                                (t)
                ri      ∼ IG SO(3) expr(t) (∆t · srθ (ri , T(t) , PFC , t)), ∆t · Id ,           (2)
                                          i

                 (t−∆t)            (t) (t−∆t)                    (t−∆t)
                ai      ∼ Cat δ{ai , ai         } + ∆t · saθ (ai        , T(t) , PFC , t) ,


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where exp and log are the exponential and logarithmic maps, and P# is the projection matrix that
                           1
                             P
removes the center of mass N i∈PCDR xi .
Network Architecture.          Inspired by previous works (Huguet et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024; Ren
et al., 2024), we utilize a score network similar to the architecture proven useful in protein structure
prediction (Lin et al., 2023; Jumper et al., 2021). It comprises three components: a structure-aware
language model we pre-trained on 2.2M structures, the Evoformer trunks, and an Invariant Point
Attention (IPA) (Jumper et al., 2021). We first extract embeddings from the structure-aware language
model for both the conditional sequences of antibody framework and antigen, and noisy CDRs
sequence. Structural information is encoded using a distogram of the antibody framework, antigen,
and noisy CDRs, followed by a linear projection. Then, these structure and sequence representations
are then processed by Evoformer trunks. Finally, the IPA and an MLP output the denoised CDRs
structure and sequence, respectively. Appendix 12 and Figure 4 present more details on feature
preprocessing and network architecture.
Training Losses.        Following previous methods (Campbell et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024), the
losses for training the base model primarily include Denoised Score Matching (DSM) losses for
structure and sequence, auxiliary losses, and structural violation loss. Details of these losses are
provided in Appendix A.4.5 presents the details of these losses.

3.3       C ONSTRAINED P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION

To design antibodies that bind to target antigens while satisfying other biophysical properties, the
training objective is formulated as:
                                h                      hX                         i
    max J (R) (pθ ) = EPFC ∈D ET(0) ∼px,r,a
                                        θ
                                               (0)
                                             (T |PFC )      ω   R
                                                              m m  (T (0)
                                                                          , P FC )
      θ
                                                                    m
                                                                                                     i
                                             − βDKL px,r,a (T(0:1) |PFC )||px,r,a (0:1)
                                                                                        |PFC )              (3)
                                                     θ                      ref (T                    ,
                                              h                  i
                                                     (0)
      s.t. EPFC ∈D,T(0) ∼px,r,a
                          θ     (T (0) |P
                                         FC )  C n (T    , P FC )  < Cn , for all n in constraints sets,

where Rm and ωm denote a normalized reward (e.g., Rosetta Binding Energy, Evolutionary Plau-
sibility) and its weight, and Cn and Cn denote a constraint (e.g., Non-specific Binding, Self-
association, Stability) and its threshold. In this equation, the first term of the objective is to max-
imize rewards, while the second term is to keep the policy model close to the reference model.
Additionally, the optimization is constrained to ensure that expected constraints do not exceed their
thresholds. Both the reward and constraint values of sampled antibodies are computed offline, as
detailed in Appendix A.5.
This problem can be associated with a Lagrangian function and then the max-min optimization
problem follows:
                     max min J (L) (pθ , λ) = J (R) (pθ ) − J (C) (pθ , λ),             (4)
                             pθ       λ∈RN
                                         +

                                 X      h                                                             i
              J (C) (pθ , λ) =        λn EPFC ∈D,T(0) ∼px,r,a
                                                        θ     (T (0) |P
                                                                       FC )  C n (T(0)
                                                                                       , P FC ) − Cn    ,   (5)
                                  n


where J (R) is the objective function in Equation 3 and λ = [λ1 , ..., λn ] is the vector of dual
variables. This equation can be interpreted as appending a penalty J (C) to the original objective
J (R) . The penalty term, which depends on how much the antibody generated by the current model
violates constraints, can be adjusted dynamically through the Lagrange multipliers λ. Then this
problem can be solved using the primary-dual method (Bertsekas, 2014; Ito & Kunisch, 2008; Liu
et al., 2024) by iteratively taking two steps :

          1. Update policy: Update network parameters θ to find p∗λ = arg maxpθ J (L) (pθ , λ) based
             on current value of λ.
          2. Update λ: Update λ by estimating the gradient of dual function G(λ) = J (L) (p∗λ , λ)
             based on policy p∗λ .


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Prior work has proved that the objective function is concave over pθ , and thus strong duality holds
(Liu et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024). A formal proof is provided in the Appendix A.3.1.
More specifically, we first sample a set of antibodies, denoted as Dg , from the reference model pref
and compute all reward and constraint values offline for these samples. Then, based on Dg , we
iteratively perform the two steps to optimize the policy model pθ , as detailed in sections 3.3.1 and
3.3.2, respectively.

3.3.1    U PDATE POLICY
Given the reference model and current value of λ along with corresponding preference data, previous
methods (Rafailov et al., 2024b; Liu et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024) leverage the DPO framework
to determine p∗λ . Here, we have significantly adapted this framework for the antibody design task.
Direct Perference Optimization with Continuous Rewards. Recent work of NCA (Chen et al.,
2024a) has extended the DPO framework to incorporate continuous reward values for large language
model alignment. Since many biophysical properties (e.g., physical energy) are continuous values,
we have further adapted NCA for diffusion-based generative models and integrated it into the con-
strained preference optimization framework. The detailed theoretical derivation is presented in the
Appendix A.3.2. Then, the optimal policy p∗λ has the following form:

                                     p∗λ ∝ pref exp(R̂/β),                                            (6)
                              X                       X
                         R̂ =   ωm Rm (T(0) , PFC ) −   λn Cn (T(0) , PFC ),                          (7)
                                    m                            n

where T(0) ∈ Dg are the sampled antibodies under the reference model, and β is the regulartizion
weight in Equation 3.
Integrating with NCA, the original training objective in Equation 4 can be reformulated as follows
(Appendix A.3.2):
                                              K
                                                  "                                                 #
     diff
                                            X         exp (R̂i /β)                    1
   LNCA (θ) = −E{T(0) ,PFC ,R̂i }1:K ∈Dg             K
                                                                      log σ (fi ) +     log σ (−fi ) ,
                     i                              P                                 K
                                             i=1        exp (R̂j /β)
                                                    j=1                                                (8)
                                                             x,r,a   (0:1)

                                                           p       (T      |PFC )
           fi = ET(∆t:1) ∼px,r,a (T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC ) log θx,r,a (0:1)             .
                           θ                i              pref (T         |PFC )
Here, we use Dg to represent antibodies sampled from the reference model and σ is the sigmoid
function. In this equation, the first term is to increase the likelihood of the samples based on their
rewards and the second one serves as a regularization term.
Due to the objective in Equation 8 is inefficient and intractable to train, we utilize Jensen’s inequality
and approximate the reverse process with the forward diffusion q x,r,a (Wallace et al., 2024; Zhou
et al., 2024). As derived in Appendix A.3.2, the simplified objective is as follows:
                                                      K h
                                                     X     exp (R̂i /β)          1         1         1       i
Ldiff
 NCA (θ) = − Et∼U (0,1),{T(0) ,PFC ,R̂i }1:K ∈Dg ,        K
                                                                          log σ(    Fi ) +   log σ(−    F i )  ,
                                i                         P                      ∆t        K         ∆t
                          (t)           (t)
                         Ti ∼q x,r,a (Ti |Ti )
                                              (0)    i=1     exp (R̂i /β)
                                                           j=1

                             (t−∆t)   (0,t)               (t−∆t)   (0,t)
        Fi = − DKL q x,r,a (Ti      |Ti , PFC )||px,r,a
                                                  θ     (Ti      |Ti , PFC )

                                                    (t−∆t)   (0,t)               (t−∆t)   (0,t)
                                    + DKL q x,r,a (Ti      |Ti , PFC )||px,r,a
                                                                         ref   (Ti      |Ti     , PFC .
                                                                                                     )
                                                                                                      (9)
Increase the Likelihood of Samples with High Rewards. Previous studies have found that the
DPO-based approach makes the likelihood of the optimal preference samples decrease (Rafailov
et al., 2024a). Chen et al. (2024a) demonstrated that the NCA training objectives ensure that the
likelihood of the optimal reward does not decrease. Building on this, we kept the training objectives
from the base model, Lsup , to further increase the likelihood of samples with higher rewards. Then


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the total loss can be written as:
                                                   K                  1
                                                                          P
                                                   X            R̂i − K         i R̂i

               Lupdate policy = Ldiff
                                 NCA + α
                                         (sup)
                                                         max 0,     P                       Lsup,i .   (10)
                                                   i=1                  j R̂j

3.3.2    U PDATE λ
This step involves calculating the gradient of the Lagrange multipliers by assessing the extent of
constraint violation in the current policy. The gradient of G(λ) can be written as follows:
                     dG(λ)                                      h                     i
                             = EPFC ∈D,T(0) ∼p∗λ (T(0) |PFC ) C − C(T(0) , PFC ) ,                     (11)
                       dλ
where C = [C1 , ..., Cn ] and C = [C1 , ..., Cn ]. In this equation, the gradient of G(λ) can be calculated
by the expected degree of constraint violation in the sampled antibodies under the current policy
model p∗λ .
Considering that the optimal solution of Equation 9 under λ can be written as p∗λ =
 1
Zλ pref exp(R̂/β), the specific estimation approach can be deduced into a closed-form:

          dG(λ)                h ET(0) ∼pref (T(0) |PFC ) exp(R̂/β)(C − C(T(0) , PFC )) i
                 = EPFC ∈Dg                                                               . (12)
            dλ                                 ET(0) ∼pref (T(0) |PFC ) exp(R̂/β)
By this way, we can estimate the gradient of the G(λ) in an offline manner. The details of the
estimation process are provided in Appendix A.3.3.

3.3.3    I TERATIVE O PTIMIZATION
Following previous work (Dubey et al., 2024), we update the reference model with the latest trained
policy model and conduct several rounds of constrained preference optimization. Specifically, in the
k-th round, we use the trained policy model from the (k − 1)-th round to update the reference model
and collect sampled antibodies and their reward and constraint values offline. The entire training
process for constrained preference optimization is detailed in Algorithm 1.

4     R ESULTS
4.1     E XPERIMENTS SETUP

Training and Testing Sets.         We trained AbNovo using antibody-antigen complex structures
derived from the SAbDab database (Dunbar et al., 2014) and evaluated its performance on the RAbD
test set, which is widely used for in silico antibody design. During testing, we simultaneously
generated all six CDRs conditioned on the antigen and the antibody framework regions. Following
previous work, we strictly eliminated any overlap between the training and test sets by applying a
40% sequence identity threshold on CDR-H3. More details on the preparation of the training and
testing datasets are provided in Appendix A.4.4.
Baseline Methods. We compare AbNovo with representative methods from each category: dis-
criminative model dyMEAN (Kong et al., 2023) and GeoAb (Lin et al., 2024); and diffusion-based
generative models DiffAb (Luo et al., 2022) and AbX (Zhu et al., 2024). Since dyMEAN does
not use native antibody framework structure as input, its settings differ from other methods, which
may lead to an underestimation of dyMEAN’s performance in the comparisons presented in our
experiments. We note that AbDiffuser (Martinkus et al., 2024) and AbDPO (Zhou et al., 2024) are
unavailable for benchmarking. More details on running these methods are in Appendix A.6.
Evaluation Metrics. We group the evaluation metrics into two categories: reference-based met-
rics and reference-independent metrics. The reference-based metrics assess the similarity between
the designed and native antibody structures and sequences. Specifically, Amino Acid Recovery
(AAR, %) measures the sequence recovery accuracy by comparing the generated sequences to the
native sequences. Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD, Å) calculates the structural deviation be-
tween Cα coordinates of the generated and native CDRs.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Constrained Preference Optimization for Antibody Design
                                                                    (0)
 1: Input: Antigen-antibody complex dataset D, base model pθ , preference loss L, dual function
      G, reward functions {Rm (T , PFC )}M
                                    (0)
                                               m=1 , constraint functions {Cn (T
                                                                                (0)
                                                                                    , PFC )}Nn=1 , initial
                                                                M
      vector of dual variables λ, weights of the rewards {ωm }m=1 , learning rate (ηθ , ηλ ), number of
    rounds of constrained preference optimization K, number of training steps during each round
    B, number of data for training V .
 2: for k = 1 to K do
         # Initialize reference model and policy model of the current round
          (k)      (k−1)
 3:     pref ← pθ
          (k)      (k−1)
 4:     pθ ← pθ
         # Collect the antibody samples from reference model offline
                     (0)                           (0)      (k)
 5:     Dg = {(Ti , PFC,i )|Vi=1 s.t. PFC,i ∼ D, Ti ∼ pref (T(0) |PFC,i )}
         # Compute the reward and constraint values of the antibody samples in Dg offline
 6:     Rm,i , Cn,i ← Evaluate(Dg )
 7:     for b = 1 to B do
              # Annotate Dg with Equation 7 under current λ
                    (0)         P              P
 8:          R̂i (Ti , PFC ) = m ωm Rm,i − n λn Cn,i
              # Update policy model θ as Equation 9
              (k)                      (k)
 9:          pθ ← PolicyOptimizer(pθ , L, ηθ , Dg )
              # Update λ as Equation 12
10:          λ ← LambdaOptimizer(λ, G, ηλ , Dg )
11:     end for
12: end for
              (K)
13: return pθ



The reference-independent metrics evaluate properties without direct comparison to native antibod-
ies. Rosetta Binding Energy assesses the binding affinity of the designed antibodies to target anti-
gens. Evolutionary Plausibility is evaluated using the likelihood under an independent antibody
language model (Shuai et al., 2021). Additionally, we consider the proportion of generated antibod-
ies that satisfy constraints related to self-association, stability, and non-specific binding. For each
method, we designed 128 antibodies per antigen and evaluated their average metrics. Details of
these metrics and the thresholds for each constraint are provided in Appendix A.5.

4.1.1     E VALUATION ON M ULTI - OBJECTIVE A NTIBODY D ESIGN
As shown in Table 1, AbNovo outperforms all baseline methods across all reference-independent
metrics. These results indicate that AbNovo not only excels in designing antibodies with superior
binding energy and evolutionary plausibility but also achieves the lowest percentage of constraint
violations compared to other methods. Furthermore, in comparison to our base model, AbNovo
demonstrates significant improvements across all metrics, underscoring the effectiveness of con-
strained preference optimization.
Subsequently, we evaluated AbNovo on reference-based metrics. As shown in Table 5, our method
achieves superior performance on these metrics compared to all baseline methods.

4.2     A BLATION STUDIES

We trained several ablation models to investigate the relative importance of the core components of
our method.
First, we compare constrained preference optimization with supervised fine-tuning (SFT). In the
SFT setting, we selected the optimal sample for each antigen as training data, based on the weighted
rewards for each property (SFT in Table 2). As presented in Table 2, while SFT improves the per-
formance of the base model, it remains less effective compared to preference optimization learning.
   1
     GeoAb only designs the CDR H3 of the antibody. For the other CDRs, we utilize the natural antibody
sequence and structure for evaluation.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Evaluation of reference-independent metrics on RAbD test set. Here, reference represents
the native antibody structure and sequence in RAbD dataset.

                     Binding         Evolutionary              Self-         Stability   Non-specific
      Methods
                    Energy (↓)      Plausibility (↓)      association (↓)       (↓)      Binding (↓)
   reference           -19.41            2.38                 12.3%            0%           3.5%
    DiffAb              -0.96            2.60                  7.6%           15.6%         2.3%
   dyMEAN               -1.74            2.82                 50.8%           94.5%         1.8%
   GeoAb 1              -1.75            2.69                 38.5%           7.6%          4.3%
     AbX                 4.79            2.44                 14.5%           4.8%         11.6 %
 AbNovo (base)          -2.60            2.41                 19.9%           2.9%         10.9%
    AbNovo             -12.05            2.36                 2.3%            2.8%          1.7%


Second, we compare constrained preference optimization with preference optimization used in Ab-
DPO (Zhou et al., 2024). For preference optimization, we convert all constraints considered in
AbNovo into optimization objectives (Multi-objective in Table 2). We observed a slight increase in
fulfilling all constraints but a significant drop in performance in Binding Energy and Evolutionary
Plausibility. This indicates that for antibody design, certain biophysical properties are more suitably
treated as constraints rather than optimization objectives. This phenomenon has also been observed
in previous studies on language model alignment (Liu et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024).
Third, we included two ablation experiments to demonstrate the relative contribution of the
structure-aware language model that is used to alleviate the scarcity of antibody-antigen complex
data. i) We trained an ablation model where we excluded the embeddings of the language model as
input features (w.o. LM in Table 2). We observed significant drops across nearly all metrics, indicat-
ing the importance of the language model. ii) We also trained an ablation model where we replaced
this structure-aware language model with a sequence-only language model (ESM-2 based in Table
2). It shows that the structure-aware model yielded better results than the sequence-only language
model. Additionally, we assessed its ability to predict long-distance contacts (Appendix A.2.4) and
found that the structure-aware language model significantly outperforms the pure sequence language
model on independent test sets, including the CASP and CAMEO datasets.
Finally, we analyzed the effect of varying the number of iteration rounds K in constrained prefer-
ence optimization on performance. As shown in Table 3, we observed that increasing the number
of iteration rounds resulted in improvements across overall metrics, with a higher proportion of
generated samples satisfying the constraints.

Table 2: Ablation studies for AbNovo on RAbD dataset. Ablation studies for AbNovo on the RAbD
dataset. The ablation experiment settings include: without using a language model (w.o. LM),
replacing the structure-aware language model with ESM2 (ESM-2 based), using supervised fine-
tuning instead of preference optimization (SFT), and incorporating all constraints into the optimiza-
tion objectives (Multi-objective).

                        Binding         Evolutionary             All
      Methods                                                                 AAR (↑)     RMSD (↓)
                       Energy (↓)      Plausibility (↓)     Constrains (↓)
    w.o. LM               7.54               2.67               46.5%          41.53%        3.19
  ESM-2 based             1.75               2.40               30.8%           49.2%        2.55
  AbNovo (base)           -2.60              2.41               26.7%           49.9%        2.19
       SFT                -6.46              2.37                6.5%           48.8%        2.41
  Multi-objective         -4.05              2.39               2.6%            42.7%        2.43
    AbNovo               -12.05              2.35                3.9%           48.5%        2.37


4.3   C ASE S TUDIES

We present a case study (Figure 2) comparing the designed antibodies from different methods:
dyMEAN, DiffAb, and AbNovo. This case illustrates that antibodies designed by AbNovo not


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Improvements achieved through iterative constrained preference optimization. Iter1-4 rep-
resent the model’s performance under constrained preference optimization with varying numbers of
iterations.

                                         Binding                 Evolutionary                          Self-                            Stability              Non-specific
       Methods
                                        Energy (↓)              Plausibility (↓)                  association (↓)                          (↓)                 Binding (↓)
    AbNovo (base)                            -2.60                         2.41                           19.9%                          2.9%                        10.9%
       Iter1                                 -6.45                         2.38                            6.5%                          8.9%                        4.7%
       Iter2                                -11.60                         2.38                            2.0%                          5.2%                        5.6%
       Iter3                                -12.05                         2.36                            2.3%                          2.8%                        1.7%



only exhibit higher binding affinity to target antigens but also fully satisfy all constraints. Previous
studies have shown that a larger area of negatively charged patches in the CDRs corresponds to a
higher risk of self-association in wet-lab experiments (Makowski et al., 2024). We see that dyMEAN
produce a large number of charged amino acids which can lead to potential risks of self-association.
In detail, we present the distribution of metrics for antibodies designed by different methods for
specific antigens. As shown in Figure 3, for AbNovo-designed antibodies, there is not only a higher
percentage of antibodies that satisfy the constraints but also a greater proportion that outperforms
natural antibodies across binding energy and evolutionary plausibility.


      ARDLGYGSEDT                                 TRLKYYDPSGDY                               TRLKRLYDVPDY                                   TRRGTFYGSFDY


         Negatively charged            Positively charged      native sequance: TRRNTLGDYFDY                                  Hydrophobic                Hydrophilic

     dyMEAN:                                     DiffAb:                                     AbX:                                          Ours:
     Binding energy: -3.01                       Binding energy: 3.66                        Binding energy: -3.62                         Binding energy: -16.75
     ppL: 2.85                                   ppL: 2.49                                   ppL: 2.22                                     ppL: 2.21
     Stablity, self-association, specificity:    Stablity, self-association, specificity:    Stablity, self-association, specificity:      Stablity, self-association, specificity:
     [False, False, True]                        [True, True，True]                           [True, True, False]                           [True, True, True]



Figure 2: Visualization of the antibody designed by dyMEAN, DiffAb, and AbNovo for given anti-
gens (PDB ID: 5NUZ). We used orange and blue to identify all CDRs of the designed antibody and
all CDRs of the natural antibody. False and True are used to indicate whether the designed antibody
satisfies different constraints or not. We presented the CDR H3 sequences designed by different
methods, indicating the biophysical properties, such as hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity.


5    D ISCUSSION

To design antibodies with strong affinity while enhancing their developability and clinical safety, we
propose AbNovo, a constrained preference optimization framework. Experimental results demon-
strate that the AbNovo framework improves the affinity and evolutionary plausibility of designed
antibodies by ensuring specificity, stability, and minimizing self-association.
The limitations of AbNovo mainly lie in the following aspects. First, while AbNovo emphasizes
various in silico metrics for evaluation, a limitation is the absence of wet-lab experimental valida-
tion, which will be addressed in our future work. Second, although AbNovo can design antibodies
in scenarios with unknown antigen-antibody binding positions by integrating structure prediction
and docking methods, the complexity of this pipeline may lead to error accumulation. Third, though
metrics like Rosetta energy are widely used in evaluating antibody design, they still do not perfectly
align with wet-lab experiments. Our framework is adaptable and can incorporate other physico-
chemical properties as rewards and constraints.


                                                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ODE AVILIBILITY
Code for AbNovo can be found at https://github.com/CarbonMatrixLab/AbNovo.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the financial support provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grant No. 32370657) and the Plan for Advancing Scientific Research Paradigms and Em-
powering Disciplinary Upgrades Through Artificial Intelligence in Shanghai, awarded to H.Z.

R EFERENCES
Josh Abramson, Jonas Adler, Jack Dunger, Richard Evans, Tim Green, Alexander Pritzel, Olaf
  Ronneberger, Lindsay Willmore, Andrew J Ballard, Joshua Bambrick, et al. Accurate structure
  prediction of biomolecular interactions with alphafold 3. Nature, pp. 1–3, 2024.
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Jared Adolf-Bryfogle, Oleks Kalyuzhniy, Michael Kubitz, Brian D Weitzner, Xiaozhen Hu, Yumiko
   Adachi, William R Schief, and Roland L Dunbrack Jr. Rosettaantibodydesign (rabd): A general
   framework for computational antibody design. PLoS computational biology, 14(4):e1006112,
   2018.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland,
 Michal Valko, and Daniele Calandriello. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learn-
 ing from human preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
 pp. 4447–4455. PMLR, 2024.
Nathaniel R Bennett, Brian Coventry, Inna Goreshnik, Buwei Huang, Aza Allen, Dionne Vafeados,
  Ying Po Peng, Justas Dauparas, Minkyung Baek, Lance Stewart, et al. Improving de novo protein
  binder design with deep learning. Nature Communications, 14(1):2625, 2023.
Dimitri P Bertsekas. Constrained optimization and Lagrange multiplier methods. Academic press,
  2014.
Andrew Campbell, Jason Yim, Regina Barzilay, Tom Rainforth, and Tommi Jaakkola. Generative
  flows on discrete state-spaces: Enabling multimodal flows with applications to protein co-design.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04997, 2024.
Huayu Chen, Guande He, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Noise contrastive alignment of language models
  with explicit rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05369, 2024a.
Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, and Quanquan Gu. Self-play fine-tuning
  converts weak language models to strong language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01335,
  2024b.
Thomas Coste, Usman Anwar, Robert Kirk, and David Krueger. Reward model ensembles help
  mitigate overoptimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02743, 2023.
Chai Discovery, Jacques Boitreaud, Jack Dent, Matthew McPartlon, Joshua Meier, Vinicius Reis,
  Alex Rogozhnikov, and Kevin Wu. Chai-1: Decoding the molecular interactions of life. bioRxiv,
  pp. 2024–10, 2024.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
James Dunbar, Konrad Krawczyk, Jinwoo Leem, Terry Baker, Angelika Fuchs, Guy Georges, Jiye
  Shi, and Charlotte M Deane. Sabdab: the structural antibody database. Nucleic acids research,
  42(D1):D1140–D1146, 2014.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jacob Eisenstein, Chirag Nagpal, Alekh Agarwal, Ahmad Beirami, Alex D’Amour, DJ Dvijotham,
  Adam Fisch, Katherine Heller, Stephen Pfohl, Deepak Ramachandran, et al. Helping or herd-
  ing? reward model ensembles mitigate but do not eliminate reward hacking. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.09244, 2023.
Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto: Model
  alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01306, 2024.
Paul Ko Ferrigno. Non-antibody protein-based biosensors. Essays in biochemistry, 60(1):19–25,
  2016.
Deep Ganguli, Liane Lovitt, Jackson Kernion, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Ben
  Mann, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer, Kamal Ndousse, et al. Red teaming language models to
  reduce harms: Methods, scaling behaviors, and lessons learned. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07858,
  2022.
Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023.
Brian L Hie, Varun R Shanker, Duo Xu, Theodora UJ Bruun, Payton A Weidenbacher, Shaogeng
  Tang, Wesley Wu, John E Pak, and Peter S Kim. Efficient evolution of human antibodies from
  general protein language models. Nature Biotechnology, 42(2):275–283, 2024.
Xinmeng Huang, Shuo Li, Edgar Dobriban, Osbert Bastani, Hamed Hassani, and Dongsheng Ding.
  One-shot safety alignment for large language models via optimal dualization. arXiv e-prints, pp.
  arXiv–2405, 2024.
Guillaume Huguet, James Vuckovic, Kilian Fatras, Eric Thibodeau-Laufer, Pablo Lemos, Riashat
  Islam, Cheng-Hao Liu, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Tara Akhound-Sadegh, Michael Bronstein, et al.
  Sequence-augmented se (3)-flow matching for conditional protein backbone generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2405.20313, 2024.
Kazufumi Ito and Karl Kunisch. Lagrange multiplier approach to variational problems and appli-
  cations. SIAM, 2008.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
Sonoko Kanai, JUN Liu, Thomas W Patapoff, and Steven J Shire. Reversible self-association of a
  concentrated monoclonal antibody solution mediated by fab–fab interaction that impacts solution
  viscosity. Journal of pharmaceutical sciences, 97(10):4219–4227, 2008.
Hélène Kaplon, Alicia Chenoweth, Silvia Crescioli, and Janice M Reichert. Antibodies to watch in
  2022. In MAbs, volume 14, pp. 2014296. Taylor & Francis, 2022.
Xiangzhe Kong, Wenbing Huang, and Yang Liu. End-to-end full-atom antibody design. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 17409–17429. PMLR, 2023.
Paulina Kulytė, Francisco Vargas, Simon Valentin Mathis, Yu Guang Wang, José Miguel Hernández-
  Lobato, and Pietro Liò. Improving antibody design with force-guided sampling in diffusion mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05832, 2024.
Jiahan Li, Chaoran Cheng, Zuofan Wu, Ruihan Guo, Shitong Luo, Zhizhou Ren, Jian Peng, and
   Jianzhu Ma. Full-atom peptide design based on multi-modal flow matching. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2406.00735, 2024.
Haitao Lin, Lirong Wu, Yufei Huang, Yunfan Liu, Odin Zhang, Yuanqing Zhou, Rui Sun, and
  Stan Z Li. Geoab: Towards realistic antibody design and reliable affinity maturation. In Forty-
  first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Nikita Smetanin,
  Robert Verkuil, Ori Kabeli, Yaniv Shmueli, et al. Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level
  protein structure with a language model. Science, 379(6637):1123–1130, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zixuan Liu, Xiaolin Sun, and Zizhan Zheng. Enhancing llm safety via constrained direct preference
  optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02475, 2024.
Shitong Luo, Yufeng Su, Xingang Peng, Sheng Wang, Jian Peng, and Jianzhu Ma. Antigen-specific
  antibody design and optimization with diffusion-based generative models for protein structures.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9754–9767, 2022.
Emily K Makowski, Patrick C Kinnunen, Jie Huang, Lina Wu, Matthew D Smith, Tiexin Wang,
  Alec A Desai, Craig N Streu, Yulei Zhang, Jennifer M Zupancic, et al. Co-optimization of ther-
  apeutic antibody affinity and specificity using machine learning models that generalize to novel
  mutational space. Nature communications, 13(1):3788, 2022.
Emily K Makowski, Tiexin Wang, Jennifer M Zupancic, Jie Huang, Lina Wu, John S Schardt,
  Anne S De Groot, Stephanie L Elkins, William D Martin, and Peter M Tessier. Optimization
  of therapeutic antibodies for reduced self-association and non-specific binding via interpretable
  machine learning. Nature Biomedical Engineering, 8(1):45–56, 2024.
Karolis Martinkus, Jan Ludwiczak, Wei-Ching Liang, Julien Lafrance-Vanasse, Isidro Hotzel,
  Arvind Rajpal, Yan Wu, Kyunghyun Cho, Richard Bonneau, Vladimir Gligorijevic, et al. Ab-
  diffuser: full-atom generation of in-vitro functioning antibodies. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Yu Meng, Mengzhou Xia, and Danqi Chen. Simpo: Simple preference optimization with a
  reference-free reward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14734, 2024.
Ted Moskovitz, Aaditya K Singh, DJ Strouse, Tuomas Sandholm, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Anca D
  Dragan, and Stephen McAleer. Confronting reward model overoptimization with constrained rlhf.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04373, 2023.
Suellen Nicholson, David E Leslie, Theodora Efandis, Christopher K Fairley, and Ian D Gust. Hep-
  atitis c antibody testing: problems associated with non-specific binding. Journal of virological
  methods, 33(3):311–317, 1991.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to fol-
  low instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Rafael Rafailov, Joey Hejna, Ryan Park, and Chelsea Finn. From r to q ∗ : Your language model is
  secretly a q-function. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12358, 2024a.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.
Milong Ren, Tian Zhu, and Haicang Zhang. Carbonnovo: Joint design of protein structure and
 sequence using a unified energy-based model. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
 Learning, 2024.
Richard W Shuai, Jeffrey A Ruffolo, and Jeffrey J Gray. Generative language modeling for antibody
  design. BioRxiv, pp. 2021–12, 2021.
Shantanu V Sule, Muppalla Sukumar, William F Weiss, Anna Marie Marcelino-Cruz, Tyler Sam-
  ple, and Peter M Tessier. High-throughput analysis of concentration-dependent antibody self-
  association. Biophysical journal, 101(7):1749–1757, 2011.
Cheng Tan, Zhangyang Gao, Lirong Wu, Jun Xia, Jiangbin Zheng, Xihong Yang, Yue Liu, Bozhen
  Hu, and Stan Z Li. Cross-gate mlp with protein complex invariant embedding is a one-shot
  antibody designer. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38,
  pp. 15222–15230, 2024.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Bram Wallace, Meihua Dang, Rafael Rafailov, Linqi Zhou, Aaron Lou, Senthil Purushwalkam,
  Stefano Ermon, Caiming Xiong, Shafiq Joty, and Nikhil Naik. Diffusion model alignment using
  direct preference optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8228–8238, 2024.
Joseph L Watson, David Juergens, Nathaniel R Bennett, Brian L Trippe, Jason Yim, Helen E Eise-
  nach, Woody Ahern, Andrew J Borst, Robert J Ragotte, Lukas F Milles, et al. De novo design of
  protein structure and function with rfdiffusion. Nature, 620(7976):1089–1100, 2023.
Sandeep Yadav, Thomas M Laue, Devendra S Kalonia, Shubhadra N Singh, and Steven J Shire. The
  influence of charge distribution on self-association and viscosity behavior of monoclonal antibody
  solutions. Molecular pharmaceutics, 9(4):791–802, 2012.
Yumeng Yan, Huanyu Tao, Jiahua He, and Sheng-You Huang. The hdock server for integrated
  protein–protein docking. Nature protocols, 15(5):1829–1852, 2020.
Jason Yim, Brian L Trippe, Valentin De Bortoli, Emile Mathieu, Arnaud Doucet, Regina Barzilay,
  and Tommi Jaakkola. Se (3) diffusion model with application to protein backbone generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02277, 2023.
Yongcheng Zeng, Guoqing Liu, Weiyu Ma, Ning Yang, Haifeng Zhang, and Jun Wang. Token-level
  direct preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.11999, 2024.
Xiangxin Zhou, Dongyu Xue, Ruizhe Chen, Zaixiang Zheng, Liang Wang, and Quanquan Gu.
  Antigen-specific antibody design via direct energy-based preference optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.16576, 2024.
Tian Zhu, Milong Ren, and Haicang Zhang. Antibody design using a score-based diffusion model
  guided by evolutionary, physical and geometric constraints. In Forty-first International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX



A.1     N OTATIONS

                              Table 4: Mathematical Symbol Explanations

        Symbol                                                    Description
        PFC                                            Antibody framework and antigen
        PCDR                                                  CDRs of antibody
        x ∈ R3                                              Coordinate of Cα atom
        r ∈ SO(3)                                               Rotation matrix
        a ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 20} ∪ {[mask]}                 Amino acid type with mask
        t                                                       Diffusion time
        T(t) = (x(t) , r(t) , a(t) )              Antibody’s structure and sequence at time t
        T(0:1) = (T(0) , T(∆t) , ..., T(1) )                    Diffusion path
        sθ                                                      Score network
        pprior                                                 Prior distribution
        pref                                                   Reference model
        pθ                                                       Policy model
        p∗λ                                             Optimal policy model under λ
        U                                                    Uniform distribution
        N                                                    Gaussian distribution
        IG SO(3)                                   Isotropic gaussian distribution on SO(3)
        Cat                                                 Categorical distribution
        R                                                      Reward function
        C                                                     Constraint function
        ω ∈ R+                                                 Weight of reward
        C ∈ R+                                              Threshold of constraint
        λ ∈ R+                                                   Dual variable
        δ                                                  Kronecker delta function
        DKL                                              Kullback-Leibler divergence
        P#                                     Projection matrix that removes the center of mass
        G                                                        Dual function
        D                                              Antigen-antibody complex dataset
        Dg                                       Antibodies sampled from the reference model
        β                                                   Regularization weight


A.2     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS



A.2.1     R EFERENCE - BASED METRICS EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate AbNovo on reference-based metrics. As shown in Table 5, AbNovo
outperforms all baseline methods.



A.2.2     A NTIBODY O PTIMIZATION
In this section, we further evaluate AbNovo on antibody optimization tasks. Here, we specifically
compare AbNovo with the generative model DiffAb and AbX. We follow the experimental process
proposed by DiffAb (Luo et al., 2022). This process involves perturbing the CDR sequence and
structure at time t using forward diffusion, then denoising from time t to time 0 in reverse diffusion
to generate 128 antibodies for each antigen. We also follow the evaluation metrics for antibody


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Table 5: Evaluation of reference-based metrics across each CDR in RAbD test dataset.

           Method         AAR(%) ↑      RMSD(Å)↓                 Method       AAR(%) ↑    RMSD(Å) ↓
          DiffAb            70.01          0.88                 DiffAb            61.07          0.85
         dyMEAN             75.71          1.09                dyMEAN             75.55          1.03
          GeoAb               -              -                  GeoAb               -              -
 H1                                                    L1
           AbX              80.92          0.85                  AbX              80.37          0.80
       AbNovo (base)        85.25          0.66              AbNovo (base)        84.34          0.66
          AbNovo            84.55          0.65                 AbNovo            83.50          0.65
          DiffAb            38.52          0.78                 DiffAb            58.58          0.55
         dyMEAN             68.48          1.11                dyMEAN             83.09          0.66
          GeoAb               -              -                  GeoAb               -              -
 H2                                                    L2
           AbX              70.73          0.76                  AbX              84.53          0.45
       AbNovo (base)        78.56          0.61              AbNovo (base)        88.25          0.32
          AbNovo            76.60          0.62                 AbNovo            88.05          0.35
          DiffAb            28.05          2.86                 DiffAb            47.57          1.39
         dyMEAN             37.50          3.88                dyMEAN             52.11          1.44
          GeoAb             41.19          2.57                 GeoAb               -              -
 H3                                                    L3
           AbX              44.18          2.50                  AbX              65.89          1.21
       AbNovo (base)        49.93          2.19              AbNovo (base)        73.88          0.86
          AbNovo            48.55          2.38                 AbNovo            74.45          0.86



optimization used in previous works (Luo et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2024). We find that AbNovo out-
performed other baseline methods in optimizing Rosetta Binding Energy, Evolutionary Plausibility
(Table 6), the proportion of satisfying constraints (Table 7), AAR and RMSD (Table 8).


Table 6: Performance of Rosetta Binding Energy (left) and Evolutionary Plausibility (right) across
different antibody optimization steps across DiffAb, AbX, and AbNovo.

           Optimization
                                  DiffAb                    AbX              AbNovo
              Steps
                 4             -10.45 / 2.39           -8.80 /2.40         -21.02 / 2.39
                 8              -8.52 / 2.41           -2.64 / 2.43        -19.77 / 2.37
                16              -7.18 / 2.42            2.07 / 2.42        -12.70/ 2.37
                32               0.23 / 2.53           -3.05 / 2.44        -12.87 / 2.36
                64               0.23 / 2.57            3.98 / 2.44        -12.87 / 2.36
               100              -0.96 / 2.60            4.79 / 2.44        -12.05 / 2.36


      Table 7: Proportion of constraint violations across varying antibody optimization steps.

           Optimization
                                  DiffAb                    AbX              AbNovo
              Steps
                 4                13.2 %                 14.0 %              12.8 %
                 8                13.9 %                 22.7 %               7.1 %
                16                13.6 %                 22.5 %               6.5 %
                32                15.7 %                 21.9 %               4.2 %
                64                21.5 %                 23.0 %               2.6 %
               100                20.8 %                 23.5 %               3.9 %


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Table 8: AAR and RMSD across different antibody optimization steps.

           Optimization
                                 DiffAb                    AbX                 AbNovo
              Steps
                 4              0.88 / 1.09             0.80 / 0.97           0.85 / 0.80
                 8              0.76 / 1.59             0.59 / 1.51           0.66 / 1.34
                16              0.48 / 1.78             0.49 / 1.54           0.51 / 1.46
                32              0.39 / 2.05             0.45 / 1.88           0.50 / 1.66
                64              0.30 / 2.69             0.45 / 2.33           0.48 / 2.03
               100              0.28 / 2.86             0.44 / 2.50           0.49 / 2.38


A.2.3    D ESIGN A NTIBODIES FOR UNKNOWN BINDING POSE BETWEEN THE ANTIBODY AND
         ANTIGEN

To enable antibody design in scenarios with unknown antigen-antibody positions and unknown
antibody frameworks, we adopted a previously established pipeline (Luo et al., 2022) (https:
//github.com/luost26/diffab/tree/main)). Specifically, we used a structure predic-
tion method Chai-1 (Discovery et al., 2024) and docking software HDock (Yan et al., 2020) to
predict the relative binding position of the antigen and antibody, followed by utilizing AbNovo for
antibody design. As shown in Table 9, AbNovo demonstrated superiority among the comparative
methods.

Table 9: Evaluation of design antibodies for unknown binding pose between the antibody and anti-
gen.

                                              Rosetta Binding         Evolutionary
                      AAR       RMSD                                                    Constraints
                                                  Energy               Plausibility
        dyMEAN         0.37      3.88               -1.7                  2.82               94.5 %
          AbX          0.40      2.83              11.22                  2.54              39.39 %
         AbNovo        0.44      2.59              -5.81                  2.54               25.5%



A.2.4    E VALUATE PRE - TRAINED LANGUAGE MODEL

To demonstrate the effectiveness of structure-aware language model, we have evaluated it on
CASP14, CASP15, and CAMEO (from 2022-05-01 to 2023-05-01) independent datasets. We fol-
low previous work (Lin et al., 2023) and choose long-range (L > 24) contact prediction accuracy
(p@L) as the evaluation metric. The results are shown in Table 10.
We observe that structure-aware language model significantly outperforms the sequence pure lan-
guage model (ESM-2 3B).

     Table 10: Evaluate pre-trained language model on CASP14, CASP15, CAMEO dataset.

                       Methods          CASP14          CASP15         CAMEO
                       ESM2-3B           0.37            0.44           0.51
                         Ours            0.58            0.59           0.75



A.2.5    C ASE S TUDIES

We analyze the metric distributions of antibodies designed by various methods for specific antigens.
dyMEAN is not a generative model and lacks the ability to produce diverse outcomes, its results are
excluded from this analysis. As illustrated in Figure 3, AbNovo has better performance in Rosetta
Binding Energy, Evolutionary Plausibility, and the proportion of constraint satisfaction.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               DiffAb                                 AbX                                 AbNovo


          Natural antibody         Antibodies that satisfy all constraints   Antibodies that violate constraints


Figure 3: Distribution of Rosetta binding energy and evolutionary plausibility for 100 antibodies
designed against the different antigens (PDB:4fqj, 1a2y, and 5nuz) using various methods. The
red star denotes the characteristics of the natural antibodies. Antibodies that satisfy all constraints
(Stability, Self-association, Non-specific Binding) are marked in blue, while those that violate the
constraints are marked in red. The yellow regions highlight areas where the binding energy and
evolutionary plausibility metrics exceed those of the natural antibody.


A.3     ANALYTICAL RESULTS

A.3.1    S TRONG D UALITY OF C ONSTRAINED P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION

This section demonstrates that strong duality holds for the constrained optimization problem (Equa-
tion 3). This material is from previous works Ito & Kunisch (2008); Bertsekas (2014); Huang et al.
(2024), we include it here only for completeness.
The Slater condition is an important concept in primal-dual algorithms and is mainly used to de-
termine a strong duality of a problem. Specifically, the Slater condition requires the existence of
a strictly feasible point in the constrained optimization problem, i.e., a point that satisfies all the
inequality constraints and all the inequality constraints strictly hold. If Slater’s condition is satisfied,
it is usually possible to ensure that the optimal solution of the primal problem is equal to the optimal
solution of the dual problem, thus achieving strong duality.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Assumption 1 (Slater condition, Strict feasible) This exists a policy p and ϵ > 0 such that
J (C) (p, λ) < ϵ.
In practice, this is possible because we often know the optimization strategy’s strictly feasible so-
lution, so we can relax the constraints appropriately according to the application scenario Liu et al.
(2024). Similarly, in this manner, AbNovo can satisfy the Slater condition.

Proposition 1 (Strong duality of constrained optimization) Under Slater condition (Assumption
1), there is no duality gap for constrained optimization problem. Let p∗ be the optimal pri-
mal policy such that p∗ = arg max J (C) (pθ , λ). Let λ∗ to be the optimal dual variable where
                                        pθ
λ∗ = arg min G(λ). Then (p∗ , λ∗ ) is a saddle point of the Langrangian function:
          λ≥0


                 max min J (L) (pθ , λ) = J (L) (p∗ , λ∗ ) = min max J (L) (pθ , λ).                                          (13)
                  pθ   λ∈RN                                                λ∈RN       pθ
                          +                                                   +


Specific proofs can be found in previous works (Liu et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024).

A.3.2    C ONTINUOUS REWARD PREFERENCE OPTIMIZATION FOR SCORE - BASED DIFFUSION
         MODELS

In this section, we derive the training objective for the score-based diffusion model using a contin-
uous reward from the objective form of RLHF. Following the approach of previous work (Wallace
et al., 2024), we first define a reparameterization of reward. Subsequently, based on this reward, we
can obtain the reparameterization of fθ as described in (Chen et al., 2024a).
We simplify the notation in this section using q, pθ , and pref to represent q x,r,a , px,r,a
                                                                                        θ     , and px,r,a
                                                                                                     ref ,
respectively.
We define rm (T(0:1) , PFC ) and cn (T(0:1) , PFC ) as the reward function and the constraint function
on the whole trajectory of diffusion process, such that we define Rm (T(0) , PFC ) and Cn (T(0) , PFC )
as follows:


                 Rm (T(0) , PFC ) = ET(∆t:1) ∼pθ (T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC ) [rm (T(0:1) , PFC )],
                                                                                                                              (14)
                  Cn (T(0) , PFC ) = ET(∆t:1) ∼pθ (T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC ) [cn (T(0:1) , PFC )],


where T(0:1) = (T(0) , T(∆t) , ..., T(1) ) means the inference trajectory of diffusion process. Then,
we only consider per PFC for simplification and the objective of AbNovo can be written as follows:


                                "                                                                                         #
                                    X                                  X                                     X
                                                     (0)                                   (0)
  max ET(0) ∼pθ (T(0) |PFC ))           ωm Rm (T           , PFC ) −       λn Cn (T              , PFC ) +        λn Cn
    θ
                                    m                                  n                                      n               (15)
                                                                               (0)                      (0)
                                                           − βDKL (pθ (T             |PFC )||pref (T          |PFC )).


From Equation 7, we can obtain R̂(T(0) , PFC ) as

                   R̂(T(0) , PFC ) = ET(∆t:1) ∼pθ (T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC ) [r̂(T(0:1) , PFC )],                                  (16)


where r̂(T(0:1) , PFC ) is defined as
                                    X                                      X
              r̂(T(0:1) , PFC ) =            ωm rm (T(0:1) , PFC ) −            λn cn (T(0:1) , PFC ).                        (17)
                                        m                                  n


                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then, the objective of 15 can be transformed to the following form:
                               h                  X        i
  min − ET(0) ∼pθ (T(0) |PFC )) R̂(T(0) , PFC ) +    λn Cn /β
    θ
                                                       n

                                          + DKL (pθ (T(0) |PFC )||pref (T(0) |PFC ))
                               h                  X         i
≤ min − ET(0) ∼pθ (T(0) |PFC )) R̂(T(0) , PFC ) +     λn Cn /β
    θ
                                                       n

                                          + DKL (pθ (T(0:1) |PFC )||pref (T(0:1) |PFC ))
                                   h                 i
= min − ET(0:1) ∼pθ (T(0:1) |PFC )) r̂(T(0:1) , PFC ) /β
    θ
                                                                                                1X
                                            + DKL (pθ (T(0:1) |PFC )||pref (T(0:1) |PFC )) −        λn Cn
                                                                                                β n
                                  "
                                                            pθ (T(0:1) |PFC )
= min ET(0:1) ∼pθ (T(0:1) |PFC )) log
    θ                                   pref (T(0:1) |PFC ) exp(r̂(T(0:1) , PFC )/β)/Z(PFC )
                                                             #
                                                                  1X
                                             − log Z(PFC ) −             λn Cn ,
                                                                  β n
                                                                                                      (18)
                                                           (0:1)
where Z(PFC ) = ET(0:1) ∼pref (T(0:1) |PFC ) exp(r̂(T    , PFC )/β) and Cn is independent of θ. The
optimal p∗θ (T(0:1) |PFC ) of Equation 18 has a unique closed-form solution:

               p∗θ (T(0:1) |PFC ) = pref (T(0:1) |PFC ) exp(r̂(T(0:1) , PFC )/β)/Z(PFC ).             (19)

Therefore, we have the reparameterization of r̂(T(0:1) , PFC ) as follows:

                                                   p∗θ (T(0:1) |PFC )
                      r̂(T(0:1) , PFC ) = β log                       + β log Z(PFC ).                (20)
                                                  pref (T(0:1) |PFC )

Plug this into the definition of R̂(T(0) , PFC ) of Equation 16, hence we have:
                                                            p∗θ (T(0:1) |PFC )

        (0)
  R̂(T , PFC ) = βET(∆t:1) ∼pθ (T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC ) log                         + β log Z(PFC ). (21)
                                                           pref (T(0:1) |PFC )

Then by Equation (15) in (Chen et al., 2024a), the fθ can be defined as follows:
                                                                       pθ (T(0:1) |PFC )

            fθ (T(0) , PFC ) = ET(∆t:1) ∼pθ (T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC ) log                       .         (22)
                                                                      pref (T(0:1) |PFC )
Here, considering that the computation of Z(PFC ) is intractable, we approximate it by
ET(0) ∼pref (T(0) |PFC ) exp(R̂(T0 , PFC )/β) to simplify the computation.
Substituting this reparameterization of fθ into Equation (16) in Chen et al. (2024a), we obtain the
objective of diffusion-based NCA:
                 K
                    "                                                                       #
 diff
                X       exp (R̂i /β)
                                                  (0)
                                                                 1
                                                                                 (0)

LNCA (θ) = −          K
                                       log σ fθ (Ti , PFC ) +      log σ −fθ (Ti , PFC )
                      P                                         K
                i=1       exp (R̂j /β)
                          j=1
                K
                      "                                                          "                    #!
                                                                                             (0:1)
                X          exp (R̂i /β)                                                pθ (Ti |PFC )
          =−              K
                                          log σ ET(∆t:1) ∼p (T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC ) log         (0:1)
                                                           θ
                i=1
                          P
                             exp (R̂j /β)
                                                  i           i        i
                                                                                      pref (Ti |PFC )
                          j=1
                                                            "                    #! #
                                                                        (0:1)
                  1                                               pθ (Ti |PFC )
                +   log σ −ET(∆t:1) ∼p (T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC ) log         (0:1)
                                                                                     .
                  K          i        θ  i        i
                                                                 pref (Ti |PFC )
                                                                                                      (23)


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               (∆t:1)       (0)                                                (∆t:1)      (0)
Since sampling from pθ (Ti      |Ti , PFC ) is intractable, we utilize q(Ti      |Ti , PFC ) for ap-
proximathon (Wallace et al., 2024).
               K
                  "                                                        "                     #!
                                                                                       (0:1)
  diff
              X      exp (R̂i /β)                                                pθ (Ti |PFC )
LNCA (θ) = −        K
                                     log σ ET(∆t:1) ∼q(T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC ) log         (0:1)
              i=1
                    P
                        exp (R̂j /β)
                                                i         i      i
                                                                                pref (Ti |PFC )
                         j=1
                                                           "                         #! #
                                                                       (0:1)
                1                                               pθ (Ti |PFC )
             +     log σ −ET(∆t:1) ∼q(T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC ) log          (0:1)
                K               i        i      i
                                                               pref (Ti |PFC )
              K
                 "                                                         "                                        #!
                                                                                                (t−∆t)    (t)
             X       exp (R̂i /β)                                              X          pθ (Ti       |Ti , PFC )
          =−        K
                                    log σ ET(∆t:1) ∼q(T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC )           log         (t−∆t)    (t)
             i=1
                    P
                       exp (R̂j /β)
                                             i            i     i
                                                                              t∈{∆t,     pref (Ti       |Ti , PFC )
                         j=1                                                                      ...,1}
                                                                        "                                                     #!#
                                                                                                   (t−∆t)        (t)
                 1                                                            X               pθ (Ti         |Ti , PFC )
               +   log σ        − ET(∆t:1) ∼q(T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC )                     log             (t−∆t)     (t)
                 K                      i             i        i
                                                                                             pref (Ti           |Ti , PFC )
                                                                            t∈{∆t,
                                                                              ...,1}
               K
                     "                                                            "                               #!
                                                                                              (t−∆t)    (t)
               X          exp (R̂i /β)                                         1        pθ (Ti       |Ti , PFC )
          =−             K
                                         log σ ET(∆t:1) ∼q(T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC ) Et log         (t−∆t)    (t)
                         P                       i          i        i         ∆t      pref (Ti       |Ti , PFC )
               i=1          exp (R̂j /β)
                         j=1
                                                                 "                                 #! #
                                                                               (t−∆t)    (t)
                1                                         1              pθ (Ti       |Ti , PFC )
             +     log σ −ET(∆t:1) ∼q(T(∆t:1) |T(0) ,PFC ) Et log               (t−∆t)    (t)
                K               i         i     i         ∆t            pref (Ti       |Ti , PFC )
              K
                 "
             X       exp (R̂i /β)           1
          =−        K
                                    log σ      Et ET(t) ∼q(T(t) |T(0) ,PFC )
                    P                       ∆t        i     i     i
             i=1       exp (R̂j /β)
                         j=1
                                                          "                                            #!
                                                                         (t−∆t)        (t)
                                                                   pθ (Ti         |Ti , PFC )
              ET(t−∆t) ∼q(T(t−∆t) |T(t) ,T(0) ,PFC ) log                    (t−∆t)      (t)
                 i              i           i     i
                                                                   pref (Ti          |Ti , PFC )
                          1           1
                     +      log σ       − Et ET(t) ∼q(T(t) |T(0) ,PFC )
                          K          ∆t          i      i     i

                                                    "                                 # !#
                                                                  (t−∆t)    (t)
                                                           pθ (Ti        |Ti , PFC )
              ET(t−∆t) ∼q(T(t−∆t) |T(t) ,T(0) ,PFC ) log           (t−∆t)    (t)
                                                                                          .
                i          i        i     i
                                                          pref (Ti        |Ti , PFC )
                                                                                                                         (24)


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By using Jensen’s inequality, we have:
               K
                   "
 diff
              X       exp (R̂i /β)
LNCA (θ) ≤ −         K
                                     Et ET(t) ∼q(T(t) |T(0) ,PFC ) log σ
                     P                    i       i     i
              i=1       exp (R̂j /β)
                      j=1
                                                          "                               #!
                                                                      (t−∆t)    (t)
                  1                                             pθ (Ti       |Ti , PFC )
                    E (t−∆t) ∼q(T(t−∆t) |T(t) ,T(0) ,PFC ) log
                  ∆t Ti          i        i     i
                                                               pref (Ti
                                                                       (t−∆t)    (t)
                                                                              |Ti , PFC )
                            1
                        +     Et ET(t) ∼q(T(t) |T(0) ,PFC ) log σ
                            K      i       i     i

                                                                "                               # !#
                                                                           (t−∆t)    (t)
                    1                                               pθ (Ti      |Ti , PFC )
                 −     ET(t−∆t) ∼q(T(t−∆t) |T(t) ,T(0) ,PFC ) log          (t−∆t)   (t)
                   ∆t i                 i        i    i
                                                                   pref (Ti       |Ti , PFC )
                                                   K
                                                      "
                                                 X       exp (R̂i /β)
          = − Et E{T(t) ∼q(T(t) |T(0) ,PFC )}1:K        K
                                                                         log σ
                     i      i     i                     P
                                                  i=1      exp (R̂j /β)
                                                          j=1
                                                       "                                 #!
                                                                   (t−∆t)     (t)
               1                                             pθ (Ti        |Ti , PFC )
                 E (t−∆t) ∼q(T(t−∆t) |T(t) ,T(0) ,PFC ) log
              ∆t Ti           i        i     i
                                                            pref (Ti
                                                                    (t−∆t)     (t)
                                                                            |Ti , PFC )
                                                                "                                # !#
                                                                             (t−∆t)    (t)
           1          1                                                pθ (Ti       |Ti , PFC )
          + log σ −      E (t−∆t) ∼q(T(t−∆t) |T(t) ,T(0) ,PFC ) log                                   .
           K         ∆t Ti               i         i    i
                                                                      pref (Ti
                                                                              (t−∆t)    (t)
                                                                                     |Ti , PFC )
                                                                                                  (25)
With some algebra, the above loss simplifies to Equation 9.

A.3.3    O FFLINE D UAL G RADIENT E STIMATES
In this section, we introduce how to use offline data to estimate the gradient of the dual function.
From Equation 11, the gradient of the dual function G(λ) can be calculated as follows:

                     dG(λ)   dJ (L) (p∗λ , λ) dp∗λ   J (L) (p∗λ , λ)
                           =         ∗             +
                      dλ         dpλ          dλ          dλ
                                  dJ (L) (p∗λ , λ)
                              =
                                     dλ
                                  d J (R) (p∗λ ) − J (C) (p∗λ , λ)                                     (26)
                              =
                                               dλ
                                 dJ (C) (p∗λ , λ)
                              =−
                                      dλ                      h                  i
                              = EPFC ∈D,T(0) ∼p∗λ (T(0) |PFC ) C − C(T(0) , PFC ) ,

where λ = [λ1 , λ2 , ..., λn ]. After updating policy, the optimal solution of Equation 9 under λ is
                                           p∗λ ∝ pref exp(R̂/β).                                       (27)
Thus, Equation 26 could be written as

           dG(λ)                  h ET(0) ∼pref (T(0) |PFC ) exp(R̂/β)(C − C(T(0) , PFC )) i
                 = EPFC ∈Dg                                                                     ,      (28)
            dλ                                  ET(0) ∼pref (T(0) |PFC ) exp(R̂/β)

Then, the gradient of G(λ) could be estimated by offline data, since Equation 28 only correlated by
                                                             (0)                 (0)
pref . Therefore, we use a large offline dataset Dg = {{Rm (Tj,k , PFC,k ), Cn (Tj,k , PFC,k )}Jj=1 }K
                                                                                                     k=1


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(for K antigens, J antibodies were sampled for each antigen) to estimate the gradient. The specific
form can be written as follows:
                         K  J                 oJ
          dG(λ)     1 XX               n
                                                        (0)
                =−             softmax R̂j /β        C(Tj,k , PFC,k ) + C avg + C,                   (29)
           dλ      |Dg |   j=1
                                               j=1 j
                             k=1

where R̂ is defined as Equation 7, C = [C1 , ..., Cn ] is the constraint functions, C = [C1 , ..., Cn ] is
the thresholds for different constraints, and C avg is the global normalization term.
Here, we use {.}i to denote the i-th element of the vector. If the current λj is higher, while the model
already satisfies the j-th constraint. Thus, a higher λj will result in a greater weight for samples with
high Gj , and { dG(λ)
                  dλ }j is larger. Eventually, the gradient of the λj will increase. Conversely, if the
current λj is low, while the model appears to violate the j-th constraint. Such a lower λj will
result in a smaller weight for samples with low Gj , and { dG(λ)dλ }j will be smaller, and after being
normalized, the gradient of the λj will be negative at this step; the next step will increase the λj .

A.4     A B N OVO BASE M ODEL

This section introduces AbNovo’s training strategies, training losses, and inference processes.

A.4.1    P RE - TRAINED LANGUAGE MODEL
We targeted masking 10% of the protein sequences using the BERT (Lin et al., 2023) model. Specif-
ically, 85% of the masked positions were replaced with the [mask] token, 10% were substituted with
random amino acids, and 5% remained unchanged. Additionally, for protein sequences longer than
200 residues, we randomly masked consecutive amino acid segments of length between 5 and 13.
Concurrently, we predicted the distance matrix of amino acids using the distogram loss Ldistogram
for input sequences containing masked regions. We also employed a contact prediction loss function
Lcontact, considering amino acids with distances greater than 8 Å as long-distance contacts. The
ESM2-3B model (Lin et al., 2023) was used as our model architecture, with its pre-trained weights
serving as initialization.

A.4.2    D IFFUSION P ROCESS D ETAILS
Following the setup from previous work (Campbell et al., 2024), our noise schedules are indepen-
dently tailored for each of the three diffusion processes (Table 11).
For diffusion computation and parameter settings, we follow previous works (Yim et al., 2023; Zhu
et al., 2024).

                                   Table 11: Noise schedule settings.

   Translation              β(t) = βmin + t(βmax − βmin )                     βmin = 0.1; βmax = 20
    Rotation         σ(t) = log(t exp(σmax ) + (1 − t) exp(σmin ))           σmin = 0.01; σmax = 2.25
                                              1
    Sequence                        α(t) = 3(1−t)                                       -



A.4.3    A B N OVO M ODEL ARCHITECTURE
Networks.       AbNovo adopts a network structure similar to ESMFold (Lin et al., 2023), com-
prising our pre-trained structure-aware language model, a 4-layer Main Trunk, IPA, a structure
encoder and a sequence decoder. Our sequence encoder is a structure-aware language model with
33 Transformer layers, while the structure encoder is a Linear layer. The sequence decoder
maps the single representation obtained from the Main Trunk to amino acid species, consisting
of three layers of MLPs. The specific network dimensions are provided in Table 14.
The model architecture of AbNovo is depicted in Figure 4. Consistent with prior studies (Jumper
et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2024; Abramson et al., 2024), we find that employing the


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


recycling technique can further enhance performance. The recycling features include the predicted
antibody sequence and the antibody distance matrix.

                                           StrucEncoder
       Antigen Structure                                                                   StrucDecoder
 Antibody Framework Structure                     Linear
      Noisy CDR Structure                                                                                       Antigen Structure
                                                                                                IPA       Antibody Framework Structure
                                                                                                            Denoised CDR Structure
                                                                Evoformer
                                           SeqEncoder             Trunk
    VH: QV...XXXXXXXX...VSA
                                                                  ( 4 Blocks )
    VL: QV...XXXXXXXX...ELK                Structure-aware                                 SeqDecoder         VH: QV...CARGGGVF...VSA
                                                                                                              VL: QV...AEDAATYC...ELK
                                           Language Model                                      MLP
   Antigen: EF...WKELANDV...RLI
                                                                                                            Antigen: EF...WKELANDV...RLI
         Noisy CDR Sequence
      Antigen Sequence, Antibody                                                                                 Denoised CDR Sequence
         Framework sequence                                                                                     Antigen Sequence, Antibody
                                                                                                                   Framework sequence
                                                                            Recycling for 3 times



                                       Figure 4: Encoder and score network of AbNovo.

Input Features.                    The specific details of the input features are shown in Table 12.

                                                 Table 12: Input features of AbNovo.

         Modules                           Description of Input Features
     Sequence Encoder                      1. Sequence of antibody framework, antigen, and noisy CDR
     Structure Encoder                     1. Distance matrix of antibody framework, antigen, and noisy CDR
                                           2. Backbone dihedral angles, including ϕ, ψ and ω in sine and
                                           cosine form of antibody framework, antigen and noisy CDR
                 Others                    1. Chain ID of antibody and antigen
                                           2. Time embedding of Sequence and Structure
                                           3. Relative position embedding


                                        Table 13: Network hyper-parameter of AbNovo.

                                         Description                                                              Value
                 dimension of single representation in Evoformer Trunk                                             512
                  dimension of pair representation in Evoformer Trunk                                              128
                         dimension of single representation in IPA                                                 384
                               dimension of sequence decoder                                                       512


A.4.4        DATASETS
Datasets for Structure-aware Language Model. In the training process, we used all the proteins
from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) before 2020-01-01 for training, except that we filtered some
antibody data. For antibody structure data, we filtered for the CDR H3 region in the training set with
more than 40% sequence similarity with the test set. In the training process, we followed the data
processing method of AlphaFold2 (Jumper et al., 2021), and we used MMseqs for 40% sequence
similarity clustering.
For proteins in AlphaFold DataBase (AFDB), we masked all amino acids with a pLDDT of less
than 50 and removed proteins with an overall pLDDT of less than 70. During the training process,
we maintained a crop size 512 and kept the sampling probability of the PDB training data and the
training data from the AFDB at 1:4. We used the parameters of the ESM2-3B (Lin et al., 2023)
model as initialization.
Datasets for Training base model. We follow the list of provided training sets from previous
work (Luo et al., 2022) in https://github.com/luost26/diffab/blob/main/data/
sabdab_summary_all.tsv.
Datasets for Preference Optimization. Following previous works (Zhou et al., 2024), we con-
struct preference-optimized datasets for antigen and antibody complexes. We generate 512 antibod-


                                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ies for each antigen in each preference optimization process, and then the metrics are calculated for
these antibodies.
When updating λ, we randomly selected 10000 (for 50 antigens and 200 of each antibody) antigen-
antibody complexes to estimate the gradient.

A.4.5    T RAINING L OSSES
Training Losses for Structure-aware Language Model.             We use Mask Language Model Loss
(Lin et al., 2023), distogram loss (Jumper et al., 2021), and contact prediction loss to train our base
model. The specific loss function is as follows:

                       Lpretrain = 0.5LMLM + 1.0Ldistogram + 1.0Lcontact ,
                                                 b=32
                                         1 XX b
                       Ldistogram = −           yij log pbij ,
                                         L2 i,j                                                    (30)
                                                  b=1
                                       1 XX
                       Lcontact = −                  I(dij < 8Å) log pbij .
                                      L2 i,j
                                               b∈Ω
Distogram loss (Ldistogram ) is the prediction of distances between amino acid pairs. Specifically, we
divide the distance from 2Å to 22Å into 32 bins and predict in which bin the distance to the amino
acid pair lies, where pbij is the probability of each bin. Contact loss (Lcontact ) is the prediction of
whether amino acid pairs are in contact or not (whether the distance is less than 8Å or not), where
Ω ∈ {contact, not contact}.
Training Losses for Base Model.                  We use four loss for training AbNovo (base)
L(x) , L(r) , L(a) , Lviolation and Laux . Following previous works (Yim et al., 2023; Campbell et al.,
2024), the denoising score matching (DSM) of different modal can be written as follows:

                               L
                            1X                       (t) (0)              (t) (0)
                   L(r) =         αt ||∇r log pt|0 (ri |r̂i ) − ∇r pt|0 (ri |ri )||22 ,
                            L i=1
                               L
                            1 X (0)      (0)
                   L(x) =        ||x̂ − xi ||22 ,                                                  (31)
                            L i=1 i
                               L
                            1X
                   L(a) =         CrossEntropy(â(0) , a(0) ).
                            L i=1

We also incorporate violation loss from AlphaFold (Jumper et al., 2021; Abramson et al., 2024) to
learn the geometry for inter-residues bonds and avoidance of atom clashes. Specifically, these losses
can be written as follows:
                                    NX
                                     bonds
                               1
            Lbondlength =                   max |ℓidesign − ℓilit | − τbondlength , 0 ,
                           Nbonds i=1
                                    Nangles
                                                                                                 (32)
                               1     X
                                                        i               i

             Lbondangle =                   max |cosαdesign − cosαlit | − τbondangle , 0 ,
                           Nangles i=1
Where ℓidesign and cosαdesign
                          i
                                  are the bond length and bond angle of i-th designed antibodies, re-
spectively. ℓilit and cosαlit
                          i
                              is the literature value for this bond length and bond angle. We use same
tolerance value (τbondlength and τbondangle ) as AlphaFold.
Additionally, we add auxiliary loss for training (Yim et al., 2023). Laux is an mean squared er-
ror(MSE) loss supervising the distance of designed CDR’s four atoms Ω ∈ {C, Cα , N, O}. This
can be written as follows:
                                    L
                                1 X           X
                                                     (t)     (t)

                        Laux =         min        ||xi,a − x̂i,a ||22 , dclamp .            (33)
                               4L i=1
                                                 a∈Ω


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Training Losses for Preference Optimization. From Equation 9, F(·) can be written as follows:

                           (t−∆t)    (0,t)           (t−∆t)      (t)
F(·) = − DKL q x,r,a (Ti          |Ti )||px,r,a
                                            θ     (T i       |T  i   )

                                                                    (t−∆t)    (0,t)              (t−∆t)   (t)
                                              + DKL q x,r,a (Ti             |Ti )||px,r,a
                                                                                       ref (Ti          |Ti )
              h
                            (t−∆t) (0,t)         (t−∆t) (t)
      = − αx DKL q x (xi           |xi )||pxθ (xi         |xi )
                                                                                                       i
                                                               (t−∆t) (0,t)               (t−∆t) (t)
                                              − DKL q x (xi              |xi )||pxref (xi        |xi )
              h
                          (t−∆t) (0,t)         (t−∆t) (t)
         − αr DKL q r (ri        |ri )||prθ (ri        |ri )
                                                                                                      i
                                                              (t−∆t) (0,t)             (t−∆t) (t)
                                              − DKL q r (ri             |ri )||prref (ri       |ri )
              h
                           (t−∆t) (0,t)         (t−∆t) (t)
         − αa DKL q a (ai         |ai )||paθ (ai         |ai )
                                                                                                       i
                                                               (t−∆t) (0,t)              (t−∆t) (t)
                                              − DKL q a (ai             |ai )||paref (ai        |ai ) ,
                                                                                                           (34)
where xi = [xn+1,i , ..., xn+m,i ], ri = [rn+1,i , ..., rn+m,i ], and ai = [an+1,i , ..., an+m,i ], the first
subscript represents the i-th sample in the preference optimization and the second subscript repre-
sents the j-th amino acid in the CDR. With some algebra, these KL divergences can be derived as
the following form:
KL Divergence in R3 Space. According to Wallace et al. (2024), the closed-form expressions of
KL divergence in R3 simplifies to:
                                       (x)
                                      DKL = ||fθx (x(t) ) − x(0) ||22 + C.                                      (35)

KL Divergence in SO(3) Space.          Similar to Zhou et al. (2024), we approximately derive an
empirical reconstruction loss in SO(3) as:
                     (r)
                   DKL = ||∇r log pt|0 (r(t) |fθr (r(t) )) − ∇r pt|0 (r(t) |r(0) )||22 + C.                     (36)

KL Divergence in Discrete Space. For sequences in discrete space, we give the details of the
derivation process:

    (a)
  DKL = DKL q a (a(t−∆t) |a(0) , a(t) )||paθ (a(t−∆t) |a(t) )
                                    h                          i
        = Eqa (a(t−∆t) |a(0) ,a(t) ) − log paθ (a(t−∆t) |a(t) ) + C1
                                    h      X                                                  i
        = Eqa (a(t−∆t) |a(0) ,a(t) ) − log      q a (a(t−∆t) |ã(0) , a(t) )paθ (ã(0) |a(t) ) + C1
                                             ã(0)
                                  h          X q a (ã(0) |a(t−∆t) )q a (a(t−∆t) |a(t) )                     i
        = Eqa (a(t−∆t) |a(0) ,a(t) ) − log                                                 paθ (ã(0) |a(t) ) + C1
                                                             q a (ã(0) |a(t) )
                                             ã(0)
                                                         h       q a (a(t−∆t) |a(t) ) a (0) (t) i
        ≤ Eqa (a(t−∆t) |a(0) ,a(t) ),qa (ã(0) |a(t−∆t) ) − log                         p (ã |a ) + C1
                                                                     q a (ã(0) |a(t) ) θ
                                           h                        i
        = Eqa (ã(0) ,a(t−∆t) |a(0) ,a(t) ) − log paθ (ã(0) |a(t) )
                                                 h      q a (a(t−∆t) |a(t) ) i
              + Eqa (ã(0) ,a(t−∆t) |a(0) ,a(t) ) − log                        + C1
                                                           q a (ã(0) |a(t) )
        = − log paθ (a(0) |a(t) ) + C.
                                                                                                                (37)
In practice, we choose [α(x) , α(r) , α(a) ]=[1.0, 0.5, 0.2], α(sup) = 0.5 and K = 8. Meanwhile, we
                                         1
add the regularisation term α(R) for ∆t     in Equation 9 to ensure the stability of training. Here, we
          (R)
choose α /∆t = 10.0.


                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4.6    T RAINING D ETAILS
We show information about the training process, objectives, and learning rate of AbNovo in Table
14.
Especially in the fine-tuning stage, for updating λ for one step, we update the policy for 100 steps.
We show details about losses we used when updating policy and λ in 3.3.1 and 3.3.2.
We use 8 Nvidia A100 (80G) for training, and the batch size is 128 for all training stages. For all
training procedures, we use the Adam optimizer for training with default parameters.

                               Table 14: Hyper-parameter of AbNovo.

                                                                Training       Learning
      Stage                  Training objective                                                     Dataset
                                                                 steps          Rate
                                                                                                   AFDB
   Pre-trained        LMLM + Ldistogram + Lcontact                200k          5e-5
                                                                                             (2M)+PDB(filter)
  Base model          1.0L(x) + 0.5L(r) + 0.2L(a) +                20k          1e-4
                                                                                             Antigen-antibody
                         0.1Lviolation + 1.0Laux                                                  complex
  Fine-tuning           Lupdate policy (Equation 10)               20k          2e-5         Preference dataset


A.5     E VALUATION M ETRICS

In this section, we provide detailed descriptions of each metric.
Rosetta Binding Energy.      For Rosetta Binding Energy, we followed previous work (Zhou et al.,
2024) by calculating the energy between the antigen and antibody using Rosetta Software. Lower
energy values represent higher antigen-antibody affinity.
We first used Rosetta software to perform side-chain packing on the backbone and side chains of
the designed antibodies, followed by FastRelax on the side chains. Then, we calculated the Rosetta
Binding Energy. We denote the residue with the index i in the antibody-antigen complex as Ai ,
then Asc        bb
       i and Ai represent the side chain and backbone of the residue respectively. We use EP to
represent the interaction energies between Paired residues, which consists of six different energy
types: Ehbond , Eatt , Esol , Eelec , Elk , Erep .
                 X       X
         E=                           EPrep (Asc   sc            sc   bb
                                              j , Aj ) + EPrep (Aj , Aj )
              j∈CDRs i∈Antigens

              + 2EPrep (Abb   sc             bb   bb
                         j , Aj ) + 2EPrep (Aj , Aj )                                                         (38)
                 X        X             X
              +                                         EPe (Asc   sc         sc   bb
                                                              j , Aj ), EPe (Aj , Aj )
                 j∈CDRs i∈Antigens e∈{hbond,att,elec,lk,rep}


The calculation incorporates various energy terms from Rosetta, using the default weights in ref2015
for each term.
Evolutionary Plausibility.       Evolutionary Plausibility measures how likely a designed sequence
is evolutionarily plausible in nature, reflecting adherence to general evolutionary rules of natural
proteins. Recent studies show that large-scale protein language models, trained on millions of nat-
ural protein sequences, effectively capture these evolutionary rules (Shuai et al., 2021; Hie et al.,
2024). Following previous works (Zhu et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024), we evaluate Evolutionary
Plausibility by calculating the perplexity of the antibody language model (Shuai et al., 2021) for the
designed antibodies. Here, we use ai to represent the residue type of designed CDRs. P represents
the conditional probability of BERT predicting the word at masked position i, where θ represents
the model parameters. The specific formula is as follows:
                                                 N
                                                 X
              Evolutionary Plausibility = −              log P (ai |ai , ..., ai−1 , ai+1 , ..., aN )
                                                i∈CDRs


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We used the script provided by IgLM Shuai et al. (2021) to calculate this metric.
Stability. Stability measures the stability of the conformation of the designed antibody in isola-
tion, without the antigen structure involved. This metric differs from Binding Energy, which eval-
uates the interaction between the antibody and the antigen. Following the evaluation approach of
prior work (Zhou et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024), we used Rosetta to calculate the total energy of the
designed antibody to assess its stability.
We performed side-chain packing and FastRelax on the backbone and side chains of the designed
antibody. Then we output the total energy of the CDR regions using the Rosetta software.
Self-association. The self-association of antibodies refers to the tendency of antibody molecules
to bind to each other without interacting with the antigen. Self-association can negatively impact the
stability, function, and biological properties of antibodies, especially in the context of therapeutic
antibody development, where self-aggregation is generally undesirable (Yadav et al., 2012; Kanai
et al., 2008).
Previous studies (Makowski et al., 2024) have shown that the occurrence of self-association is
closely correlated with the negatively charged patches area in CDRs. Therefore, we use nega-
tively charged patch areas in CDRs as a proxy for evaluating the risk of self-association. Al-
though other physicochemical properties are also correlated with self-association, we used the
physicochemical property of CDRs with the highest correlation as the evaluation metric. We
used the pipeline provided by previous work (Makowski et al., 2024) (https://github.com/
Tessier-Lab-UMich/CST_Prop_Opt_ML) to calculate the self-association metric.
Non-specific Binding. Non-specific binding refers to the undesirable interaction of antibodies
with cellular proteins other than the intended target, particularly membrane proteins of the cell
(Makowski et al., 2022). In practice, evaluating non-specific binding would require consideration
of interactions with all membrane proteins and RNA-specific binding properties. Computationally
modeling these interactions for all potential targets is a highly complex and challenging task. Here,
we followed the metric proposed in previous works (Makowski et al., 2024; 2022).
Previous studies (Makowski et al., 2024; 2022) have verified a correlation between non-specific
binding and the hydrophobic patches area in CDRs. Therefore, we use hydrophobic patch areas
in CDRs as a proxy for evaluating the risk of non-specific binding. Although other physicochemi-
cal properties also have correlation with non-specific binding, we used the most strongly correlated
physicochemical property in CDRs as the evaluation metric. We used the pipeline provided by pre-
vious work (Makowski et al., 2024) (https://github.com/Tessier-Lab-UMich/CST_
Prop_Opt_ML) to calculate the non-specific binding metric.
RMSD.        For DiffAb, AbX, GeoAb, and AbNovo, where the antibody framework structure is
provided, we directly calculate the RMSD of the designed antibody. However, for dyMEAN, as
there is no given real antibody framework, we use Kabsch alignment to align the designed antigen-
antibody complex with the natural complex. Then, we calculate the Root Mean Square Deviation
(RMSD) for each region of these aligned complexes.
Reward and Constraints Settings. Given the stringent requirements for compliance with clinical
applications, as well as the inherent biases in hydrophobicity and polarity metrics, our primary
objective is to filter out antibodies that clearly violate binding rules while retaining as many potential
candidates as possible. Setting an excessively strict threshold would, on the one hand, eliminate
many viable candidate antibodies and, on the other hand, destabilize the model’s training.
Consequently, we heuristically determined the threshold for each constraint based on training sta-
bility and the empirical thresholds used in previous studies.
Specifically, we determine the thresholds based on the dataset provided in previous work (Makowski
et al., 2024). This dataset comprises 80 clinical antibodies annotated with corresponding wet-lab
experimental results. For non-specific binding and self-association metrics, we calculate the physic-
ochemical properties of all antibodies that meet the requirements, setting the threshold for constraint
violation as twice the highest value of the physicochemical property observed in the antibody that
satisfies the wet-lab metric.



                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For stability assessment, we evaluated all antibodies in RAbD and set the highest energy value as
the threshold for constraint violation.
In our experiments, considering the different magnitudes of various rewards and constraints, we
normalized all rewards and constraints during the training process. Meanwhile, we set the initial λ
to [1.0, 1.0, 1.0] and the reward weights ω1 and ω2 to 1.0 and 1.0.

A.6   BASELINE M ETHODS

DiffAb (Luo et al., 2022). We use the test script and the pre-trained model provided in the GitHub
repository (https://github.com/luost26/diffab/tree/main). All hyper-parameters
are default.
dyMEAN (Kong et al., 2023). We use the pre-trained model and test script provided in the GitHub
repository (https://github.com/THUNLP-MT/dyMEAN). All hyper-parameters we used are
default.
GeoAb (Lin et al., 2024). We employed GeoAb from its GitHub repository (https://
github.com/Edapinenut/GeoAB) with all default hyper-parameters and the pre-trained
model provided.
AbX (Zhu et al., 2024).      We use the co-design test script and pre-trained model provided
in the GitHub repository (https://github.com/CarbonMatrixLab/AbX). All hyper-
parameters we used are default.
AbDiffuser (Martinkus et al., 2024), AbDPO (Zhou et al., 2024), and AbDesigner (Tan et al.,
2024). These models were not available at the time of this paper’s submission. Moreover, the re-
sults presented in their papers are not compatible with our experiment settings. For example, AbDPO
only designs CDR-H3; AbDiffuser does not provide six CDRs designed results simultaneously; and
AbDesigner uses a different test set. Thus, we do not include their results in our paper.


                                                29
