Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


W HAT D O YOU S EE IN C OMMON ?
L EARNING H IERARCHICAL P ROTOTYPES OVER T REE -
OF -L IFE TO D ISCOVER E VOLUTIONARY T RAITS

 Harish Babu Manogaran1∗ M. Maruf1 Arka Daw6 Kazi Sajeed Mehrab1
 Caleb Patrick Charpentier1 Josef C. Uyeda1 Wasila Dahdul2 Matthew J Thompson3
 Elizabeth G Campolongo3 Kaiya L Provost3 Wei-Lun Chao3 Tanya Berger-Wolf3
 Paula M. Mabee4 Hilmar Lapp5 Anuj Karpatne1
 1
   Virginia Tech 2 Univ. of California, Irvine 3 Ohio State Univ. 4 Battelle 5 Duke Univ.
   6
     Oak Ridge National Laboratory


Black Billed Cuckoo Yellow Billed Cuckoo Mangrove Cuckoo   Groove Billed Ani       Northern Fulmar   Sooty Albatross   Laysan Albatross Black Footed Albatross


Figure 1: Sample images of bird species with zoomed-in views of learned prototypes along with their associ-
ated score maps. We consider the problem of finding evolutionary traits common to a group of species derived
from the same ancestor (blue) that are absent in other species from a different ancestor (red). We can infer that
descendants of the blue node share a common trait: long tail, absent from descendants of the red node.

                                                                       A BSTRACT
              A grand challenge in biology is to discover evolutionary traits—features of or-
              ganisms common to a group of species with a shared ancestor in the tree of
              life (also referred to as phylogenetic tree). With the growing availability of im-
              age repositories in biology, there is a tremendous opportunity to discover evo-
              lutionary traits directly from images in the form of a hierarchy of prototypes.
              However, current prototype-based methods are mostly designed to operate over
              a flat structure of classes and face several challenges in discovering hierarchi-
              cal prototypes, including the issue of learning over-specific prototypes at internal
              nodes. To overcome these challenges, we introduce the framework of Hierarchy
              aligned Commonality through Prototypical Networks (HComP-Net). The key
              novelties in HComP-Net include a novel over-specificity loss to avoid learn-
              ing over-specific prototypes, a novel discriminative loss to ensure prototypes at
              an internal node are absent in the contrasting set of species with different an-
              cestry, and a novel masking module to allow for the exclusion of over-specific
              prototypes at higher levels of the tree without hampering classification perfor-
              mance. We empirically show that HComP-Net learns prototypes that are accu-
              rate, semantically consistent, and generalizable to unseen species in comparison
              to baselines. Our code is publicly accessible at Imageomics Institute Github site:
              https://github.com/Imageomics/HComPNet.

    ∗
        Corresponding author: harishbabu@vt.edu


                                                                               1
                                    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ver-specific
mily: Felidae
        Prototype-2                                    Over-specific                                            Over-specific                                              Common trait
e-1
         (Spotted
)                                                         Family: Felidae                                Common Phylogenetic Ancestor                               Common Phylogenetic Ancestor
           back)
                                               Prototype-1             Prototype-2                      Prototype-1              Prototype-2                       Prototype-1              Prototype-2
                                                 (Mane)              (Spotted back)                     (Long tail)             (Long neck)                      (Spotted back)            (Sharp beak)


                                                   Lion                   Bobcat                     Mangrove Cuckoo           Pied Billed Grebe               Red bellied woodpecker      Northern Flicker
spotted back is not                     Mane, Spotted back : Not common to all                  Long tail, Long neck : Not common to both                  Long beak, Spotted back : Common to Red
n to all species of                            species of Felidae family                                     Cuckoo and Grebe                               bellied woodpecker and Northern Flicker
 lidae family

                                    Figure 2: Examples to illustrate the problem of learning “over-specific” prototypes at internal nodes, which
                                    only cover one descendant species of the node, instead of learning prototypes common to all descendants.


                                    1       I NTRODUCTION

                                        A central goal in biology
                          Traits not common to family Felidae
                                                                                       Traitsisnotto   discover
                                                                                                    common              the observable
                                                                                                               to descendants      of                  characteristics of organisms, or traits (e.g.,
                                                                                              the phylogenetic ancestor
                                        beak color, stripe pattern, and                                fin curvature), that help in discriminating between species and un-
                                        derstanding
                      In first pic the prototypes  that are usedhow       organisms
                                                                  for classifying an image intoevolve           and
                                                                                                   Felidae family      adapt
                                                                                                                  represents          to are
                                                                                                                              traits that  their
                                                                                                                                             specificenvironment            (Houle
                                                                                                                                                      to one species under the             & Rossoni, 2022). For
                                                                                                                                                                               fediae family

                      Not all species example,             discovering
                                        of family Felidae has                       traits
                                                               mane and spotted back.           inherited
                                                                                           So the                   by a group of species that share a common
                                                                                                    prototypes are overspecific                                                                  ancestor onp2the
                                                                                                                                                                                              p1
                      Mane or spotted   tree
                                          back isof
                                                  not life
                                                      common  (also      referred
                                                                to all species  of Felidae to   asSothe
                                                                                           family.            phylogenetic
                                                                                                        they are overspecific traits      tree, see Figure 1) is of great interest to biologists
                                        to understand how organisms diversify and evolve (O’Leary & Kaufman, 2011) (see Appendix A
                                        for more details on the biological motivation of this problem). However, the measurement of such
                                        traits with evolutionary signals, termed evolutionary traits, is not straightforward and often relies on
                                        subjective and labor-intensive human expertise and definitions (Simões et al., 2017; Sereno, 2007),
                                        hindering rapid scientific advancement (Lürig et al., 2021).
                                    With the growing availability of large-scale image repositories in biology containing tens of thou-
                                    sands of species of organisms (Van Horn et al., 2018; Singer et al., 2018; Wah et al., 2011), there
                                    is an opportunity for machine learning (ML) methods to discover evolutionary traits automatically
                                    from images, especially those that differentiate visually or genetically similar species (Lürig et al.,
                                    2021; Elhamod et al., 2023). This is especially true in light of recent advances in the field of explain-
                                    able ML, such as the seminal work of ProtoPNet (Chen et al., 2019) and its variants (Rymarczyk
                                    et al., 2021; 2022; Nauta et al., 2021) which find representative patches in training images (termed
                                    prototypes) capturing discriminatory features for every class. We can thus cast the problem of dis-
                                    covering evolutionary traits into asking the following question: what image features or prototypes
                                    are common across a group of species with a shared ancestor in the tree of life that are absent in
                                    species with a different shared ancestor?
                                    For example, in Figure 1, we can see that the four species of birds on the left descending from the
                                    blue node show the common feature of having “long tails”, unlike any of the descendant species of
                                    the red node. Learning such common features at every internal node as a hierarchy of prototypes
                                    can help biologists generate novel hypotheses of species diversification (e.g., the splitting of blue
                                    and red nodes) and accumulation of evolutionary trait changes.
                                    Despite the success of ProtoPNet (Chen et al., 2019) and its variants including HPnet (Hase et al.,
                                    2019) that first introduced the idea of learning hierarchical prototypes at every internal node of
                                    the tree, there are three main challenges to be addressed while learning hierarchical prototypes for
                                    discovering evolutionary traits. First, existing methods that learn multiple prototypes for every class
                                    are prone to learning “over-specific” prototypes at internal nodes of a tree, which cover only one (or
                                    a few) of its descendant species. Figure 2 shows a few examples to illustrate the concept of over-
                                    specific prototypes. Consider the problem of learning prototypes common to descendant species of
                                    the Felidae family: Lion and Bobcat. If we learn one prototype focusing on the feature of the mane
                                    (specific only to Lion) and another prototype focusing on the feature of spotted back (specific only
                                    to Bobcat), then these two prototypes taken together can classify all images from the Felidae family.
                                    However, they do not represent common features shared between Lion and Bobcat and hence are not
                                    useful for discovering evolutionary traits. Such over-specific prototypes should be instead pushed
                                    down to be learned at lower levels of the tree (e.g., the species leaf nodes of Lion and Bobcat).


                                                                                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Second, while existing methods such as ProtoPShare (Rymarczyk et al., 2021), ProtoPool (Rymar-
czyk et al., 2022), and ProtoTree (Nauta et al., 2021) allow prototypes to be shared across classes for
re-usability and sparsity, in the problem of discovering evolutionary traits, we want to learn proto-
types at an internal node n that are not just shared across all its descendant species but are also absent
in the contrasting set of species (i.e., species descending from sibling nodes of n representing alter-
nate paths of diversification). Third, at higher levels of the tree, finding features that are common
across a large number of diverse species is challenging (Harmon et al., 2010; Pennell et al., 2015).
In such cases, we should be able to abstain from finding common prototypes without hampering
accuracy at the leaf nodes—a feature missing in existing methods.
To address these challenges, we present Hierarchy aligned Commonality through Prototypical
Networks (HComP-Net), a framework to learn hierarchical prototypes over the tree of life for dis-
covering evolutionary traits. Here are the main contributions of our work:

      1. HComP-Net learns common traits shared by all descendant species of an internal node and
         avoids the learning of over-specific prototypes in contrast to baseline methods using a novel
         over-specificity loss.
      2. HComP-Net uses a novel discriminative loss to ensure that the prototypes learned at an
         internal node are absent in the contrasting set of species with different ancestry.
      3. HComP-Net includes a novel masking module to allow for the exclusion of over-specific
         prototypes at higher levels of the tree without hampering classification performance.
      4. We empirically show that HComP-Net learns prototypes that are accurate, semantically
         consistent, and generalizable to unseen species compared to baselines on data from 190
         species of birds (CUB-200-2011 dataset) (Wah et al., 2011), 38 species of fishes (Elhamod
         et al., 2023), 30 species of butterflies (Lawrence & Campolongo, 2024), 113 species of
         spiders and 41 species of turtles (Van Horn et al., 2021). We show the ability of HComP-Net
         to generate novel hypotheses about evolutionary traits at different levels of the phylogenetic
         tree of organisms.


2    R ELATED W ORKS

One of the seminal lines of work in the field of prototype-based interpretability methods is the
framework of ProtoPNet (Chen et al., 2019) that learns a set of “prototypical patches” from training
images of every class to enable case-based reasoning. Following this work, several variants have
been developed, such as ProtoPShare (Rymarczyk et al., 2021), ProtoPool (Rymarczyk et al., 2022),
ProtoTree (Nauta et al., 2021), and HPnet (Hase et al., 2019) suiting to different interpretability
requirements. Among all these approaches, our work is closely related to HPnet (Hase et al., 2019),
the hierarchical extension of ProtoPNet that learns a prototype layer for every parent node in the
tree. Despite sharing similar motivation, HPnet is not designed to avoid the learning of over-specific
prototypes or to abstain from learning common prototypes at higher levels of the tree.
Another related line of work is the framework of PIPNet (Nauta et al., 2023), which uses self-
supervised learning to reduce the “semantic gap” (Hoffmann et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022) between
the latent space of prototypes and the space of images, such that the prototypes in the latent space
correspond to the same visual concept in the image space. In HComP-Net, we build upon the
idea of self-supervised learning introduced in PIPNet to learn a semantically consistent hierarchy
of prototypes. Our work is also related to ProtoTree (Nauta et al., 2021), which structures the
prototypes as nodes in a decision tree to offer more granular interpretability. However, ProtoTree
differs from our work in that it learns the tree-based structure of prototypes automatically from data
and cannot handle a known hierarchy. Moreover, the prototypes learned in ProtoTree are purely
discriminative and allow for negative reasoning, which is not aligned with our objective of finding
common traits of descendant species.
Other related works that focus on finding shared features are ProtoPShare (Rymarczyk et al., 2021)
and ProtoPool (Rymarczyk et al., 2022). Both approaches aim to find common features among
classes, but their primary goal is to reduce the prototype count by exploiting similarities among
classes, leading to a sparser network. This is different from our goal of finding a hierarchy of
prototypes to find evolutionary traits common to a group of species absent in other species.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                  K                                                                           Prototype
          x’                                                                                                                      W
                                                                                                                                               Softmax &       Scores


                                                                                                                          K
                                                                                          Node 1 Prototype                                H     Global
                                                                                                                                              Max-pooling
                                        C                                                     vectors


                                                                         Inner                                                                                                Child
                                                                        Product                                                                                      sg      classes
                                   H
                       CNN
       x’’                                  W                                                                                                               Masking module
                                                                                          Node 2 Prototype
                                                                                              vectors
                                        C

                                                                          Inner
                                                                         Product                                                                                              Child
    Augmented                                                                                                                                                        sg      classes
                                   H
      image

                                            W                                                                                                               Masking module
                          Masking module                                                       Node N
                                                                                          Prototype vectors
    Overspecificity
        score
                                                   stop
                                                 gradient                 Inner                                                                                               Child
                Gumbel                                                   Product                                                                                     sg      classes
                Softmax

                                       Multiplication                                                                                                       Masking module
 Learnable parameter


                            Figure 3: Schematic illustration of HComP-Net model architecture.


Outside the realm of prototype-based methods, the framework of Phylogeny-guided Neural Net-
works (PhyloNN) (Elhamod et al., 2023) shares a similar motivation as our work to discover evolu-
tionary traits by representing biological images in feature spaces structured by tree-based knowledge
(i.e., phylogeny). However, PhyloNN primarily focuses on the tasks of image generation and trans-
lation rather than interpretability. Additionally, PhyloNN can only work with discretized trees with
fixed number of ancestor levels per leaf node, unlike our work that does not require any discretization
of the tree.
There are also methods for learning hierarchical features in image classification that can clas-
sify difficult-to-distinguish categories within coarse-grained datasets (Yan et al., 2015; Hu et al.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                  sto
2016; Taherkhani et al., 2019). These methods use semantic hierarchies that separate broad super-
                                                            W
                                                                         W                   W
                                                                                                   Learnable
                                                                                                              W               W                   W

                                                                                                                                                                                                gradi
                                                                                                   parameter Gumbel
                                                                    M


                                                                                      M


                                                                                                      M


                                                                                                                      M


                                                                                                                                              M


                                                                             H                   H                H                   H               H

categories and sub-categories instead of enforcing a multi-level hierarchy among fine-grained im-
                                                        M


                                                                H

                                                                                                                Softmax
ages (for example, images of birds only). Other related works include regularization techniques to                                                                                     Multiplication
capture commonalities between similar classes Goo et al. (2016), and hierarchical interpretability
                                                                                                Overspecificity score
frameworks Dai et al. (2023) that extend the concept of concept whitening (Chen et al., 2020) to
incorporate known hierarchies. However, the interpretability offered by these approaches cannot
localize to fine-grained image parts. In contrast, our approach enforces a multi-level predefined
hierarchy on images, and learns prototypes that represent localized attributes common to different
nodes of the hierarchy.


3       P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY

3.1        HC OM P-N ET M ODEL A RCHITECTURE

Given a phylogenetic tree with N internal nodes, the goal of HComP-Net is to jointly learn a set of
prototype vectors Pn for every internal node n ∈ {1, . . . , N }. Our architecture as shown in Figure 3
begins with a CNN that acts as a common feature extractor f (x; θ) for all nodes, where θ represents
the learnable parameters of f . f converts an image x into a latent representation Z ∈ RH×W ×C ,
where each “patch” at location (h, w) is, zh,w ∈ RC . Following the feature extractor, for every node
                                                             Kn
n, we initialize a set of Kn prototype vectors Pn = {pi }i=1    , where pi ∈ RC . Here, the number of
prototypes Kn learned at node n varies in proportion to the number of children of node n, with β
as the proportionality constant, i.e., at each node n we assign β prototypes for every child node. To
simplify notations, we drop the subscript n in Pn and Kn while discussing the operations occurring
in node n.
We consider the following sequence of operations at every node n. We first compute the similarity
score between every prototype in P and every patch in Z. This results in a matrix Ẑ ∈ RH×W ×K ,
where every element represents a similarity score between image patches and prototype vectors. We


                                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


apply a softmax operation across the K channels of Ẑ such that the vector ẑh,w ∈ RK at spatial
location (h, w) in Ẑ represents the probability that the corresponding patch zh,w is similar to the K
prototypes. Furthermore, the ith channel of Ẑ serves as a prototype score map for the prototype
vector pi , indicating the presence of pi in the image. We perform global max-pooling across the
spatial dimensions H × W of Ẑ to obtain a vector g ∈ RK , where the ith element represents
the highest similarity score of the prototype vector pi across the entire image. g is then fed to a
linear classification layer with weights ϕ to produce the final classification scores for every child
node of node n. We restrict the connections in the classification layer so that every child node nc
is connected to a distinct set of β prototypes, to ensure that every prototype uniquely maps to a
child node. ϕ is restricted to be non-negative to ensure that the classification is done solely through
positive reasoning, similar to the approach used in PIP-Net (Nauta et al., 2023). We borrow the
regularization scheme of PIP-Net to induce sparsity in ϕ by computing the logit of child node nc as
log((gϕ)2 + 1). g and ϕ here are again unique to each node.

3.2   L OSS F UNCTIONS U SED TO T RAIN HC OM P-N ET

Contrastive Losses for Learning Hierarchical Prototypes: PIP-Net (Nauta et al., 2023) intro-
duced the idea of using self-supervised contrastive learning to learn semantically meaningful proto-
types. We build upon this idea in our work to learn semantically meaningful hierarchical prototypes
at every node in the tree as follows. For every input image x, we pass in two augmentations of the
                                                                                                  ′
image, x′ and x′′ to our framework. The prototype score maps for the two augmentations, Ẑ and
  ′′
Ẑ , are then considered as positive pairs. Since ẑh,w ∈ RK represents the probabilities of patch zh,w
                                                                                                    ′
being similar to the prototypes from P, we align the probabilities from the two augmentations ẑh,w
      ′′
and ẑh,w to be similar using the following alignment loss:
                                         1       X              ′       ′′
                              LA = −                      log(ẑh,w · ẑh,w )                       (1)
                                       HW
                                             (h,w)∈H×W
      PK                                                                                             ′
Since i=1 ẑh,w,i = 1 due to softmax operation, LA is minimum (i.e., LA = 0) when both ẑh,w
      ′′
and ẑh,w are identical one-hot encoded vectors. A trivial solution that minimizes LA is when all
patches across all images are similar to the same prototype. To avoid such representation collapse,
we use the following tanh-loss LT of PIP-Net (Nauta et al., 2023), which serves the same purpose
as uniformity losses in Wang & Isola (2020) and Silva & Rivera (2022):
                                             K            B
                                          1 X            X
                                 LT = −         log(tanh(   gb,i )),                                     (2)
                                          K i=1
                                                            b=1
where gb,i is the prototype score for prototype i with respect to image b of mini-batch. LT en-
courages each prototype pi to be activated at least once in a given mini-batch of B images, thereby
helping to avoid the possibility of representation collapse. The use of tanh ensures that only the
presence of a prototype is taken into account and not its frequency.
Over-specificity Loss: To achieve the goal of learning prototypes common to all descendant species
of an internal node, we introduce a novel loss, termed over-specificity loss Lovsp , that avoids learning
over-specific prototypes at any node n. Lovsp is formulated as a modification of the tanh-loss such
that prototype pi is encouraged to be activated at least once in every one of the descendant species
d ∈ {1, . . . , Di } of its corresponding child node in the mini-batch of images fed to the model, as
follows:                                      K Di
                                          1 XX                 X
                               Lovsp = −             log(tanh(      gb,i )),                          (3)
                                          K i=1
                                                d=1            b∈Bd
where Bd is the subset of images in the mini-batch that belong to species d.
Discriminative loss: In order to ensure that a learned prototype for a child node nc is not activated
by any of its contrasting set of species (i.e., species that are descendants of child nodes of n other
than nc ), we introduce another novel loss function, Ldisc , defined as follows:
                                                K
                                             1 X X
                                   Ldisc =         max(gb,i ),                                           (4)
                                             K i=1 b∈Bd
                                                    d∈D
                                                      fi



                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Dfi is the contrasting set of all descendant species of child nodes of n other than nc . This is
similar to the separation loss used in other prototype-based methods such as ProtoPNet (Chen et al.,
2019), ProtoTree (Nauta et al., 2021), and TesNet (Wang et al., 2021).
Orthogonality loss: We also apply kernel orthogonality as introduced in Wang et al. (2020) to the
prototype vectors at every node n, so that the learned prototypes are orthogonal and capture diverse
features:
                                       Lorth = ∥P̂P̂⊤ − I∥2F                                     (5)
where P̂ is the matrix of normalized prototype vectors of size C × K, I is an identity matrix, and
                                                                               pi
∥.∥2F is the Frobenius norm. Each prototype p̂i in P̂ is normalized as, p̂i = ∥pi∥
                                                                                   .
Classification loss: Finally, we apply cross-entropy loss for classification at each internal node as
follows:                                        XB
                                     LCE = −        yb log(ŷb )                                  (6)
                                                    b
where y is ground truth label and ŷ is the prediction at every node of the tree.

3.3   M ASKING M ODULE TO I DENTIFY OVER - SPECIFIC P ROTOTYPES

We employ an additional masking module at every node n to identify over-specific prototypes with-
out hampering their training. The learned mask for prototype pi simply serves as an indicator of
whether pi is over-specific or not, enabling our approach to abstain from finding common prototypes
if there are none, especially at higher levels of the tree. To obtain the mask values, we first calculate
the over-specificity score for prototype pi as the product of the maximum prototype scores obtained
across all images in the mini-batch belonging to every descendant species d as:
                                                 YDi
                                        Oi = −         max (gb,i )                                    (7)
                                                      (b∈Bd )
                                                d=1
where gb,i is the prototype score for prototype pi with respect to image b of mini-batch and Bd
is the subset of images in the mini-batch that belong to descendant species d. Since gb,i takes a
value between 0 and 1 due to the softmax operation, Oi ranges from -1 to 0, where -1 denotes least
over-specificity and 0 denotes the most over-specificity. The multiplication of the prototype scores
ensures that even when the score is less with respect to only one descendant species, the prototype
will be assigned a high over-specificity score (close to 0).
As shown in Figure 3, Oi is then fed into the masking module, which includes a learned mask value
Mi for every prototype pi . We generate Mi from a Gumbel-softmax distribution (Jang et al., 2016)
so that the values are skewed to be very close to either 0 or 1, i.e., Mi = Gumbel-Softmax(γi , τ ),
where γi are the learnable parameters of the distribution and τ is temperature. We then compute the
masking loss, Lmask , as:
                                K
                                X
                     Lmask =      (λmask Mi ◦ stopgrad(Oi ) + λL1 ∥Mi ∥1 )                           (8)
                                i=1
where λmask and λL1 are trade-off coefficients, ∥.∥1 is the L1 norm added to induce sparsity in the
masks, and stopgrad represents the stop gradient operation applied over Oi to ensure that the
gradient of Lmask does not flow back to the learning of prototype vectors and impact their training.
Note that the learned masks are not used for pruning the prototypes during training, they are only
used during inference to determine which of the learned prototypes are over-specific and likely to
not represent evolutionary traits. Therefore, even if all the prototypes are identified as over-specific
by the masking module at an internal node, it will not affect the classification performance at that
node.

3.4   T RAINING HC OM P-N ET

We first pre-train the prototypes at every internal node in a self-supervised learning manner using
alignment and tanh-losses as LSS = λA LA + λT LT . We then fine-tune the model using the follow-
ing combined loss: (λCE LCE + LSS + λovsp Lovsp + λdisc Ldisc + λorth Lorth + Lmask ), where
λ’s are trade-off parameters. Note that the loss is applied over every node in the tree. We show an
ablation of key loss terms used in our framework in Table 6 in Appendix D.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Datasets: In our experiments, we primarily focus on the 190 species of birds (Bird) from the CUB-
200-2011 (Wah et al., 2011) dataset, for which the phylogenetic relationship (Jetz et al., 2012) is
known. The tree is quite large, with a total of 184 internal nodes. We removed the background from
the images to avoid the possibility of learning prototypes corresponding to background information,
such as the bird’s habitat, as we are only interested in the traits corresponding to the body of the
organism. We also apply our method on a fish dataset with 38 species (Fish) (Elhamod et al., 2023)
along with its associated phylogeny (Elhamod et al., 2023), 30 subspecies of Heliconius butterflies
(Butterfly) from the Jiggins Heliconius Collection dataset (Lawrence & Campolongo, 2024) col-
lected from various sources (see Appendix F) . We also consider certain subsets of iNat2021 dataset
(Van Horn et al., 2021) where the set of species are not too diverse (such as elephants and whales
from class Mammalia), but exhibit fine-grained, hard-to-quantify hierarchical variation in visually
observable traits, such that we can find interpretable commonalities between the species. We reiter-
ate that our goal is to discover local prototypes as evolutionary traits, e.g., beak color, stripe pattern,
and fin curvature. Traits differentiating species at higher levels of the tree are often not local, such as
global contours, which are beyond the scope of our study. Therefore, we consider 41 species from
order Testudines (Turtle) and 113 species from order Araneae (Spider) in the iNat2021 dataset.
The phylogeny for Butterfly, Turtle, and Spider were obtained using the rotl package (Redelings
et al., 2019; Michonneau et al., 2016). Further details of dataset statistics, phylogeny statistics,
hyperparameter settings and training strategy are provided in Appendix F.
Baselines: We compare HComP-Net to ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016), ConvNeXt-tiny(Liu et al.,
2022), ProtoPNet (Chen et al., 2019), INTR (Interpretable Transformer) (Paul et al., 2023), PIP-Net
(Nauta et al., 2023) and HPnet (Hase et al., 2019) as classification baselines. For HPnet, we used
the same hyperparameter settings and training strategy as used by ProtoPNet for the CUB-200-2011
dataset. To ensure a fair comparison, we set the number of prototypes per child class to 10 for both
HComP-Net and HPnet on the Bird, Butterfly, and Fish datasets. For the Spider and Lizard datasets,
due to the higher diversity of images, we increased the number of prototypes to 20 for both methods.
We follow the same training strategy as provided by ProtoPNet for the CUB-200-2011 dataset.


5     R ESULTS

5.1   F INE - GRAINED ACCURACY

Similar to HPnet (Hase et al., 2019),                 Table 1: % Fine-grained Accuracy
we calculate the fine-grained accuracy Model             Hierarchy Bird Butterfly Fish Spider Turtle
for each leaf node by calculating the
path probability over every image. ResNet-50                        74.18 95.76 86.63 74.17 56.23
During inference, the final probabil-      ConvNeXt-tiny            84.23 96.28 91.73 84.05 69.56
                                           ProtoPNet         No     75.80 96.82 91.11 74.17 61.74
ity for leaf class Y given an image INTR                            69.22 95.53 86.73 78.91 58.64
X is calculated as, P (Y |X) = PIPNet                               83.38 97.87 93.58 83.45 67.24
     (1)    (2)       (L)
P (Y , Y , ..., Y |X)                 =
QL          (l)                 (l)        HPnet                    36.18 94.69 77.51 5.85 6.38
                |X), where P (Y |X) is HComP-Net             Yes
   l=1 P (Y                                                         70.01 97.35 90.80 76.19 58.26
the probability of assigning the image
X to a node at level l, and L is the
depth of the leaf node. Every image is assigned to the leaf class with maximum path probability,
which is used to compute the fine-grained accuracy. The comparison of the fine-grained accuracy
calculated for HComP-Net and the baselines are given in Table 1 (best performance bolded and
second-best performance underlined). Note that despite extensive hyperparameter tuning, HPnet
was unable to perform well on Spider and Turtle datasets (See Appendix F for details). It is
important to note that the primary objective of our work is identifying evolutionary traits through
semantically meaningful prototypes (both quantitatively and qualitatively evaluated in Section 5.3
and 5.4 respectively), and not necessarily achieving high classification accuracy (which may require
capturing global features or features prone to dataset bias). Additionally, we observe that the
Spider and Turtle datasets from iNat2021 are relatively more challenging since they contain noisy
elements, including blurry images, obscured foregrounds and camouflaged backgrounds, that cause
models to misclassify these images (examples provided in Figure 7 of Appendix).


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     (a) HPnet                                              (b) HComP-Net

Figure 4: Comparing the part consistency of HPnet and HComP-Net for their prototype learned at an inter-
nal node in the Bird dataset that corresponds to 3 descendant species (names shown on the rows). For every
species, we are visualizing the top-3 images with the highest prototype score for both HPnet and HComP-Net,
shown as the three columns with zoomed in views of their discovered prototypes. We can see that HPnet high-
lights varying parts of the bird across the 3 species and across multiple images of the same species, making it
difficult to associate a consistent semantic meaning to its learned prototype. In contrast, HComP-Net consis-
tently highlights the head region of the bird across all four species and their images.



5.2   G ENERALIZING TO U NSEEN S PECIES IN THE P HYLOGENY

We analyze the performance of HComP-Net in generaliz-          Table 2: % Fine-grained Accuracy
ing to unseen species that the model has not seen during              (on unseen species)
training. The biological motivation for this experiment is Species Name         HComP-Net HPnet
to evaluate if HComP-Net can situate newly discovered
species at its appropriate position in the phylogeny by Fish Crow                  53.33    10.55
identifying its common ancestors shared with the known       Rock  Wren            53.33    10.22
                                                             Indigo Bunting        96.67     49.2
species. An added advantage of our work is that along Bohemian Waxwing             70.00    44.9
with identifying the ancestor of an unseen species, we can
also identify the common traits shared by the novel species with known species in the phylogeny.
Since unseen species cannot be classified to the finest levels (i.e., up to the leaf node corresponding
to the unseen species), we analyze the ability of HComP-Net to classify unseen species accurately up
to one level above the leaf level in the hierarchy. With this consideration, the final probability of an
unseen species for a given image is calculated as, P (Y |Xunseen ) = P (Y (1) , Y (2) , ..., Y (L−1) |X) =
QL−1        (l)
   l=1 P (Y     |X). Note that we leave out the class probability at the Lth level, since we do not take
into account the class probability of the leaf level. Since such path probability can only be calculated
for hierarchical methods, we compare our approach to HPnet which also learns hierarchical proto-
types. We leave four species from the Bird training set and calculate their accuracy during inference
in Table 2. We can see that HComP-Net is able to generalize better than HPnet for all four species.

5.3   A NALYZING THE S EMANTIC Q UALITY OF P ROTOTYPES

Following the method introduced in PIPNet            Table 3: Part purity of prototypes on Bird dataset.
(Nauta et al., 2023), we assess the semantic
quality of our learned prototypes by evaluat-       Model          Lovsp Masking Part purity % masked
ing their part purity. A prototype with high        HPnet            -        -      0.14 ± 0.09    -
part purity (close to 1) is one that consis-        HComP-Net        -        -      0.68 ± 0.22    -
tently highlights the same image region in          HComP-Net        -        ✓      0.75 ± 0.17 21.42%
the score maps (corresponding to consistent         HComP-Net        ✓        -      0.72 ± 0.19    -
local features, such as the eye or wing of a        HComP-Net        ✓        ✓      0.77 ± 0.16 16.53%
bird) across images belonging to the same
class.
The part purity is calculated using the part locations of 15 parts that are provided in the CUB dataset.
For each prototype, we take the top-10 images from each leaf descendant. We consider the 32 × 32
image patch that is centered around the max activation location of the prototype from the top-10


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


images. With these top-10 image patches, we calculate how frequently each part is present inside
the image patch. For example, a part that is found inside the image patch 8 out of 10 times is given a
score of 0.8. In PIP-Net, the highest value among the values calculated for each part is given as the
part purity of the prototype. In our approach, since we are dealing with a hierarchy and taking the
top-10 from each leaf descendant, a particular part, let’s say the eye, might have a score of 0.5 for
one leaf descendant and 0.7 for a different leaf descendant. Since we want the prototype to represent
the same part for all the leaf descendants, we take the lowest score (the weakest link) among all the
leaf descendants as the score of the part. By following this method, for a given prototype we can
arrive at a value for each part and finally take the maximum among the values as the purity of the
prototype. We take the mean of the part purity across all the prototypes and report the results in
Table 3 for different ablations of HComP-Net and also HPnet, which is the only baseline method
that can learn hierarchical prototypes.
We can see that HComP-Net, even without the use of over-specificity loss, performs much better than
HPnet due to the contrastive learning approach we have adopted from PIPNet (Nauta et al., 2023).
The addition of over-specificity loss improves the part purity because over-specific prototypes tend
to have poor part purity for some of the leaf descendants, which will affect their overall part purity
score. Further, for both ablations with and without over-specificity loss, we apply the masking
module and remove masked (over-specific) prototypes during the calculation of part purity. We see
that the part purity goes higher by applying the masking module, demonstrating its effectiveness in
identifying over-specific prototypes. We further compute the purity of masked-out prototypes and
notice that the masked-out prototypes have drastically lower part purity (0.29 ± 0.17) compared
to non-masked prototypes (0.77 ± 0.16). We also provide a visual comparison of a masked (over-
specific) prototype and an unmasked (non-over-specific) prototype in Appendix H. An alternative
approach to learning the masking module is to identify over-specific prototypes using a fixed global
threshold over Oi . We show in Table 9 of Appendix G that given the right choice of such a threshold,
we can identify over-specific prototypes. However, selecting the ideal threshold can be non-trivial.
On the other hand, our masking module learns the appropriate threshold dynamically as part of the
training process.
Figure 4 visualizes the part consistency of prototypes discovered by HComP-Net in comparison to
HPnet for the bird dataset. We can see that HComP-Net is finding a consistent region in the image
(corresponding to the head region) across all three descendant species and all images of a species, in
contrast to HPnet. Since HPnet is implemented with a 7 × 7 latent space in comparison to HComP-
Net which uses a 26 × 26 latent space, we explore HPnet with a higher resolution feature map of
28 × 28 and report the qualitative and quantitative results in Figure 9 in Appendix I. We note that the
performance of HPnet does not improve with higher resolution feature maps. Furthermore, thanks
to the alignment loss, in HComP-Net every patch ẑh,w is encoded as nearly a one-hot encoding
with respect to the K prototypes which causes the prototype score maps to be highly localized.
The concise and focused nature of the prototype score maps makes the interpretation much more
effective compared to baselines.


5.4   A NALYZING E VOLUTIONARY T RAITS D ISCOVERED BY HC OM P-N ET

We now qualitatively analyze some of the hypothesized evolutionary traits discovered in the hierar-
chy of prototypes learned by HComP-Net. Figure 5 shows the hierarchy of prototypes discovered
over a small subtree of the phylogeny from Bird (four species) and Fish (three species) dataset. In
the visualization of bird prototypes, we can see that the two Pelican species share a consistent re-
gion in the learned Prototype labeled 2, which corresponds to the head region of the birds. We can
hypothesize this prototype is capturing the white-colored crown common to the two species. On the
other hand, Prototype 1 finds the shared trait of similar beak morphology (e.g., sharpness of beaks)
across the two Cormorant species. We can see that HComP-Net avoids the learning of over-specific
prototypes at internal nodes, which are pushed down to individual leaf nodes, as shown in visual-
izations of Prototype 3, 4, 5, and 6. Similarly, in the visualization of the fish prototypes, we can see
that Prototype 1 is highlighting a specific fin (dorsal fin) of the Carassius auratus and Notropis hud-
sonius species, possibly representing their pigmentation and structure, which is noticeably different
compared to the contrasting species of Alosa chrysochloris. Note that while HComP-Net identifies
the common regions corresponding to each prototype (shown as heatmaps), the textual descriptions
of the traits provided in Figure 5 are based on human interpretation.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Visualizing the hierarchy of prototypes discovered by HComP-Net for Birds and Fishes. *Note that
the textual descriptions of the hypothesized traits shown for every prototype are based on human interpretation.
Visualizations for Butterfly, Turtle, and Spider datasets are provided in the Appendix J.


Figure 6: We trace the prototypes learned for Western Grebe at three different levels in the phylogenetic tree
(corresponding to different periods of time in evolution). Text in blue is the interpretation of common traits of
descendants found by HComP-Net at every ancestor node of Western Grebe.


Figure 6 shows another visualization of the sequence of prototypes learned by HComP-Net for the
Western Grebe species at different levels of the phylogeny. We can see that at level 0, we are
capturing features closer to the neck region, indicating the likely difference between the length of
necks between Grebe species and other species (Cuckoo, Albatross, and Fulmar) that diversify at
an earlier time in the process of evolution. At level 1, the prototype is focusing on the eye region,
potentially indicating a difference in the color of red and black patterns around the eyes. At level
2, we are differentiating Western Grebe from Horned Grebe based on the feature of bills. We also
validate our prototypes by comparing them with the multi-head cross-attention maps learned by
INTR (Paul et al., 2023). We can see that some of the prototypes discovered by HComP-Net can
be mapped to equivalent attention heads of INTR. However, while INTR is designed to produce
a flat structure of attention maps, we are able to place these maps on the tree of life. This shows
the power of HComP-Net in generating novel hypotheses about how trait changes may have evolved
and accumulated across different branches of the phylogeny. Additional visualizations of discovered
evolutionary traits from all five datasets are provided in the Appendix (Figures 10 to 29).

6    C ONCLUSION
We introduce a novel approach for learning hierarchy-aligned prototypes while avoiding the learning
of over-specific features at internal nodes of the phylogenetic tree, enabling the discovery of novel
evolutionary traits. Our empirical analysis on birds, fishes, and butterflies demonstrates the efficacy
of HComP-Net over baseline methods. Furthermore, HComP-Net demonstrates a unique ability
to generate novel hypotheses about evolutionary traits, showcasing its potential in advancing our
understanding of evolution. We discuss the limitations of our work in Appendix M. While we focus
on the biological problem of discovering evolutionary traits, our work can be applied in general to
domains involving a hierarchy of classes, which can be explored in future research.



                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is supported by National Science Foundation (NSF) awards for the HDR Ima-
geomics Institute (OAC-2118240). We are thankful for the support of computational resources
provided by the Advanced Research Computing (ARC) Center at Virginia Tech. This manuscript
has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under contract DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the US De-
partment of Energy (DOE). The US government retains, and the publisher, by accepting the ar-
ticle for publication, acknowledges that the US government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irre-
vocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript or al-
low others to do so for US government purposes. DOE will provide public access to these re-
sults of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan (https:
//www.energy.gov/doe-public-access-plan).

R EPRODUCIBILITY
We have ensured the reproducibility of our work by providing a detailed set of resources. The source
code used for training and evaluation, along with instructions for reproducing the experiments,
is available via Imageomics Institute GitHub site: (https://github.com/Imageomics/HComPNet),
which is mentioned in Appendix L. Comprehensive implementation details, including hyperparam-
eters and compute resources, are described in Appendix F. Additionally, we have cited all dataset
sources and outlined the data processing steps in Appendix F to facilitate accurate replication of our
experiments.

R EFERENCES
Abien Fred Agarap.     Deep learning using rectified linear units (relu).             arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.08375, 2018.
Chaofan Chen, Oscar Li, Daniel Tao, Alina Barnett, Cynthia Rudin, and Jonathan K Su. This looks
  like that: deep learning for interpretable image recognition. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 32, 2019.
Zhi Chen, Yijie Bei, and Cynthia Rudin. Concept whitening for interpretable image recognition.
  Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(12):772–782, 2020.
Haixing Dai, Lu Zhang, Lin Zhao, Zihao Wu, Zhengliang Liu, David Liu, Xiaowei Yu, Yanjun Lyu,
  Changying Li, Ninghao Liu, et al. Hierarchical semantic tree concept whitening for interpretable
  image classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04343, 2023.
Mohannad Elhamod, Mridul Khurana, Harish Babu Manogaran, Josef C Uyeda, Meghan A Balk,
 Wasila Dahdul, Yasin Bakis, Henry L Bart Jr, Paula M Mabee, Hilmar Lapp, et al. Discovering
 novel biological traits from images using phylogeny-guided neural networks. In Proceedings of
 the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 3966–3978,
 2023.
R. Farrell. Cub-200-2011 segmentations (1.0) [data set], 2024. URL https://data.caltech.
  edu/records/w9d68-gec53.
Wonjoon Goo, Juyong Kim, Gunhee Kim, and Sung Ju Hwang. Taxonomy-regularized semantic
 deep convolutional neural networks. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Confer-
 ence, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 14, pp. 86–101.
 Springer, 2016.
Luke J Harmon, Jonathan B Losos, T Jonathan Davies, Rosemary G Gillespie, John L Gittleman,
  W Bryan Jennings, Kenneth H Kozak, Mark A McPeek, Franck Moreno-Roark, Thomas J Near,
  et al. Early bursts of body size and shape evolution are rare in comparative data. Evolution, 64
  (8):2385–2396, 2010.
Peter Hase, Chaofan Chen, Oscar Li, and Cynthia Rudin. Interpretable image recognition with
  hierarchical prototypes. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Human Computation and
  Crowdsourcing, volume 7, pp. 32–40, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Adrian Hoffmann, Claudio Fanconi, Rahul Rade, and Jonas Kohler. This looks like that... does
  it? shortcomings of latent space prototype interpretability in deep networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2105.02968, 2021.
David Houle and Daniela M Rossoni. Complexity, evolvability, and the process of adaptation.
  Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics, 53, 2022.
Hexiang Hu, Guang-Tong Zhou, Zhiwei Deng, Zicheng Liao, and Greg Mori. Learning structured
  inference neural networks with label relations. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-
  puter vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2960–2968, 2016.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.
W. Jetz, G. H. Thomas, J. B. Joy, K. Hartmann, and A. O. Mooers. The global diversity of birds in
  space and time. Nature, 491:444–448, 2012. URL http://birdtree.org.
Chris Jiggins and Ian Warren. Cambridge butterfly wing collection - Chris Jiggins 2001/2 broods
  batch 1, January 2019a. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2549524.
Chris Jiggins and Ian Warren. Cambridge butterfly wing collection - Chris Jiggins 2001/2 broods
  batch 2, January 2019b. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2550097.
Chris Jiggins, Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Ian Warren, and Eva Wiltshire. Cambridge but-
  terfly wing collection batch 3, May 2019. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
  2682458.
Anuj Karpatne, Xiaowei Jia, and Vipin Kumar. Knowledge-guided machine learning: Current trends
  and future prospects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.15989, 2024.
Mridul Khurana, Arka Daw, M Maruf, Josef C Uyeda, Wasila Dahdul, Caleb Charpentier, Yasin
 Bakış, Henry L Bart Jr, Paula M Mabee, Hilmar Lapp, et al. Hierarchical conditioning of diffusion
 models using tree-of-life for studying species evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00160, 2024.
Sunnie SY Kim, Nicole Meister, Vikram V Ramaswamy, Ruth Fong, and Olga Russakovsky. Hive:
  Evaluating the human interpretability of visual explanations. In European Conference on Com-
  puter Vision, pp. 280–298. Springer, 2022.
Christopher Lawrence and Elizabeth G. Campolongo. Heliconius collection (cambridge
  butterfly), 2024.    URL https://huggingface.co/datasets/imageomics/
  Heliconius-Collection_Cambridge-Butterfly.
Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023.
Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie.
  A convnet for the 2020s. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 11976–11986, 2022.
Moritz D Lürig, Seth Donoughe, Erik I Svensson, Arthur Porto, and Masahito Tsuboi. Computer
 vision, machine learning, and the promise of phenomics in ecology and evolutionary biology.
 Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 9:642774, 2021.
Chiyu Ma, Brandon Zhao, Chaofan Chen, and Cynthia Rudin. This looks like those: Illuminating
  prototypical concepts using multiple visualizations. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Anniina Mattila, Chris Jiggins, and Ian Warren. University of Helsinki butterfly collection - Anni-
  ina Mattila bred specimens, February 2019. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
  2555086.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Joana I. Meier, Patricio Salazar, Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Ian Warren, and Chris Jggins. Cam-
  bridge butterfly wing collection - Patricio Salazar PhD wild specimens batch 3, October 2020.
  URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4153502.
Jason G Mezey and David Houle. The dimensionality of genetic variation for wing shape in
  drosophila melanogaster. Evolution, 59(5):1027–1038, 2005.
Francois Michonneau, Joseph W. Brown, and David J. Winter. rotl: an r package to interact with
  the open tree of life data. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7(12):1476–1481, 2016. doi:
  10.1111/2041-210X.12593.
Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Chris Jiggins, and Ian Warren. Cambridge butterfly wing collection
  batch 1- version 2, May 2019a. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3082688.
Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Chris Jiggins, and Ian Warren. Cambridge butterfly wing collection
  batch 2, May 2019b. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2677821.
Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Chris Jiggins, and Ian Warren. Cambridge butterfly wing collection
  batch 4, May 2019c. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2682669.
Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Chris Jiggins, Ian Warren, Camilo Salazar, Marianne Elias, Imogen
  Gavins, Eva Wiltshire, Stephen Montgomery, and Owen McMillan. Cambridge and collabora-
  tors butterfly wing collection batch 10, May 2019d. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.2813153.
Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Chris Jiggins, Ian Warren, and Eva Wiltshire. Cambridge butter-
  fly wing collection batch 7, May 2019e. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
  2702457.
Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Chris Jiggins, Ian Warren, and Eva Wiltshire. Cambridge butter-
  fly wing collection batch 8, May 2019f. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
  2707828.
Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Chris Jiggins, Ian Warren, and Eva Wiltshire. Cambridge butter-
  fly wing collection batch 5, May 2019g. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
  2684906.
Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Chris Jiggins, Ian Warren, and Eva Wiltshire. Cambridge butter-
  fly wing collection batch 6, May 2019h. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
  2686762.
Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Chris Jiggins, Ian Warren, Eva Wiltshire, and Imogen Gavins. Cam-
  bridge butterfly wing collection batch 9, May 2019i. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.2714333.
Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Eva van der Heijden, and Chris Jiggins. Cambridge butterfly col-
  lection - GMK Broods Ikiam 2018, November 2020a. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.4291095.
Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Eva van der Heijden, Nicola Nadeau, and Chris Jiggins. Cambridge
  butterfly wing collection batch 10, November 2020b. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.4289223.
Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Quentin Paynter, and Amin Ghane. Heliconius erato cyrbia, Cook
  Islands (New Zealand) 2016, 2019, 2021, September 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.
  5281/zenodo.5526257.
Samuel G Müller and Frank Hutter. Trivialaugment: Tuning-free yet state-of-the-art data augmenta-
  tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 774–782,
  2021.
Meike Nauta, Ron Van Bree, and Christin Seifert. Neural prototype trees for interpretable fine-
 grained image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition, pp. 14933–14943, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Meike Nauta, Jörg Schlötterer, Maurice van Keulen, and Christin Seifert. Pip-net: Patch-based
 intuitive prototypes for interpretable image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
 ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2744–2753, 2023.
Maureen A O’Leary and Seth Kaufman. Morphobank: phylophenomics in the “cloud”. Cladistics,
 27(5):529–537, 2011.
Dipanjyoti Paul, Arpita Chowdhury, Xinqi Xiong, Feng-Ju Chang, David Carlyn, Samuel Stevens,
  Kaiya Provost, Anuj Karpatne, Bryan Carstens, Daniel Rubenstein, et al. A simple interpretable
  transformer for fine-grained image classification and analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04157,
  2023.
Matthew W Pennell, Richard G FitzJohn, William K Cornwell, and Luke J Harmon. Model ade-
 quacy and the macroevolution of angiosperm functional traits. The American Naturalist, 186(2):
 E33–E50, 2015.
Erika Pinheiro de Castro, Christopher Jiggins, Karina Lucas da Silva-Brand0̆0e3o, Andre Vic-
  tor Lucci Freitas, Marcio Zikan Cardoso, Eva Van Der Heijden, Joana Meier, and Ian War-
  ren. Brazilian Butterflies Collected December 2020 to January 2021, February 2022. URL
  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5561246.
MARTin J RAMirez, Jonathan A Coddington, Wayne P Maddison, Peter E Midford, Lorenzo Pren-
 dini, Jeremy Miller, Charles E Griswold, Gustavo Hormiga, Petra Sierwald, Nikolaj Scharff, et al.
 Linking of digital images to phylogenetic data matrices using a morphological ontology. System-
 atic Biology, 56(2):283–294, 2007.
Benjamin Redelings, Luna Luisa Sanchez Reyes, Karen A. Cranston, Jim Allman, Mark T. Holder,
  and Emily Jane McTavish. Open tree of life synthetic tree, 2019. URL https://doi.org/
  10.5281/zenodo.3937741.
Dawid Rymarczyk, Łukasz Struski, Jacek Tabor, and Bartosz Zieliński. Protopshare: Prototypical
  parts sharing for similarity discovery in interpretable image classification. In Proceedings of the
  27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 1420–1430, 2021.
Dawid Rymarczyk, Łukasz Struski, Michał Górszczak, Koryna Lewandowska, Jacek Tabor, and
  Bartosz Zieliński. Interpretable image classification with differentiable prototypes assignment. In
  European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 351–368. Springer, 2022.
Camilo Salazar, Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Chris Jiggins, Ian Warren, and Imogen Gavins.
  Camilo Salazar and Cambridge butterfly wing collection batch 1, May 2019a. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2735056.
Patricio Salazar, Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Ian Warren, and Chris Jiggins. Cambridge butterfly
  wing collection - Patricio Salazar PhD wild and bred specimens batch 1, December 2018. URL
  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1748277.
Patricio Salazar, Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, Ian Warren, and Chris Jiggins. Cambridge butterfly
  wing collection - Patricio Salazar PhD wild and bred specimens batch 2, January 2019b. URL
  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2548678.
Patricio A. Salazar, Nicola Nadeau, Gabriela Montejo-Kovacevich, and Chris Jiggins. Sheffield
  butterfly wing collection - Patricio Salazar, Nicola Nadeau, Ikiam broods batch 1 and 2, November
  2020. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4288311.
Paul C Sereno. Logical basis for morphological characters in phylogenetics. Cladistics, 23(6):
  565–587, 2007.
Thalles Silva and Adı́n Ramı́rez Rivera. Representation learning via consistent assignment of views
  to clusters. In Proceedings of the 37th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing, pp.
  987–994, 2022.
Tiago R Simões, Michael W Caldwell, Alessandro Palci, and Randall L Nydam. Giant taxon-
  character matrices: quality of character constructions remains critical regardless of size. Cladis-
  tics, 33(2):198–219, 2017.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Randal A Singer, Kevin J Love, and Lawrence M Page. A survey of digitized data from us fish
  collections in the idigbio data aggregator. PloS one, 13(12):e0207636, 2018.
Fariborz Taherkhani, Hadi Kazemi, Ali Dabouei, Jeremy Dawson, and Nasser M Nasrabadi. A
  weakly supervised fine label classifier enhanced by coarse supervision. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 6459–6468, 2019.
Grant Van Horn, Oisin Mac Aodha, Yang Song, Yin Cui, Chen Sun, Alex Shepard, Hartwig Adam,
  Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The inaturalist species classification and detection dataset. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8769–8778,
  2018.
Grant Van Horn, Elijah Cole, Sara Beery, Kimberly Wilber, Serge Belongie, and Oisin Mac Aodha.
  Benchmarking representation learning for natural world image collections. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 12884–12893, 2021.
Catherine Wah, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The caltech-ucsd
  birds-200-2011 dataset. 2011.
Jiaqi Wang, Huafeng Liu, Xinyue Wang, and Liping Jing. Interpretable image recognition by con-
   structing transparent embedding space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-
   ence on Computer Vision, pp. 895–904, 2021.
Jiayun Wang, Yubei Chen, Rudrasis Chakraborty, and Stella X Yu. Orthogonal convolutional neural
   networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
   tion, pp. 11505–11515, 2020.
Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola. Understanding contrastive representation learning through align-
  ment and uniformity on the hypersphere. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  9929–9939. PMLR, 2020.
Ian Warren and Chris Jiggins. Miscellaneous Heliconius wing photographs (2001-2019) Part 2,
  February 2019a. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2553501.
Ian Warren and Chris Jiggins. Miscellaneous Heliconius wing photographs (2001-2019) Part 1,
  February 2019b. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2552371.
Ian Warren and Chris Jiggins. Miscellaneous Heliconius wing photographs (2001-2019) Part 3,
  February 2019c. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2553977.
Zhicheng Yan, Hao Zhang, Robinson Piramuthu, Vignesh Jagadeesh, Dennis DeCoste, Wei Di,
  and Yizhou Yu. Hd-cnn: hierarchical deep convolutional neural networks for large scale visual
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2740–
  2748, 2015.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

TABLE OF C ONTENTS

A Additional Biological Background                                                                 16

B Ablation of Over-specificity Loss Trade-off Hyperparameter                                       17

C Ablation of Number of Prototypes                                                                 17

D Ablation of Individual Losses                                                                    17

E Consistency of Classification Performance Over Multiple Runs                                     18

F Implementation Details                                                                           18

G Post-hoc Thresholding to Identify Over-specific Prototypes                                       20

H Visual Comparison of an Over-specific and a Non-over-specific prototype                          20

I   Performance of HPnet with high resolution feature maps                                         21

J   Additional Visualizations of the Hierarchical Prototypes Discovered by HComP-Net               21

K Additional Top-K Visualizations of HComP-Net Prototypes                                          21

L Reproducibility                                                                                  23

M Limitations of Our Work                                                                          24


A    A DDITIONAL B IOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

One of the first steps in any study of evolutionary morphology is character construction - the process
of deciding which measurements will be taken of organismal variation that are replicable and mean-
ingful for the underlying biology, and how these traits should be represented numerically (Mezey
& Houle, 2005). For phylogenetic studies, researchers typically attempt to identify synapomorphies
– versions of the traits that are shared by two or more species, are inherited from their most recent
common ancestor, and may have evolved along the phylogeny branch. The difficulty with the tradi-
tional character construction process is that humans often measure traits in a way that is inconsis-
tent and difficult to reproduce, and can neglect shared features that may represent synapomorphies,
but defy easy quantification. To address the problem of human inconsistency, PhyloNN (Elhamod
et al., 2023) and Phylo-Diffusion (Khurana et al., 2024) took a knowledge-guided machine learning
(KGML) (Karpatne et al., 2024) approach to character construction, by giving their neural networks
knowledge about the biological process they were interested in studying (in their case, phylogenetic
history), and specifically optimizing their models to find embedded features (analogous to biolog-
ical traits) that are predictive of that process. To address the problem of visual reproducibility,
RAMirez et al. (2007) suggested photographing the local structures where the empirical traits vary
and linking the images to written descriptions of the traits. In this paper, we take influence from
both approaches. We extend the hierarchical prototype approach from Hase et al. (2019) to better
reflect phylogeny, similar in theory to the way PhyloNN (Elhamod et al., 2023) and Phylo-Diffusion
(Khurana et al., 2024) learned embeddings that reflect phylogeny. Using prototypes, however, we


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


enforce local visual interpretability, similar to how researchers may use “type-specimens” to define
prototypical definitions of particular character states.
Specifically, our method is about finding synapomorphies – shared derived features unique to a
particular group of species that share a common ancestor in the phylogeny (referred to as clade).
While such features may bear similarities to convergent phenotypes in other clades, our goal is not to
identify features that exhibit convergence. It is typical for phylogenetic studies to specifically avoid
features that exhibit high levels of convergence, as they can lend support for erroneous phylogenetic
relationships. Identifying convergence requires additional information such as shared habitat, niche,
diet, or behavior, which is not incorporated in our work.


B     A BLATION OF OVER - SPECIFICITY L OSS T RADE - OFF H YPERPARAMETER

We have provided an ablation for the over-specificity loss trade-off hyperparameter (λovsp ) in Table
4. We can observe that increasing the weight of over-specificity loss reduces the model’s classifi-
cation performance, as the model struggles to find any commonality, especially at internal nodes
where the number of leaf descendant species is large and quite diverse. It is natural that species that
are diverse and distantly related may share fewer characteristics with each other, in comparison to
a set of species that diverged more recently from a common ancestor (Harmon et al., 2010; Pennell
et al., 2015). Therefore, forcing the model to learn common traits with a strong Lovsp constraint can
cause the model to perform badly in terms of accuracy.

Table 4: Ablation of over-specificity loss trade-off hyperparameter (λovsp ). Done on Bird dataset.

        λovsp        Part purity    Part purity with mask applied    % masked      % Accuracy
        w/o Lovsp    0.68 ± 0.22              0.75 ± 0.17                21.42%       58.32
        0.05         0.72 ± 0.19              0.77 ± 0.16                16.53%       70.01
        0.1          0.71 ± 0.18              0.74 ± 0.16                11.31%       70.97
        0.5          0.71 ± 0.19              0.72 ± 0.18                  4.2%       68.23
        1.0          0.70 ± 0.19               0.70 ± 0.2                 2.13%       62.68
        2.0          0.69 ± 0.19              0.69 ± 0.19                 0.55%       53.16



C     A BLATION OF N UMBER OF P ROTOTYPES

In Table 5, we vary the number of prototypes per child β for a node to see the impact on the model’s
performance. We note that while the accuracy increases marginally with increasing the number of
prototypes per child (β) from 10 to 15, it does not affect the performance of the model significantly.
Therefore, we continue to work with β = 10 for all of our experiments.

    Table 5: Ablation of the number of prototypes per child for a node (β). Done on Bird dataset.

                             Number of Prototypes (β)        % Accuracy
                                         10                      70.01
                                         15                      70.92
                                         20                      69.99



D     A BLATION OF I NDIVIDUAL L OSSES

In Table 6, we perform an ablation of the various loss terms used in our methodology. As it can be
observed, the removal of Lovsp and Ldisc degrades performance in terms of both semantic consis-
tency (part purity) and accuracy. On the other hand, the removal of self-supervised contrastive loss
LSS improves accuracy, but at the cost of drastically decreasing the semantic consistency.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Table 6: Ablation of individual losses. Done on Bird dataset.

 Model                      Part purity    Part purity with mask applied    % masked      % Accuracy
 HComP-Net                  0.72 ± 0.19             0.77 ± 0.16               16.53%         70.01
 HComP-Net w/o Lovsp        0.68 ± 0.22             0.75 ± 0.17               21.42%         58.32
 HComP-Net w/o Ldisc        0.69 ± 0.19             0.72 ± 0.17               10.95%         65.99
 HComP-Net w/o LSS          0.53 ± 0.18             0.57 ± 0.15                8.36%         81.62


E       C ONSISTENCY OF C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OVER M ULTIPLE
        RUNS

We trained the model using five distinct random weight initializations. The results showed that the
model’s fine-grained accuracy averaged 70.63% with a standard deviation of 0.18% on the Bird
dataset.


F       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We have made the code and dataset processing steps for reproducing our results publicly accessible
at: https://github.com/Imageomics/HComPNet.
Model hyperparameters: We build HComP-Net on top of a ConvNeXt-tiny (Liu et al., 2022) ar-
chitecture as the backbone feature extractor. We have modified the stride of the max pooling layers
of later stages of the backbone from 2 to 1, similar to PIP-Net, such that the backbone produces
feature maps of increased height and width, in order to get more fine-grained prototype score maps.
We implement and experiment with our method on ConvNeXt-tiny backbones with 26 × 26 feature
maps. The length of prototype vectors C is 768. The weights ϕ at every node n of HComP-Net
are constrained to be non-negative by the use of the ReLU activation function (Agarap, 2018). Fur-
ther, the prototype activation nodes are connected with non-negative weights only to their respective
child classes in W while their weights to other classes are made zero and non-trainable. For hy-
perparameter tuning HPnet for Spider and Turtle datasets we tried various prototype vector lengths
such as 128, 512, 1024. We also increased the learning rate by a factor of 10. We also reduced push
operation from once every 5 epochs to only done at the end of training. We found prototype length
of 128 with original learning and push operation done at the end of training to perform the best.
Training details: All models were trained with images resized and appropriately padded to 224 ×
224 pixel resolution and augmented using TrivialAugment (Müller & Hutter, 2021) for contrastive
learning. The prototypes are pretrained with self-supervised learning similar to PIP-Net for 10
epochs, following which the model is trained with the entire set of loss functions for 60 epochs. We
use a batch size of 256 for the Bird dataset and 64 for the Butterfly and Fish dataset. The masking
module is trained in parallel, and its training is continued for 15 additional epochs after the training
of the rest of the model is completed. The trade-off hyperparameters for the loss functions are set to
be λCE = 2; λA = 5; λT = 2; λovsp = 0.05; λdisc = 0.1; λorth = 0.1; λmask = 2.0; λL1 = 0.5.
λCE , λT and λA were borrowed from PIP-Net (Nauta et al., 2023). Ablations to arrive at suitable
λovsp are provided in Table 4. λdisc and λorth were chosen empirically and found to work well on
all three datasets. Experiment on unseen species was done by leaving out certain classes from the
datasets, so that they are not considered during training.
Dataset and Phylogeny Details: Dataset statistics and phylogeny statistics are provided in Table
8 and Table 7 respectively. Bird dataset is created by choosing 190 species from CUB-200-20111
(Wah et al., 2011) dataset, which were part of the phylogeny. Background from all images was
filtered using the associated segmentation metadata (Farrell, 2024). For Fish2 dataset, we followed
the exact same preprocessing steps as outlined in PhyloNN (Elhamod et al., 2023). We obtain the
Spider and Turtle dataset from iNaturalist3 by filtering for the Araneae order and the Testudines
    1
      License: CC BY
    2
      License: CC BY-NC
    3
      License: CC BY-NC


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


order, respectively. We manually observe that images from iNaturalist are noisy and contain unde-
sired background artifacts, which may deter our models from learning attributes on the organism
body. To account for this, we use GroundingDINO Liu et al. (2023) to detect and crop into ‘com-
plete turtle’ and ‘complete spider’ with a threshold confidence of 50%. We filter images in which
GroundingDINO cannot detect the organisms with sufficient confidence. For Butterfly dataset we
considered each subspecies as an individual class and considered only the subspecies of genus He-
liconius from the Heliconius Collection (Cambridge Butterfly4 ) (Lawrence & Campolongo, 2024).
There is substantial variation among subspecies of Heliconius species. Furthermore, we balanced
the dataset by filtering out the subspecies that did not have 20 or more images. We also sampled a
subset of 100 images from each subspecies that had more than 100 images.
Compute Resources: The models for the Bird dataset were trained on two NVIDIA A100 GPUs
with 80GB of RAM each. Butterfly and Fish models were trained on a single A100 GPU. As a
rough estimate, the execution time for the training model on the Bird dataset is around 2.5 hours.
For Butterfly and Fish datasets, the training is completed in under 1 hour. We used a single A100
GPU during the inference stage for all other analyses.

              Table 7: High-level statistics of the phylogenies used for different datasets.

                    Phylogeny        # Internal nodes        Max-depth          Min-depth
                    Bird                    184                     25               3
                    Butterfly                13                      5               2
                    Fish                     20                     11               2
                    Spider                   53                     17               2
                    Turtle                   38                     12               1


                       Table 8: Dataset statistics (# train and validation images).

                        Dataset          # Classes      Train set        Validation set
                        Bird               190              5695             5512
                        Butterfly           30              1418              358
                        Fish                38              4140             1294
                        Spider             113             26784              991
                        Turtle              41              9951              345


                                Spider                                              Turtle

 ResNet-50



       INTR



HComP-Net


Figure 7: Sample of images misclassified by ResNet-50, INTR and HComP-Net models on Spider and Turtle
dataset. We observe that the dataset is quite noisy with diverse backgrounds along with obscured and blurred
images, making it a challenging task to identify and interpret commonalities.


   4
     Note that this dataset is a compilation of images from 25 Zenodo records by the Butterfly Genetics Group
at Cambridge University, licensed under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (Montejo-Kovacevich
et al., 2020b; Salazar et al., 2020; Montejo-Kovacevich et al., 2019b; Jiggins et al., 2019; Montejo-Kovacevich
et al., 2019c;g; Warren & Jiggins, 2019b;c; Montejo-Kovacevich et al., 2019h; Jiggins & Warren, 2019a;b;
Meier et al., 2020; Montejo-Kovacevich et al., 2019a;d; Salazar et al., 2018; Montejo-Kovacevich et al., 2019e;
Salazar et al., 2019b; Pinheiro de Castro et al., 2022; Montejo-Kovacevich et al., 2019f;i; 2020a; 2021; Warren
& Jiggins, 2019a; Salazar et al., 2019a; Mattila et al., 2019).


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Table 9: Part purity with post-hoc thresholding approach. Done on Bird dataset.

                      Threshold     Part purity with mask applied   % masked
                          0.2                 0.74 ± 0.28            12.28%
                          0.3                 0.75 ± 0.27            13.47%
                          0.4                 0.76 ± 0.26            14.97%
                          0.5                 0.77 ± 0.15            16.66%
                          0.6                 0.77 ± 0.26            17.43%


G    P OST- HOC T HRESHOLDING TO I DENTIFY OVER - SPECIFIC P ROTOTYPES

An alternative approach to learning the masking module is to calculate the over-specificity score for
each prototype on the test set after training the model. We calculate the over-specificity scores for
the prototypes of a trained model as follows,
                                               Di      top
                                               Y    1 Xk
                                      Oi = −               (gi )                                     (9)
                                                  topk i=1
                                               d=1


For a given prototype, we choose the topk images with the highest prototype scores from each
leaf descendant. After taking the mean of the topk prototype score, we multiply the values from
each descendant to arrive at the over-specificity score for the particular prototype. Subsequently,
we choose a threshold to determine which prototypes are over-specific. We provide the results of
post-hoc thresholding approach that can also be used to identify over-specific prototypes in Table 9.
While we can note that this approach can also be effective, validating the threshold, particularly in
scenarios where there are no part annotations available (such as part location annotation of CUB-
200-2011) can be an arduous task. In such cases, directly identifying over-specific prototypes as
part of the training through the masking module can be the more feasible option.


H    V ISUAL C OMPARISON OF AN OVER - SPECIFIC AND A N ON - OVER - SPECIFIC
     PROTOTYPE

We do a visual comparison of a prototype that has been identified as over-specific by the masking
module and a prototype that is not identified as over-specific in Figure 8. As it can be observed in
Figure 8(a), the Red-Legged Kittiwake has legs that are shorter in comparison to other species of its
clade - Heerman Gull and Western Gull. Therefore, the prototype is identified as over-specific, as
long legs are not common to all three species. On the other hand, in Figure 8(b), the prototype has
been identified as non-over-specific because all three species share white-colored crowns. Prototype
from Figure 8(a) has very low activation for Red Legged Kittiwake and also has poor part purity
since it does not highlight the same part of the bird in the images of Red-legged Kittiwake.


       (a) Masked prototype (Over-specific)             (b) Unmasked prototype (Non-over-specific)

Figure 8: Comparison of over-specific (a) vs non-over-specific (b) prototype identified by masking
module at the same internal node. Each row corresponds to the top-3 closest image to the prototype
from each species.



                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I   P ERFORMANCE OF HP NET WITH HIGH RESOLUTION FEATURE MAPS
We analyze the performance of HPnet with high-resolution feature maps in Table 10. We modified
the backbone by removing the max pooling layers at the final stages of the model to produce a 28×28
feature map instead of the original 7 × 7 feature map. It can be observed that the accuracy and part
purity do not improve with high-resolution feature maps. We also make a qualitative comparison
between an HPnet and HComP-Net prototype with a higher resolution feature map in Figure 9,
showing that part purity does not improve with high-resolution feature maps for HPnet.

Table 10: Performance of HPnet with higher resolution feature map (Feature map dimensions in
parentheses)

                          Model                    % Accuracy Part purity
                          HComP-Net (26 × 26)            70.01     0.77 ± 0.16
                          HPnet (7 × 7)                  36.18     0.14 ± 0.09
                          HPnet (28 × 28)                20.68     0.14 ± 0.11


    (a) HPnet prototype with 28 × 28 feature map        (b) HComP-Net prototype with 26 × 26 feature map

Figure 9: Comparison of HPnet (28 × 28 feature map) (a) and HComP-Net (26 × 26 feature map) (b)
prototype score maps. Although HPnet with a 28×28 feature map highlights a localized region in the
image, the prototype highlights varying regions in each image. HComP-Net prototype visualization
is more localized and is also consistent in the part it highlights.


J   A DDITIONAL V ISUALIZATIONS OF THE H IERARCHICAL P ROTOTYPES
    D ISCOVERED BY HC OM P-N ET
We provide more visualizations of the hierarchical prototypes discovered by HComP-Net for Butter-
fly (Figures 10 and 11), Fish (Figure 12) and Spider and Turtle (Figure 13) datasets in this section.
For ease of visualization, in each figure we visualize the prototypes learned over a small subtree from
the phylogeny. The prototypes at the lowest level capture traits that are species-specific, whereas the
prototypes at internal nodes capture the commonality between its descendant species. For Fish
dataset, we have provided textual descriptions purely based on human interpretation for the traits
that are captured by prototypes at different levels. For Butterfly, Spider and Turtle datasets, since the
prototypes are capturing different patterns, assigning textual descriptions for them is not straightfor-
ward. Therefore, we refrain from providing any text description for the highlighted regions of the
learned prototypes and leave it to the reader’s interpretation.

K    A DDITIONAL T OP -K V ISUALIZATIONS OF HC OM P-N ET P ROTOTYPES
We provide additional top-K visualizations of the prototypes from Butterfly (Figures 14 to 17) and
Fish (Figures 18 to 20) datasets, where every row corresponds to a descendant species and the
columns corresponds to the top-K images from the species with the largest prototype activation
scores. A requirement of a semantically meaningful prototype is that it should consistently highlight
the same part of the organisms in various images, provided that the part is visible. We can see in
the figures that the prototypes learned by HComP-Net consistently highlight the same part across all


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Traits common                     Traits common                  Traits specific
                to species                        to species                    to species


                                                                      Heliconius telesiphe sotericus


                                                                       Heliconius erato amalfreda


                                                                        Heliconius erato lativitta


                                                                        Heliconius erato notabilis


                                                                          Heliconius sara sara


                                                                      Heliconius eleuchia primularis


                                                                      Heliconius eleuchia eleuchia


Figure 10: Visualizing the hierarchy of prototypes discovered by HComP-Net over three levels in
the phylogeny of seven species from Butterfly dataset. For each prototype, we visualize one image
from each of its leaf descendants. Therefore, for prototypes at the species level (rightmost column),
we show only one image, whereas for prototypes at internal nodes, we show multiple images (equal
to the number of leaf descendants). For each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original
image as well as the heatmap overlaid image in the region of the learned prototype. The prototypes
appear to capture different butterfly wing patterns.



top-K images of a species, and across all descendant species. We additionally show that HComP-
Net can find common traits at internal nodes with a varying number of descendant species, including
4 species (Figure 14), 5 species (Figures 15 and 16), and 10 species (Figure 17) of butterflies, and
5 species (Figure 18), 8 species (Figure 19) and 18 species (Figure 20) for fish. We also provide
several top-k visualizations of prototypes learned for bird species in Figures 21 to 29. This shows


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Traits common                     Traits common                 Traits specific
                to species                        to species                   to species


                                                                     Heliconius timareta linaresi


                                                                      Heliconius cydno alithea


                                                                     Heliconius cydno chioneus


                                                                     Heliconius cydno cydnides


                                                                   Heliconius melpomene plesseni


                                                                   Heliconius melpomene melpomene


                                                                    Heliconius melpomene rosina


Figure 11: Visualizing the hierarchy of prototypes discovered by HComP-Net over three levels in
the phylogeny of seven species from Butterfly dataset.


the ability of HComP-Net to discover common prototypes at internal nodes of the phylogenetic tree
that consistently highlight the same regions in the descendant species images even when the number
of descendants is large.

L    R EPRODUCIBILITY
We have ensured the reproducibility of our work by providing a detailed set of resources. The source
code used for training and evaluation, along with instructions for reproducing the experiments, is
available via Imageomics Institute GitHub site: (https://github.com/Imageomics/HComPNet). Com-
prehensive implementation details, including hyperparameters and compute resources, are described


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Traits common to species                                  Traits specific to species


                                                                                                                Esox
                                                                                                              americanus

                                                              Trait: Dorsal fin morphology*



                                                                                                              Gambusia
                                                                                                               affinis

                                                                   Trait: Head morphology*


                                                                                                              Lepomis
                                                                                                              gulosus
                  Trait: Snout shape*
                                                               Trait: Dorsal fin upper back
                                                                               shape*


Figure 12: Visualizing the hierarchy of prototypes discovered by HComP-Net for a subtree with
three species from Fish dataset. *Note that the textual descriptions of the hypothesized traits shown
for every prototype are based on human interpretation.

  Turtle                                                             Spider
                                   1                                                                     1


              2                   3                    4                          2                     3                  4


  Gopherus agassizii Gopherus berlandieri Gopherus morafkai        Trichonephila clavipes   Nephila pilipes    Neriene radiata



Figure 13: Visualizing the hierarchy of prototypes discovered by HComP-Net for a subtree with
three species from Turtle and Spider datasets.


in Appendix F. Additionally, we have cited all dataset sources and outlined the data processing steps
in Appendix F to facilitate accurate replication of our experiments.

M     L IMITATIONS OF O UR W ORK

A fundamental challenge of every prototype-based interpretability method (including ours) is the
difficulty in associating a semantic interpretation with the underlying visual concept of a prototype.
While some prototypes can be interpreted easily based on visual inspection of prototype activation


                                                              24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between four species of butterfly
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


maps, other prototypes are harder to interpret and require additional domain expertise of biolo-
gists. To reduce the subjectivity in the analysis of prototypes, we visualize the prototype in multiple
training images instead of a single image (e.g., the top-k image patches closest to the prototype)
wherever possible, so that the semantic meaning of the prototype is more apparent. Visualizing pro-
totypes with multiple images also helps to overcome challenges introduced due to images taken from
non-typical angles. A recent approach called ProtoConcepts (Ma et al., 2024) explores modifying
the similarity metric to allow multiple image patches to be equally close to a given prototype. Such
visualizations may help with understanding the underlying semantic concept better. We leave such
an extension of our work for future research to explore. Also, while we have considered large phy-
logenies as that of the 190 species from the CUB dataset, it may still not be representative of all bird
species. This limited scope may cause our method to identify apparent homologous evolutionary
traits that could differ with the inclusion of more species into the phylogeny. Therefore, our method
can be seen as a system that generates hypotheses about potential evolutionary traits discovered in
the form of hierarchical prototypes.


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between nine species of butterfly
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between twelve species of but-
terfly sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species.
For each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 17: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between four species of butterfly
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


Figure 18: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between five species of fish
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 19: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between eight species of fish
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 20: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between eighteen species of fish
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 21: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between seven species of birds
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 22: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between eight species of birds
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 23: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between nine species of birds
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 24: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between thirteen species of birds
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 25: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between five species of birds
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


Figure 26: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between five species of birds
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 27: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between sixteen species of birds
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.
                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 28: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between four species of birds
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


Figure 29: Top-K visualization of a prototype finding commonality between three species of birds
sharing a common ancestor. Each row represents the top 3 images from the respective species. For
each image, we show the zoomed-in view of the original image as well as the heatmap overlaid
image.


                                               37
