Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EVISITING M ULTI -P ERMUTATION E QUIVARIANCE
THROUGH THE L ENS OF I RREDUCIBLE R EPRESENTA -
TIONS

 Yonatan Sverdlov1,* , Ido Springer1,* & Nadav Dym1,2
 1
   Faculty of Mathematics
 2
   Faculty of Computer Science
 Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
 nadavdym@technion.ac.il
 {yonatans,ido.springer}@campus.technion.ac.il



                                             A BSTRACT
          This paper explores the characterization of equivariant linear layers for repre-
          sentations of permutations and related groups. Unlike traditional approaches,
          which address these problems using parameter-sharing, we consider an alternative
          methodology based on irreducible representations and Schur’s lemma. Using this
          methodology, we obtain an alternative derivation for existing models like DeepSets,
          2-IGN graph equivariant networks, and Deep Weight Space (DWS) networks. The
          derivation for DWS networks is significantly simpler than that of previous results.
          Next, we extend our approach to unaligned symmetric sets, where equivariance
          to the wreath product of groups is required. Previous works have addressed this
          problem in a rather restrictive setting, in which almost all wreath equivariant layers
          are Siamese. In contrast, we give a full characterization of layers in this case and
          show that there is a vast number of additional non-Siamese layers in some settings.
          We also show empirically that these additional non-Siamese layers can improve
          performance in tasks like graph anomaly detection, weight space alignment, and
          learning Wasserstein distances. Our code is available at GitHub.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Learning with symmetries has recently attracted great attention in machine learning. In this learning
setting, a group acts on an input space, and the hypothesis mappings are restricted to be equivariant
with respect to the group action. Motivated by the structure of fully connected neural networks, group
equivariant models are often defined by a composition of parametric linear equivariant functions and
non-parametric non-linear activations functions (Cohen & Welling, 2016). Thus, characterizing all
equivariant layers for a given group action is fundamental for understanding and designing equivariant
deep neural networks. Indeed, this question has attracted a considerable amount of attention in various
scenarios (e.g., Finzi et al. (2021); Kondor & Trivedi (2018); Cohen et al. (2019); Pearce-Crump
(2023a;b)).
For permutation groups, the standard strategy for characterizing equivariant layers is through studying
parameter-sharing (Ravanbakhsh et al., 2017). Perhaps the first result in this direction was given by
Zaheer et al. (2017), who showed that only two parameters are required to characterize all permutation
equivariant layers on a set of scalars. Another famous example is Maron et al. (2018), who described
the specific parameter-sharing scheme for graph equivariant networks and other tensor representations
of the symmetric group. Recently, parameter-sharing has been applied in Navon et al. (2023); Zhou
et al. (2024b) to characterize all equivariant layers of weight space neural functionals. These neural
networks operate on weights of another neural network, a problem with a complex multi-permutation
equivariant structure.
In this paper, we revisit equivariant linear layer characterization for permutation groups from the
perspective of irreducible representations. Given a group G acting on a linear space V, we explore
     * Equal contribution


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


linear equivariant mappings f : V → V by decomposing V to its minimal invariant components,
which are irreducible representations of G. Once this decomposition is performed, a basic result in
representation theory called Schur’s lemma automatically provides us with a full characterization of
all equivariant mappings.
As a first step, we use our method to get an alternative derivation for known equivariant layer
characterization at the basis of the DeepSets (Zaheer et al., 2017), 2-IGN (Maron et al., 2018), and
DWSNets (Navon et al., 2023) architectures. Notably, for the Deep Weight Space problem, our
derivation is significantly simpler than the cumbersome derivations previously obtained by parameter
sharing (Navon et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024b).
Next, we consider the problem of sets of unaligned symmetric elements, where equivariance to the
joint action of a group G and the permutation group Sk is required (also known as the wreath product
G ≀ Sk ). This setting arises naturally when considering alignment, distance prediction, or anomaly
detection of sets of unaligned symmetric elements. It was studied by Wang et al. (2020) under
the assumption that G acts transitively, in which case Siamese Networks capture an overwhelming
majority of the equivariant layers. Indeed, in practice, Siamese networks are often employed (Navon
et al., 2024; Chen & Wang, 2024). In contrast, we give a full characterization of the equivariant layers
in the general setting and show that in some settings (e.g., alignment of weights spaces), there can
be a large number of non-Siamese equivariant layers. Empirically, we show that these additional
layers improve performance on a synthetic graph anomaly detection task and the deep weight space
alignment task discussed in Navon et al. (2024). In summary, our contributions are the following:

 • We give an alternative irreducible-based derivation for the DeepSets (Zaheer et al., 2017), 2-IGN
(Maron et al., 2018), and DWSNets (Navon et al., 2023) architectures. The DWSnets derivation is
significantly simpler than previous approaches.

 • We provide a characterization of all equivariant functions on sets of unaligned symmetric elements.

 • We empirically validate the importance of our equivariant layers for sets of unaligned symmetric
elements by showing its superiority on a synthetic graph anomaly detection task, Wasserstein set
distance computation, and deep weight space alignment task.


2   R ELATED WORK

Learning Sets of Symmetric Elements. When dealing with multiple occurrences of symmetric
objects as a set, additional symmetries arise as the set elements can be permuted. In this case, the
layers are required to be equivariant under the permutation of elements in addition to the original
element group action. Maron et al. (2020) suggested a new layer called Deep Sets for Symmetric
Elements (DSS) that operates on a set of symmetric objects. They showed that incorporating DSS
layers is strictly more expressive than using Siamese networks. The DSS framework was also used in
sub-graph aggregation networks (Bevilacqua et al., 2021), where the network should be invariant to
the order of the sub-graphs. In the main setting of Maron et al. (2020), the same group element g ∈ G
acts uniformly on all set objects. However, the more challenging setting is where we allow different
elements gi ∈ G to act on the objects. This corresponds to the action of the restricted wreath product
G ≀ Sk on the set. Maron et al. (2020) deal with this setting as well, but only when G is a subgroup of
Sn and the action of G is transitive. Later, Wang et al. (2020) characterized all linear mappings for
general wreath products, however they also assumed that the group actions are transitive.

Equivariant Characterization Via Irreducibles. Using irreducible representations to characterize
equivariant layers is a popular approach for rotation-equivariant networks (Thomas et al., 2018;
Anderson et al., 2019; Dym & Maron). For permutation groups, the primary work which considered
this approach, to the best of our knowledge, is Henning Thiede et al. (2020). They suggest using
the known characterization of permutation irreducible representations with Young diagrams (Fulton
& Harris, 2013) to characterize permutation-equivariant layers and explain how to reconstruct the
results from DeepSets and 2-IGN. Our approach for these results is similar but gives a more explicit
derivation of the DeepSet and 2-IGN layers. More importantly, our analysis covers deep weight
spaces and sets of unaligned symmetric elements, not discussed in this paper.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3    PRELIMINARIES

Let V be a finite-dimensional vector space over the field F = C or R. Let G be a finite group acting
linearly on V. We will sometimes say that V is a representation of G. We will say V is a trivial
representation of G if the action of G on V is the trivial action gv = v for all g ∈ G and v ∈ V.
A subspace U ⊆ V is invariant to G if g · u ∈ U for all g ∈ G and u ∈ U. We say an invariant
subspace U is irreducible if it does not strictly contain an invariant subspace except the zero space.
By Maschke’s theorem, each finite-dimensional space V can be decomposed into a direct sum of
irreducible invariant spaces (Fulton & Harris, 2013).
A mapping T : V → V is equivariant if T (g · v) = g · T (v) for every v ∈ V, g ∈ G. Two
representations V, U of G are isomorphic if there is an equivariant linear bijection LV,U : V → U,
which we notate by V ∼= U.
The following lemma, named Schur’s lemma, is a key component of our work. Schur’s lemma
describes equivariant mappings between irreducible representations:

Schur’s lemma. Let V, W be finite-dimensional irreducible representations of G over F, and let
T : V → W be a G-equivariant linear map * . Then:

       • Either T is an isomorphism or T = 0.
       • If L : V → W is an isomorphism, and F = C, then T = λL for λ ∈ C.

In this paper, we will only consider representations over R, which are the common setting in applica-
tions. In all cases, we will discuss, our real irreducible representations are absolutely irreducible. This
means that their natural extension to complex vector spaces is irreducible. In this case, if L : V → W
is an isomorphism, F = R, and V is absolutely irreducible, then T = λL for λ ∈ R (Boardman).
In Appendix B we elaborate more on this topic. We note that when V is not absolutely irreducible,
the space of isomorphisms from V to W is either 2 or 4 dimensional (Poonen, 2016). In this setting,
using an automatic computational method to find all 2-4 equivariant layers may be beneficial (Finzi
et al., 2021).

Layer characterization using Schur’s Lemma Equivariant layers from a representation V to itself
can be characterized using Schur’s lemma via two steps. The first step is decomposition, where we
identify the decomposition of P V into irreducible representations V = ⊕si=1 Vi . Any x ∈ V can be
                                  s
written uniquely as a sum x = i=1 xi where each xi is in Vi . The decomposition step also requires
an algorithm to compute this decomposition. Next, we will need to identify which of the space pairs
Vi and Vj are isomorphic, and if they are, specify an isomorphism Lij . Finally, since we are working
over the reals, we will need to verify that all irreducible representations are absolutely irreducible.
Once the decomposition step is carriedPout, the second step uses Schur’s lemma. Equivariant mappings
                                          s
T : V → V can be written as T = i,j=1 Tij , where Tij : Vi → Vj are equivariant. By Schur’s
lemma if Vi and Vj are isomorphic then Tij = λij Lij for some λij ∈ R, and otherwise Tij = 0. All
in all, we obtain that T is equivariant if and only if for some choice of the scalar λij we have
                                                        X
                              T (x1 + . . . + xs ) =           λij Lij (xi ).                     (1)
                                                     (i,j),Vi ∼
                                                              =Vj


The number of parameters in the expression above depends on the isomorphism relations between
the irreducibles. We can assume without loss of generality that the first 1 ≤ t ≤ s irreducible spaces
are not isomorphic, and by identifying isomorphic irreducibles, we can rewrite the decomposition
                      ⊕α            ⊕α
above as V = ⊕tj=1 Vj j (Where Vj j is defined to be the direct sum of αj copies of Vj ) where
                                                                               Pt
α1 +. . .+αt = s. The number of parameters λij in the decomposition is then i=1 αi2 . This process
can easily be generalized to compute mappings between representations V and W by decomposing
both spaces into irreducibles.
We note that the cornerstones of this methodology: decomposition into irreducibles and Schur’s
Lemma, are applicable for all finite dimensional representations of finite groups (and also for compact
    * The equivariant map is often referenced as a G-module.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


infinite groups like SO(d)). The main challenge in this approach is characterizing and computing
the decomposition into irreducibles. This needs to be done on a case to case basis. Much of the
remainder of the paper will be devoted to computing these decompositions for important equivariant
learning scenarios.

4     C OMPUTING LINEAR EQUIVARIANT LAYERS
We now demonstrate how to derive the results in Zaheer et al. (2017); Maron et al. (2018); Navon
et al. (2023) via decomposition into irreducibles.

4.1   D EEP S ETS

We begin with the simple case of the action of the permutation group Sn on V = Rn by permutation
of elements (we assume n ≥ 2). Here, there are two non-trivial invariant spaces:
                                                                            n
                                                                            X
                      S = {α · 1n |α ∈ R},        V(n) = {x ∈ Rn :                xi = 0}.           (2)
                                                                            i=1

As the first space is one-dimensional, it’s irreducible. By Hinton et al. (2006), the second one is also
irreducible. These two spaces are not isomorphic since the action of Sn on S is trivial, but the action
of Sn on V(n) is not (also they do not have the same dimension when n ≥ 3).
The decomposition of x ∈ Rn to a sum of elements from the irreducible spaces can be computed as
                                         x = x̄1n + (x − x̄1n )
where x̄ is the average of x, and 1n is the all one vector. By Equation (1), Schur’s lemma, and the
fact that all irreducibles of the permutation group are absolutely irreducible (see Appendix B), the
linear equivariant mappings T : V → V are characterized by two parameters a, b ∈ R, that is:
                                       T x = ax̄1n + b(x − x̄1n ).
This is exactly the result described in DeepSets (Zaheer et al., 2017).

4.2   E QUIVARIANT GRAPH LAYERS

We next consider the setting where V = Rn×n , G = Sn and the group action is defined by (τ ·
X)ij = Xτ −1 (i),τ −1 (j) . This setting is natural for graph neural networks, as two adjacency matrices
A, B ∈ Rn×n represent isomorphic graphs if and only if A = τ · B for some permutation τ . This
setting was considered in Maron et al. (2018) using a parameter sharing scheme, and we show how
to obtain similar results using irreducibles (note that Maron et al. (2018) also discussed general
mappings between k-order and ℓ-order tensors. In contrast, we only discuss the k = ℓ = 2 case).
We claim that, when n ≥ 4, the space Rn×n can be written as a sum of seven irreducible permutation
invariant sub-spaces. The behavior for n < 4 is discussed in Appendix C.3.
The first two spaces are one-dimensional representations on which the action of Sn is trivial: diagonal
matrices with identical diagonal entries and matrices with zero diagonal and identical off-diagonal
entries:
                      V0 = {a · In |a ∈ R}, V1 = {a · (1n×n − In )|a ∈ R}.                          (3)

Next, we have three spaces of dimension n − 1 which are isomorphic to V(n) from equation 2. The
first space is the space V2 of diagonal matrices whose diagonal sums to zero and the next two n − 1
dimensional spaces are the space of matrices whose rows (respectively columns) are constant, and
columns (respectively rows) sum to zero:
                                       n
                                       X                                    n
                                                                            X
                        V3 = {r1Tn |         ri = 0},       V4 = {1n cT |         ci = 0}
                                       i=1                                  i=1

Finally, there are two larger irreducible spaces:
 V5 = {A| A = −AT , A1n = 0n },              V6 = {A| A = AT , A1n = 0n , Aii = 0, ∀i = 1, . . . , n}


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                 2                                                2
The dimension of V5 is n−1    = n −3n + 1, and the dimension of V6 is n−1  − 1 = n −3n

                          2        2                                   2            2  . So,
we have the following decomposition:
               V = V0 ⊕ V1 ⊕ V2 ⊕ V3 ⊕ V4 ⊕ V5 ⊕ V6 ∼ = V ⊕2 ⊕ V ⊕3 ⊕ V5 ⊕ V6
                                                                  0      3

Accordingly, using Schur’s lemma, each linear mapping can be characterized by 32 + 22 + 1 + 1 = 15
parameters, the same result from Maron et al. (2018), so we have the expected number of parameters.
In appendix C, we give a formal proof of these arguments and present an algorithm to decompose an
input matrix X into its seven irreducible spaces with linear complexity in the matrix size n2 . These
results are summarized in the following theorem.
Theorem 4.1. For all n ≥ 4, the space Rn×n can be written as a direct sum of the spaces V0 , . . . , V6 .
These spaces are invariant and irreducible, and the isomorphism relations between them are given by
V0 ∼= V1 , V2 ∼
              = V3 ∼
                   = V4 .

4.3   D EEP WEIGHT SPACES

Recently, there has been growing interest in devising neural operators: neural networks that operate
on an input, which is itself a neural network. This type of problem is of interest for various tasks
involving post-processing and synthesis of multiple trained neural networks, as well as for processing
Implicit Neural Representations (INRs), which are a popular alternative for representing certain
standard data structures. (see e.g. Kalogeropoulos et al. (2024) for further discussion).
A key concept in the design of ’neural operators’ has been the requirement that they are equivariant
to the input neural data (Kalogeropoulos et al., 2024; Kofinas et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024a; 2023;
Lim et al., 2024) In this section we consider the setting discussed in Navon et al. (2023); Zhou et al.
(2024b), where the neural data is a collection of weights and biases (Wm , bm )M m=1 representing an
MLP of depth M , and a neural operator is constructed by composing standard activation with linear
mappings which are equivariant with respect to the multi-permutation action we will now describe:
The output of an MLP architecture is invariant to the permutation of its hidden neurons. For example,
the MLP defined by W2 · ReLU · (W1 x) will remain the same function if we replace weights W2 , W1
with the weights W2 P, P T W1 .
To define the symmetries of learning on MLPs in full generality, we will adapt the notation from
Navon et al. (2023). We consider the space of MLP parameters with a given fixed depth M and layer
dimensions d0 , . . . , dM +1 (M and all dj are assumed to be larger than one). These are parameterized
                            LM
by the vector space V = m=1 (Wm ⊕ Bm ) where Wm := Rdm ×dm−1 and Bm := Rdm represent
the weights and biases of the m-th layer. The symmetry group of the weight space is the direct
product of symmetric groups G = Sd1 × · · · × SdM −1 . An element g = (τ1 , . . . , τM −1 ) in the group
acts on an element v = [Wm , bm ]m∈[M ] from V as follows:
                                                ′
                                      ρ(g)v = [Wm , b′m ]m∈[M ] ,                                   (4a)
                                     W1′ = PτT1 W1 , b′1 = PτT1 b1 ,                                (4b)
                        ′
                       Wm = PτTm Wm Pτm−1 , b′m = PτTm bm , m ∈ [2, M − 1]                          (4c)
                                  ′
                                WM   = WM PτM −1 , bM ′ = bM .                                      (4d)

where Pτm ∈ Rdm ×dm is the permutation matrix of τm ∈ Sdm .
Previous work (Navon et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024b) has already characterized all linear equivariant
functions from V to itself. However, this characterization requires tedious bookkeeping and division
into a large number of different cases. Here we show how to decompose V into irreducibles in a
rather straightforward way, and as a result obtain a (arguably) simpler characterization of all linear
equivariant layers.
We claim that V is a direct sum of multiple copies of 2M − 3 irreducible representations of G:
 1. The first irreducible representation is the trivial scalar representation S = R with the trivial
action gx = x.
 2. The next M − 1 representations are the vector representations Vm , m = 1, . . . , M − 1 of
vectors in Rdm which sum to zero (the spaces V(dm ) from equation 2), with the action of g being
permutation of the vector by the m-th permutation τm .


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 3. The last M − 2 representations are representations Mm , m = 2, . . . , M − 1 of dm × dm−1
matrices whose rows and columns sum to zero, where the action of g on a matrix W in this space is
given by PτTm W Pτm−1 .

The linear equivariant layers from V to itself can be inferred from the following theorem:
Theorem 4.2. The spaces S, V1 , . . . , VM −1 , M2 , . . . , MM −1 are absolutely irreducible,
                                                                                            and are
                                                                 −1 ⊕βm          M −1
not isomorphic to each other. V is isomorphic to S⊕α ⊕ ⊕M

                                                              m=1  V m      ⊕  ⊕ m=2  M m   , where
 α = d0 + 2dM + 2M − 3,        β1 = d0 + 2,     βM −1 = dM + 2,      βm = 3, ∀m = 2, . . . , M − 2 (5)
In particular, the space of equivariant linear mappings from V to itself is thus of dimension α2 +
PM −1 2
   m=1 βm + (M − 2).

Proof. The spaces S, V1 , . . . , VM −1 , M2 , . . . , MM −1 are not isomorphic (even when they have the
same dimension). The action of G on S is trivial while the action on the other spaces is not. The other
spaces aren’t isomorphic to each other since different components of the multi-permutation g ∈ G
acts on each space. The spaces S and Vm are absolutely irreducible, as we discussed in Subsection
4.1. We will explain why Mm are absolutely irreducible in Appendix D.
Obtaining the decomposition of V is rather straightforward. First, following Navon et al. (2023),
we identify the weight spaces Wm and bias spaces Bm with subspaces Ŵm and B̂m of V by zero
padding, and note that each one of these subspaces is G-invariant and that their direct sum gives us
the full parameter space V. We can then decompose each one of these spaces into irreducibles to
obtain
                       B̂m ∼
                           = S ⊕ Vm ,      m = 1, . . . , M − 1                                    (6a)
                           ∼ S⊕dM
                       B̂M =                                                                       (6b)
                       Ŵ1 ∼
                           =S   ⊕d0
                                      ⊕ V1⊕d0                                                      (6c)
                      Ŵm ∼= S ⊕ Vm−1 ⊕ Vm ⊕ Mm ,            m = 2, . . . , M − 1                  (6d)
                      ŴM ∼         ⊕dM
                          = S⊕dM ⊕ VM −1                                                           (6e)

The multiplicities of each irreducible in V, specified in equation 5, can now be found by simply
counting how many times each irreducible appears in the decomposition above.
The decomposition in equation 6 can actually be easily obtained from the ’deepsets’ decomposition
of the Sn on Rn described previously: the action of G on B̂m with m < M is isomorphic to the
action of Sdm on Rm and hence we get the exact ’DeepSets’ decomposition from Section 4.1. The
action of G on B̂M is trivial and hence can be written as a direct sum of dM trivial one dimensional S
spaces. The action on Ŵ1 (and ŴM ) multiplies a matrix by a permutation from the left (right), and
hence can be seen as a direct sum of ‘deep-sets’ actions on the columns (rows) of the matrix. Finally,
the action of G on Ŵm for m = 2, . . . , M − 1 is a tensor product of the natural action of Sdm−1 on
Rdm−1 and the action of Sdm on Rdm , and therefore its irreducible decomposition can be obtained by
taking tensor products of the irreducible representations of Rdm and Rdm−1 , as explained in more
detail in the full proof.

We note that equation 6 includes almost all information required to compute linear equivariant maps
from V to itself. All is left is the decomposition algorithm to write each (Wm , bm )m∈[M ] as a direct
sum of elements in the irreducible decomposition. This can be done independently for each subspace
Wm and Bm . The decomposition for Ŵm in equation 6d is not immediate and we will explain it in
Appendix D.1.
The decomposition in equation 6 and equation 5 also provides substantial additional information.
For example, we can immediately see that there are α invariant maps from V to R = S , which
correspond to the number of copies of the trivial representation S in V. Moreover, if we are interested
in the equivariant maps from a bias space B̂i (or weight space Ŵi ) to another bias space B̂j (or
weight space Ŵj ), we can easily infer the equivariant mappings from the decomposition in equation 6.
For example, when i = j = M there will be d2M mappings since B̂m consists of dM isomorphic


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


representations, and when i < j = M there will be dM mappings since S appears a single time in
B̂i and dM times in B̂M . Continuing in this way we can reconstruct all the different bias-to-bias,
bias-to-weight, weight-to-bias, and weight-to-weight cases analyzed in Tables 5-8 of Navon et al.
(2023), and Tables 8-11 in Zhou et al. (2024b). More importantly, these tables which were necessary
for implementing weight space layers in previous work, are not necessary when implementing these
layers using Schur’s lemma as we suggest.

5    S ETS OF UNALIGNED SYMMETRIC ELEMENTS
Next, we consider the setting where our data is a k-tuple of ’unaligned objects’ (v1 , . . . , vk ), each
coming from a representation V of G, and we want to learn functions which are equivariant with re-
spect to the joint action of a k-tuple of group elements (g1 , . . . , gk ) on each coordinate independently,
and to a permutation τ ∈ Sk of the k-tuple.
We define G ≀ Sk := G × · · ·k−times × G × Sk , and the action is given by
                      (τ, g1 , .., gk ) · (v1 , .., vk ) = (gτ (1) · vτ (1) , ..., gτ (k) · vτ (k) )            (7)
The group for which this action is defined is also called the restricted wreath product of G and Sk .
For more details, see Wang et al. (2020).
This type of ’wreath-equivariant-structure’ arises in several settings. One is ’alignment problems’,
where our goal is, given a pair of elements (v1 , v2 ) ∈ V k , k = 2, to find the group element
g ∗ = g ∗ (v1 , v2 ) which makes v1 ’as similar as possible’ to v2 . This task is equivariant to application
of G elements to each coordinate because if g ∗ v1 ≈ v2 then g2 g ∗ g1−1 (g1 v1 ) ≈ g2 v2 . Similarly, this
task is equivariant to permuting v1 and v2 , because if g ∗ v1 ≈ v2 then (g ∗ )−1 v2 ≈ v1 . For a more
detailed derivation, see Chen & Wang (2024); Navon et al. (2024), which discussed these problems
for sets and weight spaces, respectively. Additional examples of ’wreath-equivariant-problems’ are
the anomaly detection problem discussed in the experimental section, and problems with hierarchical
structures as discussed in Wang et al. (2020).

Wreath-equivariant layers. Our aim is to characterize all G ≀ Sk equivariant mappings from V k
to itself. We note that any linear G-equivariant mapping L̂ : V → V induces a ’Siamese’ G ≀ Sk
equivariant mapping defined by
                                   L(v1 , . . . , vk ) = (L̂(v1 ), . . . , L̂(vk )).

The interesting question is how many additional mappings are present. This problem was previously
studied in Maron et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2020) when G is a finite group acting on Rn transitively by
permutations (this means that the action of G on [n] has a single orbit). In this setting, the equivariant
mappings are composed of the Siamese mappings and a single additional non-Siamese mapping.
However, the transitivity assumption does not hold in many examples of interest, such as the graph
and weight space examples discussed in this paper. In our analysis, we will release the transitivity
assumption, and allow G to be a general finite group. In some cases, this will lead to a substantial
number of non-Siamese networks.
To characterize G ≀ Sk equivariant functions, we first aim to characterize all invariant irreducible
sub-spaces of V k , assuming we know all irreducible sub-spaces of V. An important role will be
played by trivial representations: representations S of G such that gv = v for all g ∈ G and v ∈ S.
Theorem 5.1. Let V be a real representation of G, with irreducible decomposition
                                     V = (⊕si=1 Si ) ⊕ ⊕tj=1 Vt

                                                                                                 (8)

where Si are trivial representations and Vt are not. Then an irreducible decomposition for V k with
respect to the action of G ≀ Sk is given by
                           V k = ⊕si=1 Ski,0 ⊕ ⊕si=1 Ski,1 ⊕ ⊕tj=1 Vtk ,


                                                           k
                                                           X
           where     Ski,0 = {(s1 , . . . , sk ) ∈ Ski ,         si = 0},     Ski,1 = {(s, . . . , s) ∈ Ski }
                                                           i=1


                                                            7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. The fact that Vi is G invariant implies easily that Vik is G ≀ Sk also invariant. In the appendix
E.1, we will show that if the action of G on V is not trivial then V k is irreducible representation of
G ≀ Sk . In contrast, for the spaces Ski the action of G is trivial, so this representation can be identified
with the standard representation Rk of Sk . The decomposition to Ski,0 and Ski,1 then follows from the
’DeepSets decomposition’ discussed in Section 4.1.

To count the number of linear equivariant mappings L : V k → V k , we note that
                      Ski,0 ∼
                            = Skj,0 ,        Ski,1 ∼
                                                   = Skj,1 ,   Ski,0 ̸∼
                                                                      = Ski,1 ,   ∀1 ≤ i < j ≤ k

Thus, the number of linear equivariant mappings from the ’trivial part’ of V k , that is ⊕si=1 Ski,0 ⊕

 ⊕si=1 Ski,1 , to istelf, is 2s2 , while the number of linear equivariant mappings from the ’trivial part’
of V to itself (which is equal to the number of Siamese layers), is s2 . As a result, we obtain s2
non-Siamese G ≀ Sk equivariant maps.

Examples. We found that the number of non-Siamese layers is s2 , where s is the number of trivial
representations in V. Let us consider the implications for the three examples we have discussed
earlier:

1. Deep-sets. In the DeepSets setting where V = Rn , G = Sn , there is a single trivial representation
of constant vectors, and therefore in this setting there is a unique non-Siamese layer for V k . Indeed,
this is the case for any group acting transitively by permutations on Rn , and thus we obtain the results
for transitive actions from Maron et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2020).
2. Graphs. In the graph setting where V = Rn×n , G = Sn there are s = 2 trivial representations
(see equation 3), and therefore s2 = 4 non-Siamese layers.
3. Weight Spaces. In the weight space examples the number s of trivial representations is rather
large, α = d0 + 2dM + 2M − 3 from equation 5, and there are α2 non-Siamese mappings.

In the next theorem we give an explicit characterization of the non-Siamese layers of V k . For this
characterization, we note that the direct sum of all trivial representations of V (as in equation 8)
is the vector space Vf ixed = {v ∈ V|gv = v, ∀g ∈ G}. Alternatively, every basis e1 , . . . , es of
Vf ixed defines a decomposition of Vf ixed into one-dimensional irreducible invariant sub-spaces
Si = {cei |c ∈ R}. Accordingly, our characterization of non-Siamese layers is based on such bases:
Theorem 5.2. Let V be a real representation of a finite group G. and let e1 , . . . , es be a basis to the
subspace Vf ixed . Let ⟨·, ·⟩ be a G invariant inner product on V. Then every linear equivariant map
L : V k → V k is of the form

                               s              k                        k
                                                                                        !
                               X              X                        X
       L(v1 , . . . , vk ) =           aij      ⟨vℓ , ei ⟩ej , . . . ,   ⟨vℓ , ei ⟩ej       + L̂(v1 ), . . . , L̂(vk )    (9)
                               i,j=1          ℓ=1                    ℓ=1

where L̂ : V → V is a linear equivariant map, and aij are real numbers. Conversely, every linear
mapping of the form defined in equation 9 is equivariant.

The theorem is proven in Appendix E. We note that an invariant inner product on V is an inner product
satisfying ⟨gv, gu⟩ = ⟨v, u⟩ for all g ∈ G and u, v ∈ V. When G is finite, an invariant inner product
always exists: it can be obtained by starting from an arbitrary inner product and then averaging over
the group (Fulton & Harris, 2013). In the examples we consider in this paper, the group G acts by
permutations. In this case, the standard ℓ2 inner product is invariant. Implementing the non-Siamese
layers defined in equation 5.2 only requires finding a basis for Vf ixed . In particular, if V is one of the
spaces discussed previously, the basis ei is just a choice of an element from each of the trivial spaces
Si in the decomposition of V.

Beyond Sk . So far, we have considered the action of G ≀ Sk where G is finite. We can also generalize
these results to the setting G ≀ H, where H is a subgroup of Sk which acts transitively on {1, . . . , k}.
By doing this, we are generalizing the results in Wang et al. (2020), which assumes that both G and
H act transitively.


                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The full generalization is described in Appendix E.1. The general idea is this: Since G acts trivially
on Vf ixed , the action of G ≀ H on Vfkixed can be identified with the action of H on Vfkixed . In turn,
Vfkixed is a direct sum of s different copies of Rk . Accordingly, the number of H equivariant maps
from Vfkixed to itself is s2 · h, where h is the number of H equivariant maps from Rk to itself. One
of these h maps is the identity map, which is Siamese; therefore, the total number of non-Siamese
equivariant maps is (h − 1) · s2 . In the case where H = Sk , we have that h = 2, and therefore, in
our analysis above, we have found s2 non-Siamese maps.

6    E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we consider problems with a wreath-equivariant structure. We compare networks
implementing the complete basis of equivariant layers that we have found, with networks that only
use Siamese layers or combine a partial list of non-Siamese layers suggested in previous works.
Implementation details of all experiments are described in Appendix A.

Graph Anomaly Detection. We begin with a synthetic wreath-equivariant task in which Siamese
networks will fail by design: we consider a graph anomaly detection problem, where the input is k
graphs with n nodes, (G1 , . . . , Gk ), where most graphs are similar, and one is an ’anomaly.’ The
output is a k dimensional probability vector, where the i-th entry denotes the probability that Gi is an
anomaly. This task is G ≀ Sk equivariant (where G = Sn ), where the action on the input space is as in
equation 7, and the action on the output space is just permuting the entries of the probability vector.
We generate data for this problem as follows: We randomly generate two graphs G and Ĝ using
the Erdos-Reyni distribution. We take k − 1 copies of the graphs (G1 , . . . , Gk−1 ) to be permuted
copies of G, and one of them to be Ĝ and insert it in a random location. We also add some noise with
variance η to all graphs.
We consider equivariant models for this task, composed of several linear wreath-equivariant layers
and point-wise ReLU activations. The final layer is a point-wise summation of each of the k graphs to
obtain a final vector in Rk , followed by a softmax layer to obtain a probability vector. For the linear
wreath-equivariant layers, we consider several alternatives: Siamese layers only, adding the single
additional non-Siamese layer suggested in Wang et al. (2020); Maron et al. (2020) denoted by DSS,
and the full model we suggest, which has four non-Siamese layers (we name our model SchurNet).
The Siamese layers are implemented using the decomposition computed in Subsection 4.2.
The results of this experiment are shown in Ta-         Model/Noise         η = 0.0 η = 0.1
ble 1. As we can see, Siamese networks attain              Siamese            10%      10%
10% accuracy without noise (and even lower                   DSS             97.5%     92%
accuracy with noise). This is to be expected           SchurNet (Ours)       100%    97.0%
since Siamese features can be useful to differen-
tiate between G and Ĝ, but not to determine how Table 1: Performance comparison of models at
many times each one of them occurs in a k-tuple. different noise levels (η).
In contrast, networks with non-Siamese layers attain significantly better performance, whereas our
method, which contains the maximal number of non-Siamese layers, attains the best performance.

Wasserstein Distance Computation                   Dataset         Input    SchurNet NProductNet
We next consider the task of learn-                             [100, 300]   0.0389     0.046
                                                noisy-sphere-3  [300, 500]   0.1026     0.158
ing the Wasserstein distance, as dis-                           [100, 300]   0.0217     0.015
cussed in Amir & Dym (2024); Chen               noisy-sphere-6  [300, 500]   0.0795     0.049
& Wang (2024); Haviv et al. (2024).                uniform
                                                                    256      0.0974     0.097
The Wasserstein distance between                                [200, 300]   0.1043    0.1089
two unordered multisets of vectors                               [20, 200]   0.0623     0.084
                                                ModelNet-small [300, 500]    0.0738     0.111
in Rd , denoted by {x1 , . . . , xn } and                           2048     0.0468     0.140
{y1 , . . . , yn }, is defined to be the min-   ModelNet-large [1800, 2000] 0.0551      0.162
imal distance between the sets, under              RNAseq
                                                                 [20, 200]   0.0123     0.012
the optimal permutation giving the                              [300, 500]   0.0334     0.292
best alignment between them (as in
the alignment problem discussed in              Table 2: Comparison of SchurNet and NProductNet.
the beginning of Section 5). Comput-


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ing Wasserstein distances can be computationally intensive, so this task aims to devise a neural
network to learn the distance instead. Learning Wasserstein distances is a Sn ≀ S2 invariant task.
In Chen & Wang (2024), a Siamese approach named NProductNet is suggested to address this
problem. We compare SchurNet to Chen & Wang (2024) to demonstrate that adding our non-siamese
layers enhances the performance of standard Siamese layers. We note that Amir & Dym (2024)
achieved state-of-the-art results for this task with a very different method, which does not follow
the conventional paradigm of a stack of linear layers and non-linear activation functions. Therefore,
we have no direct way of adding our non-siamese layers to their method for comparison. In our
experiments, we add the additional d2 non-Siamese layers to their implementation and compare
performance on the datasets addressed in their paper. The results, reported in Table 2, show that
adding non-Siamese layers improves performance in most cases. We note that each dataset has two
options: the top option in each table row depicts the case where training and test distributions had the
same dimension, while the bottom option checks the generalization to test distribution of different
sizes.

Weight Space Alignment. We consider the alignment task discussed above in the setting where
v1 , v2 are elements in weight spaces, and the task is to find the group element that optimally aligns
v1 and v2 . One interesting application of this problem is model merging: in Ainsworth et al., it was
shown that linear interpolation of v1 , v2 gives a new network whose performance is considerably
worse, but interpolation after alignment leads to much better results.
The weight space alignment problem was considered in Ainsworth et al.; Tatro et al. (2020); Peña
et al. (2023). Recently, Navon et al. (2024) outperformed these methods using a learning approach
based on the DWS layers from Navon et al. (2023), applied to v1 , v2 in a Siamese fashion. This
experiment aims to check whether adding non-Siamese layers improves their results. We take only
part of the described layers in Theorem 5.2 layers: the mappings from each weight/bias space to
itself, excluding, for example, non-Siamese weight to other weight or weight to bias. This added
fewer parameters and generalized better than taking all mappings.

                   Model                       MNIST                  CIFAR10
                                         Acc(↓)      Loss (↓)    Acc(↓)     Loss (↓)
                   SchurNet (Ours)        1.5e-5    0.251346        0.0      1.7822
                   Siamese               1.25e-5    0.262913      1.0e-4     1.7876

         Table 3: Comparison of SchurNet and Siamese models on MNIST and CIFAR10.

We run two sets of experiments from Navon et al. (2024): one on MLPs trained on MNIST (LeCun
et al., 1998) and one on MLPs trained on the CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) dataset. We trained
both models for 100 epochs and reported the test accuracy and the reconstruction loss. We ran several
hyper-parameter configurations for both methods to ensure a fair comparison and reported the results
with the best reconstruction loss. As we can see, our model with non-Siamese layers outperforms the
Siamese network from Navon et al. (2024) in all settings.

Conclusion. In this paper, we revisited the idea of using irreducible representations instead of
parameter-sharing to characterize equivariant linear layers for representations of permutations and
related groups. Using this approach, we obtained alternative derivations for the characterizations of
equivariant layers from DeepSets and 2-IGN, and a significantly simplified derivation of deep weight
spaces equivariant layers. We have also obtained a previously unknown characterization for the linear
equivariant layers of wreath products G ≀ Sn , and showed the benefits of using the full characterization
for several wreath-equivariant tasks. In general, looking forward to other yet unknown applications,
what could be the benefit of using the irreducible approach? One answer is reduced book-keeping, as
exemplified in the deep weight space example. In general, the number of equivariant layers can be, in
the worst case, quadratic in the number of irreducibles. When this happens, the irreducible approach
is expected to lead to simpler characterizations that are easier to implement. Additionally, networks
like k-IGN (Maron et al., 2018), which are based on tensor representations, use intermediate features
in nk , and using irreducibles could lead to new equivariant models with intermediate irreducible
features of lower dimensions. Finding the irreducible decompositions of k-IGN when k > 2 and the
potential applications of this decomposition is an interesting avenue for future work.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to extend our thanks to Eitan Rosen for the valuable discussions. We also sincerely
thank Idan Tankel for his technical support, as without your help, none of this would have worked as
it has. The authors are supported by ISF grant 272/23.

R EFERENCES
Samuel Ainsworth, Jonathan Hayase, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. Git re-basin: Merging models modulo
  permutation symmetries. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations.

Tal Amir and Nadav Dym. Injective sliced-wasserstein embedding for weighted sets and point clouds.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16519, 2024.

Brandon Anderson, Truong Son Hy, and Risi Kondor. Cormorant: Covariant molecular neu-
  ral networks. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2019/file/03573b32b2746e6e8ca98b9123f2249b-Paper.pdf.

Beatrice Bevilacqua, Fabrizio Frasca, Derek Lim, Balasubramaniam Srinivasan, Chen Cai, Gopinath
  Balamurugan, Michael M Bronstein, and Haggai Maron. Equivariant subgraph aggregation
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02910, 2021.

J. Michael Boardman. Real and complex representations (lecture notes). http:
  //web.archive.org/web/20080207010024/http://www.808multimedia.
  com/winnt/kernel.htm. Accessed: 2024-09-12.

Samantha Chen and Yusu Wang. Neural approximation of wasserstein distance via a universal archi-
  tecture for symmetric and factorwise group invariant functions. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. In Maria Florina Balcan
  and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2990–2999, New York,
  New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v48/cohenc16.html.

Taco S Cohen, Mario Geiger, and Maurice Weiler. A general theory of equivariant cnns on ho-
  mogeneous spaces. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2019/file/b9cfe8b6042cf759dc4c0cccb27a6737-Paper.pdf.

Nadav Dym and Haggai Maron. On the universality of rotation equivariant point cloud networks. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations.

Marc Finzi, Max Welling, and Andrew Gordon Gordon Wilson. A practical method for constructing
 equivariant multilayer perceptrons for arbitrary matrix groups. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang
 (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3318–3328. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL
 https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/finzi21a.html.

William Fulton and Joe Harris. Representation theory: a first course, volume 129. Springer Science
 & Business Media, 2013.

Doron Haviv, Russell Zhang Kunes, Thomas Dougherty, Cassandra Burdziak, Tal Nawy, Anna Gilbert,
  and Dana Pe’er. Wasserstein wormhole: Scalable optimal transport distance with transformer. In
 Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=Su0qe33cWA.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Erik Henning Thiede, Truong Son Hy, and Risi Kondor. The general theory of permutation equivarant
  neural networks and higher order graph variational encoders. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2004.03990,
  April 2020. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2004.03990.
Geoffrey E. Hinton, Simon Osindero, and Yee Whye Teh. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief
  nets. Neural Computation, 18:1527–1554, 2006.
Ioannis Kalogeropoulos, Giorgos Bouritsas, and Yannis Panagakis. Scale equivariant graph metanet-
  works, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.10685.
Miltiadis Kofinas, Boris Knyazev, Yan Zhang, Yunlu Chen, Gertjan J. Burghouts, Efstratios Gavves,
 Cees G. M. Snoek, and David W. Zhang. Graph neural networks for learning equivariant represen-
 tations of neural networks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=oO6FsMyDBt.
Risi Kondor and Shubhendu Trivedi. On the generalization of equivariance and convolution in neural
  networks to the action of compact groups. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 2747–2755. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v80/kondor18a.html.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes, and Christopher J.C. Burges. Mnist handwritten digit database.
  http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/, 1998. Accessed: 2024-08-23.
Derek Lim, Haggai Maron, Marc T. Law, Jonathan Lorraine, and James Lucas. Graph metanetworks
  for processing diverse neural architectures. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ijK5hyxs0n.
Haggai Maron, Heli Ben-Hamu, Nadav Shamir, and Yaron Lipman. Invariant and equivariant graph
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.09902, 2018.
Haggai Maron, Or Litany, Gal Chechik, and Ethan Fetaya. On learning sets of symmetric elements.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 6734–6744. PMLR, 2020.
Aviv Navon, Aviv Shamsian, Idan Achituve, Ethan Fetaya, Gal Chechik, and Haggai Maron. Equiv-
  ariant architectures for learning in deep weight spaces. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 25790–25816. PMLR, 2023.
Aviv Navon, Aviv Shamsian, Ethan Fetaya, Gal Chechik, Nadav Dym, and Haggai Maron. Equivariant
  deep weight space alignment. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=nBPnmk6EeO.
Edward Pearce-Crump. Connecting permutation equivariant neural networks and partition diagrams.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08648, 2022.
Edward Pearce-Crump. Brauer’s group equivariant neural networks. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 27461–27482. PMLR, 2023a.
Edward Pearce-Crump. How jellyfish characterise alternating group equivariant neural networks. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 27483–27495. PMLR, 2023b.
Fidel A Guerrero Peña, Heitor Rapela Medeiros, Thomas Dubail, Masih Aminbeidokhti, Eric
  Granger, and Marco Pedersoli. Re-basin via implicit sinkhorn differentiation. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 20237–20246, 2023.
Bjorn Poonen. Real representations, 2016.
Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Jeff Schneider, and Barnabás Póczos. Equivariance through parameter-
  sharing. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  2892–2901. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/
  ravanbakhsh17a.html.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jean-Pierre Serre. Linear representations of finite groups. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1977. ISBN
  0-387-90190-6. Translated from the second French edition by Leonard L. Scott, Graduate Texts in
  Mathematics, Vol. 42.

Norman Tatro, Pin-Yu Chen, Payel Das, Igor Melnyk, Prasanna Sattigeri, and Rongjie
  Lai.     Optimizing mode connectivity via neuron alignment.    In H. Larochelle,
  M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 15300–15311. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/aecad42329922dfc97eee948606e1f8e-Paper.pdf.

Nathaniel Thomas, Tess E. Smidt, Steven Kearnes, Lusann Yang, Li Li, Kai Kohlhoff, and Patrick
  Riley. Tensor field networks: Rotation- and translation-equivariant neural networks for 3d point
  clouds. CoRR, abs/1802.08219, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.08219.

Renhao Wang, Marjan Albooyeh, and Siamak Ravanbakhsh. Equivariant maps for hierarchical
  structures. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546.

Ben Webster. Answer in mathoverflow. https://mathoverflow.net/questions/
  222831/reference-request-irreducibles-of-the-regular-representation-of-the-permuta
  rq=1. Accessed: 2024-09-12.

Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Barnabas Poczos, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and
 Alexander J Smola. Deep sets. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Allan Zhou, Kaien Yang, Yiding Jiang, Kaylee Burns, Winnie Xu, Samuel Sokota, J Zico Kolter, and
  Chelsea Finn. Neural functional transformers. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=JdhyIa0azI.

Allan Zhou, Chelsea Finn, and James Harrison. Universal neural functionals, 2024a. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2402.05232.

Allan Zhou, Kaien Yang, Kaylee Burns, Adriano Cardace, Yiding Jiang, Samuel Sokota, J Zico Kolter,
  and Chelsea Finn. Permutation equivariant neural functionals. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 36, 2024b.


A    I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

In this section, we detail the hyper-parameters used through learning. In all our models we used
Adam or AdamW optimizers.

Graph Anomaly Detection In this set of experiments we run each model with 27 different hyper-
parameters and reported the best for each model. We run through different learning rates, weight
decays and learning rate decay. In our model, we used four layers, each with a hidden dimension of
256 and ReLU activation.

Deep weight space alignment In this section we took the model of Navon et al. (2024) and added
our non-Siamese common layers. We searched for each model and dataset over four hyper-parameters
and for each reported the best performance. We trained for 100 epochs and reported the reconstruction
loss.

Wasserstein Distance computation In this set we took the model of Chen & Wang (2024) and
added the non-Siamese layers. We trained for 200 epochs and reported the relative absolute mean
error. In most of the experiments we used learning rate of 1e−4 and weight decay of 1e−5 .


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    A BSOLUTELY I RREDUCIBLE R EAL R EPRESENTATIONS


Here we give some more details on the concept of absolutely irreducible real representations.
As discussed in the main text, a real irreducible representation V is called absolutely irreducible if its
complexification is irreducible over C. The complexification is denoted by cV. It can be defined by
choosing a basis v1 , . . . , vn to V and then defining



                                            Xn
                                      cV = {   ci vi ,       ci ∈ C}.
                                              i=1


Let T : V → V be an equivariant non-zero mapping, and assume V is absolutely irreducible. Then
T v = λv for some real λ. This is because T can be linearly extended to a non-zero linear mapping
T : cV → cV. Similarly, the group action of G which is linear can also be extended to cV. The
extension of T to cV will be equivariant, and therefore, since cV is irreducible by assumption, Schur’s
Lemma for complex representations implies that T = λI for λ ∈ C. Since T V = V, we know λ
must be real.


Real irreducible permutation representations are absolutely irreducible. Classical represen-
tation theory results (see e.g., Fulton & Harris (2013)) characterize all complex irreducible repre-
sentation of the permutation group, up to isomorphism. In this process, they show that all these
representations can be defined over the rational numbers. This means that, for any complex irreducible
representation U of the permutation group Sn , there exists a basis in which for every g ∈ Gn , the
matrix representing the linear mapping defined by g will be rational.
As explained, e.g., in Webster, this fact implies that every irreducible s dimensional real representation
V is absolutely irreducible. Indeed, if cV were not irreducible over C, then cV = V1 ⊕ V2 where V1
is an invariant (complex) irreducible subspace, and the dimension t of V1 satisfies 0 < t < s. In an
appropriate bases u1 , . . . , ut of V1 we will have that the matrix representing each g ∈ Sn is rational.
We can write each uj as



                                              n
                                              X
                                       uj =       (ajk + ibjk )vk .
                                              k=1


One can then verify that the t dimensional real space V̂1 defined by


                                                    n
                                                    X
                                            ûj =         ajk vk
                                                    k=1


is a (real) G invariant subspace of V and has dimension t < s, which contradicts the fact that V is
irreducible.


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     GRAPH NETWORKS IRREDUCIBLE DECOMPOSITION

In the main text, we claim that, for n ≥ 4, the representation Rn×n of the permutation group Sn can
be decomposed into a direct sum of seven irreducible representations:
                      V0 = {a · In |a ∈ R}
                      V1 = {a · (1n×n − In )|a ∈ R}
                                                n
                                                X
                      V2 = {Diag(α1 , .., αn )|   αi = 0}
                                                      i=1
                                     n
                                     X
                      V3 = {r1Tn |        ri = 0}
                                     i=1
                                      Xn
                      V4 = {1n cT |         ci = 0}
                                      i=1
                      V5 = {A|A = −AT , A1n = 0}
                      V6 = {A|A = AT , A1n = 0, Aii = 0, ∀i = 1, . . . , n}.


We begin by giving an algorithm describing how every n by n matrix can be decomposed into a sum
of matrices from these spaces, with a computational complexity of O(n2 ). This is necessary for a
2-IGN implementation which is based on irreducibles, and is also a first step towards a full proof of
Theorem 4.1. This full proof will be presented after the algorithm.

C.1   D ECOMPOSITION ALGORITHM

We will give an algorithm to decompose a matrix A ∈ Rn×n into a sum of matrices from these seven
sub-spaces. We assume n ≥ 4 (actually, when n = 3 the algorithm works as well, but in this case V6
is zero dimensional as discussed in the main text).
The first step of the algorithm is to write
                                        0 a     ... a       b
                                                                          
                                      a 0      . . . a  b                 
                          A=B+        ...
                                                        + .
                                                         ..
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                      a     a   ...     0          ...   b
where the two matrices from the right are in V0 and V1 , and a and b are the average of off-diagonal
and diagonal elements of A, respectively, so that the diagonal and off-diagonal elements of B both
sum to zero. It remains to find a decomposition for B. The crucial part of this is the following lemma
Lemma C.1. Let n > 2 be a natural number, and let B ∈ Rn×n be a matrix whose diagonal
elements sum to zero, and off-diagonal elements sum to zero. Then there exists a matrix C in
              V̂ = {C ∈ Rn×n | , C1n = 0, C T 1n = 0 and Cii = 0, ∀i = 1, . . . , n}             (10)
                       n
and vectors r, c, d ∈ R which all sum to zero, such that
                                 C = B + r1Tn + 1n cT + diag(d).                                 (11)
Moreover, this decomposition of B is unique.

Stated differently, the matrix B will be a linear combination of matrices r1Tn , 1n cT and diag(d)
which are in V3 , V4 and V2 , repsectively, and the matrix C which is in V̂. Once we prove the lemma,
we will conclude by showing that a matrix in V̂ can be written as a sum of matrices in V5 and V6 ,
which will conclude the argument.

Proof of the Lemma. Let us denote the sum of the i-th row and column of B by riB and cB     i respec-
tively. Denote dB
                i = Bii . Note that the vectors r B B
                                                   , c , and d B
                                                                 all sum to zero by our assumption on
B.


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We need to show there exists vectors r, d, c ∈ Rn satisfying equation 11 for an appropriate C ∈ V̂.
This will occur if and only if the following equations are satisfied

                                                n
                                                X
                                                      ri = 0
                                                i=1
                                                Xn
                                                      ci = 0
                                             i=1
                                             Xn
                                                      di = 0
                                                i=1
                                   ri + ci + di = −dBi ,                ∀i = 1, . . . , n
                                    Xn
                              nri +     cj + di = −riB ,                ∀i = 1, . . . , n
                                      j=1
                                      Xn
                              nci +         rj + di = −cB
                                                        i ,             ∀i = 1, . . . , n.
                                      j=1



Here the first three constraints are the requirements that the vectors r, c, d all sum to zero, and the
last three constraints (each of which are actually n constraints) follow from our requirement that the
diagonal elements of C will be zero and that the rows and columns of C sum to zero.
Next, we note that since the vectors r, c, d, rB , cB , dB all sum to zero, if the last three equations
above are satisfied for i = 1, . . . , n − 1, they will automatically be satisfied for i = n. That is, these
equations are equivalent to
                                        Xn
                                            ri = 0
                                      i=1
                                      n
                                      X
                                            ci = 0
                                      i=1
                                      Xn
                                            di = 0
                                      i=1
                               ri + ci + di = −dB
                                                i ,             ∀i = 1, . . . , n − 1
                                   nri + di = −riB ,            ∀i = 1, . . . , n − 1
                                   nci + di = −cB
                                                i ,             ∀i = 1, . . . , n − 1

This gives us a 3n linear equations system in 3n variables. We will show this equation has a unique
solution and compute it explicitly. First, we eliminate the variables rn , cn and d1 , . . . , dn by setting
                                di = −dB
                                       i − ri − ci ,             i = 1, . . . , n − 1                    (12)
and
                                   n−1
                                   X                           n−1
                                                               X                      n−1
                                                                                      X
                          rn = −         rj ,     cn = −             cj ,   dn = −           dj          (13)
                                   j=1                         j=1                    j=1
This ensures that the first four equations above are satisfied, and we are left with the task of choosing
r1 , . . . , rn−1 , c1 , . . . , cn−1 satisfying the last two equations (which are actually 2n − 2 equations).
By replacing the eliminated variables di we obtain the equations
                          (n − 1)ri − ci = −riB + dB
                                                   i ,                  ∀i = 1, . . . , n − 1
                          (n − 1)ci − ri = −cB    B
                                             i + di ,                   ∀i = 1, . . . , n − 1



                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For every i, there are two equations in ri and ci . Since we assume n ≥ 4, this equation has a unique
solution
                                                        −1   B
                              ri       n−1         −1        −ri + dBi ,
                                  =
                              ci         −1     n−1           −cB    B
                                                                i + di ,

And we can derive
                                                                   B
                           ri     1    n−1                 1      −ri + dB
                                                                         i ,
                              = 2
                           ci  n − 2n   1                 n−1     −cB    B
                                                                    i + di ,


                                       B
                                  ri   ndi − (n − 1)riB − cB
                                                           i ,
                                     =
                                  ci   ndB           B     B
                                         i − (n − 1)ci − ri ,

We can then reconstruct d1 , . . . , dn−1 from equation 12 and cn , rn , dn from equation 13. This
concludes the proof.

Given the proof, it remains to decompose a matrix C ∈ V̂ into a sum of two matrices in V5 , V6 . This
can be simply done by writing
                                          1             1
                                    C=      (C + C T ) + (C − C T )
                                          2             2
and noting that the matrices 21 (C − C T ) and 12 (C + C T ) are in V5 and V6 .

C.2    ISOMORPHISM TYPES

We now restate and prove the theorem on 2-IGN stated in the main text
Theorem 4.1. For all n ≥ 4, the space Rn×n can be written as a direct sum of the spaces V0 , . . . , V6 .
These spaces are invariant and irreducible, and the isomorphism relations between them are given by
V0 ∼
   = V1 , V2 ∼
             = V3 ∼= V4 .

Proof. The decomposition given in Subsection C.1 is unique when n ≥ 4, and thus we see that
                                             2
                                          Rn = V0 ⊕ . . . ⊕ V6 .
It is also clear that all the spaces Vi are invariant, that V0 , V1 are isomorphic to the irreducible trivial
space, and V2 , V3 , V4 are isomorphic to the irreducible space V(n). It remains to show: (a) That
V5 , V6 are not zero-dimensional, (b) that they are irreducible, and (c) that both V5 and V6 are not
isomorphic to any of the other spaces.
We handle (a) by computing the dimension of V5 and V6 . We note that a matrix A ∈ V5 can be
parameterized by freely choosing all upper diagonal elements Aij with j − i > 1. The elements
Aji with j − i > 1 are then determined by the constraint Aji = −Aij , and then the coordinates
A12 = −A21 , A23 = −A32 , . . . are determined recursively by the constraint that the first n − 1 rows
of A will sum to zero. The obtained matrix A satisfies A = −AT and its first n − 1 rows sum to zero.
It follows from A = −AT that the sum of all elements of A is zero and hence the last row of A must
also sum to zero and A is indeed in V5 .
To summarize, since V5 is parameterized by the upper diagonal elements Aij with j − i > 1 we
deduce that
                                                                 n2 − 3n
                          dim(V5 ) = (n2 − n)/2 − (n − 1) =               + 1.
                                                                     2
We compute the dimension of V6 by noting that V̂ from equation 10 is a direct sum of V5 and V6 . The
space V̂ can be parameterized by choosing an (n − 1) × (n − 1) matrix A with zero on the diagonal,
and whose elements sum to zero. There is then a unique extension of this matrix to an n by n matrix
Â which is in V̂ and satisfies Âij = Aij for all 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n − 1. Accordingly, the dimension of V̂ is
(n − 1)2 − (n − 1) − 1 = n2 − 3n + 1 and
                                                                    n2 − 3n
                             dim(V6 ) = dim(V̂) − dim(V5 ) =                .
                                                                       2

                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


It follows that when n ≥ 4, both V5 and V6 have positive dimension. Moreover, V5 and V6 are not
isomorphic as they do not have the same dimension. The same argument shows that and V6 is are not
isomorphic to the other Vi with i = 0, . . . , 4 since they do not have the same dimension for any n. In
contrast V5 does have the same dimension as V2 when n = 4, as we get dim(V5 ) = 3 = dim(V2 ).
Nonetheless, the spaces are still not isomorphic since the action of Sn on the spaces is different. For
example, the subspace of fixed points of the permutation τ = (1, 2) in the space V2 ∼     = V(n) is all
n = 4 dimensional vectors x which sum to zero and satisfy x1 = x2 . This space is two dimensional.
In contrast, one can verify that the subspace of fixed points of τ in V5 is one dimensional. Hence they
cannot be isomorphic.
It remains to show that V5 and V6 are indeed irreducible. Let Ṽ5 ⊆ V5 and Ṽ6 ⊆ V6 be non-zero
invariant subspaces. We need to show that Ṽj = Vj for j = 5, 6. To show this, we consider the space
                                  U = V0 ⊕ V1 ⊕ . . . V4 ⊕ Ṽ5 ⊕ Ṽ6 .
It is sufficient to show that U = Rn×n . Since U contains all diagonal matrices which are given by
V0 ⊕ V2 , and since it is an invariant subspace, it is sufficient to show that the matrix E 1,2 which is
                                                           1,2
zero in all coordinates except for a single coordinate E1,2    = 1, is in U.

To show that E 1,2 is in U, let us choose a non-zero matrix A ∈ Ṽ5 and B ∈ Ṽ6 . Both matrices have a
non-zero off diagonal matrix element, and by applying an appropriate permutation and rescaling we
can assume that A12 = 1 = B12 . Next, let us average over the group
                              stab(1, 2) = {τ ∈ Sn , τ (1) = 1, τ (2) = 2}
to obtain new matrices
                          1           X                          1         X
              Â =                           τ · A, B̂ =                           τ ·B
                     |stab(1, 2)|                          |stab(1, 2)|
                                  τ ∈stab(1,2)                             τ ∈stab(1,2)

Note that Â (respectively B̂) is in Ṽ5 (respectively Ṽ6 ) and satisfy Â12 = 1 = B̂12 and
                                    Â1j = Â1k , B̂1j = B̂1k ∀j, k > 2
and
                                           Âjk = Âst , B̂jk = B̂st
for all j, k, s, t which are all larger than 2, and such that j ̸= k, s ̸= t. Defining for convenience
                                             1                 2
                                     a=          ,b =                    ,
                                           n−2          (n − 2)(n − 3)
it follows that
            0      1 −a . . . −a                      0      1 −a . . . −a
                                                                              
        −1 0            a ... a                  1        0 −a . . . −a
         a −a 0 . . . 0                         −a −a b . . . b 
  Â =                                                                           − diag(0, 0, b, . . . , b)
                                         B̂ =  .
                                                
         ...
                                                                                 
                                                  ..                           
            a −a 0 . . . 0                           −a −a b . . . b
It is not difficult to show that any matrix which is constant along the rows is in V0 ⊕ . . . ⊕ V4 ⊆ U.
The same is true for any matrix which is contant along the columns. Let C(i) denote the matrix with
Cij (i) = 1 for all j and Ckj (i) = 0 for all j and all k ̸= i. Then
        Ã :=Â + aC(1) − aC(2) − aC T (1) + aC T (2)
                     0      1 + 2a 0 . . . 0
                                             
                −1 − 2a       0   0 . . . 0
              =
                    0         0   0 . . . 0 
                    ..                       
                     .                       
                        0          0      0      ...   0
        B̃ :=B̂ + diag(0, 0, b, . . . , b) − b1n×n + (a + b)(C(1) + C(2) + C T (1) + C T (2))
                    2a + b        1 + 2a + b 0 . . . 0
                                                          
                1 + 2a + b           2a + b     0 . . . 0
              =
                
                      0                  0      0  . . . 0
                                                           
                      .
                       ..
                                                           
                                                           
                       0                  0      0 ... 0


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where both Ã and B̃ are in U. Since a, b are positive numbers, we can take the following linear
combination which zeros out the (2, 1) entry and sets the (1, 2) entry to one:
                                                           c 1 0 ... 0
                                                                              
                                                     0 d 0 . . . 0
                    1      1              1             0 0 0 . . . 0
                               Ã +             B̃ =   .
                                                                               
                    2 1 + 2a         1 + 2a + b          ..
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                           0   0   0 ...     0
for appropriate c, d. Since diagonal matrices are in U, we can remove the diagonal matrix
diag(c, d, 0, . . . , 0) to finally obtain that the matrix E 1,2 is in U.

C.3   S MALL n

As discussed in Finzi et al. (2021); Pearce-Crump (2022), when n < 4 the dimension of the space of
equivariant mappings is smaller than 15: it is 14 for n = 3 and 8 for n = 2. We now explain this
according to our derivation.
For n = 3, the space V6 is zero-dimensional. In this case, there are only 22 + 32 + 1 = 14 equivariant
linear mappings. When n = 2, both V5 and V6 are zero dimensional. Additionally, we can directly
verify that in this case, we can "drop" V4 as well because R2×2 = V0 ⊕ V1 ⊕ V2 ⊕ V3 . Since V0 ∼= V1
and V2 ∼= V3 we have 22 + 22 = 8 equivariant linear mappings.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     P ROOF FOR D EEP W EIGHT S PACE DECOMPOSITION
In this section we fill in some details on the tensor product of representations which were ommitted
from the proof of Theorem 4.2 in the main text.
At the base of this discussion is the following lemma (Serre, 1977):
Lemma D.1. Let G1 , G2 be finite groups, and let V1 , V2 be (real or complex) finite dimensional
irreducible representations, with an action denoted by ρ1 , ρ2 . Then the action ρ1 ⊗ ρ2 on V1 ⊗ V2 is
an irreducible representation of G1 × G2 .

Firstly, we explain the decomposition of Ŵm into irreducibles. We note that the representation
Ŵm of G can be thought of as a representation of Sdm−1 × Sdm , which is a tensor product of the
representation Rdm−1 of Sdm−1 and the representation Rdm of Sdm . Therefore (Serre, 1977), its
irreducible decomposition is given by the tensor product of the irreducible decomposition of its
factors, namely
           Ŵm ∼
               = Rdm−1 ⊗ Rdm ∼= (S ⊕ V(dm−1 )) ⊗ (S ⊕ V(dm ))
               ∼
               = (S ⊗ S) ⊕ (S ⊗ V(dm )) ⊕ (V(dm−1 ) ⊗ S) ⊕ (V(dm−1 ) ⊗ V(dm ))
               ∼
               = S ⊕ V(dm ) ⊕ V(dm−1 ) ⊕ Mm .
All components in the decomposition are irreducible as a tensor product of irreducibles.
We also need to show that all irreducibles in the decomposition are absolutely irreducible. For S
this is obvious. For all representations V(dm )) this follows from the fact that these representations
can be identified with representations of the permutation group Sdm−1 , which are always absolutely
irreducible. To see that Mm is absolutely irreducible, we note that Mm is the set of dm−1 × dm
real matrices whose rows and columns all sum to zero, and its complexification cMm is the set of
complex matrices whose rows and columns all sum to zero. cMm is the tensor product of cV(dm−1 )
and cV(dm ), the complexification of V(dm−1 ) and V(dm ), respectively. Since these spaces are
irreducible, so is their tensor product.

D.1   D ECOMPOSITION OF WEIGHT SPACES

We explain here how each matrix A ∈ Wm , m = 2, . . . , M − 1 can be written as a sum of elements
from its irreducible decomposition. For convenience denote a = dm , b = dm−1 . We want to write A
as a sum of elements from the spaces
      S∼
       = {c1a×b },     Vm−1 ∼
                            = {1a cT |c ∈ Rb , cT 1b = 0},       Vm ∼
                                                                    = {r1Tb |r ∈ Ra , rT 1a = 0}
and
                            Mm = {C ∈ Ra×b , C1b = 0b , C T 1a = 0a }

As a first step, we take our given A ∈ Wm and write it as
                                   A = Ā1n×n + (A − Ā1n×n )
where Ā is the average of all elements of A, and
                                               P Ā1n×n is in S. Next, we need to decompose
(A − Ā1n×n ) which we denote by B. Note that ij Bij = 0.
Let r and c be the vectors describing the average of the rows and columns of B, respectively:
                                          1                 1 T
                                     r=     B1b ,    c=       B 1a
                                          b                 a
Note that rT 1a = 1b                                 T
                                                         1b = 0 and thus 1a cT ∈ Vm−1 and r1Tb ∈ Vm .
                       P
                        ij Bij = 0 and similarly c
Now let us define
                                       C = B − 1a cT − r1Tb
We can directly verify that C1b = 0b and C T 1a = 0a . Therefore C is in Mm and we obtained the
decomposition we wanted.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    P ROOFS FOR W REATH P RODUCTS
To conclude the proof of Theorem 5.1, we need to prove the following lemma
Lemma E.1. Let V be an irreducible representation of G, and assume the action of G on V is not
trivial. Then V k is an irreducible representation of G ≀ Sk .

Proof. The space V k is invariant. Let W ⊆ V k be a non-zero G k invariant subspace. We need to
show that W = V k .
We first claim that there exists an element in W of the form (u, 0, ..., 0) with u ̸= 0. Let (v1 , v2 , .., vk )
be a non-zero element in W. By applying a permutation if necessary, we can assume without loss of
generality that the first element is non-zero. If vi = 0, ∀2 ≤ i ≤ k, we are done. Otherwise, there
exists some g ∈ G such that gv1 ̸= v1 and so
                       (g · v1 , v2 , .., vk ) − (v1 , v2 , .., vk ) = (gv1 − v1 , 0, .., 0) ∈ W

The space {v ∈ V|(v, 0, .., 0) ∈ W} is invariant under the action of G, and we just saw it is not zero.
Since V is irreducible, this space equals to V, and thus W contains V ⊕ 0... ⊕ 0. By Sk invariance it
follows that W contains all k-tuples with a single non-zero entry, and since such tuples span all of V
we deduce that W = V.
Theorem 5.2. Let V be a real representation of a finite group G. and let e1 , . . . , es be a basis to the
subspace Vf ixed . Let ⟨·, ·⟩ be a G invariant inner product on V. Then every linear equivariant map
L : V k → V k is of the form

                                s             k                        k
                                                                                        !
                                X             X                        X
        L(v1 , . . . , vk ) =           aij     ⟨vℓ , ei ⟩ej , . . . ,   ⟨vℓ , ei ⟩ej       + L̂(v1 ), . . . , L̂(vk )    (9)
                                i,j=1         ℓ=1                    ℓ=1

where L̂ : V → V is a linear equivariant map, and aij are real numbers. Conversely, every linear
mapping of the form defined in equation 9 is equivariant.

Proof. It is straightforward to checking that every mapping of the form equation 9 is equivariant. We
would like to prove the converse statement.
It is also straightforward to verify that the space spanned by the non-Siamese mappings
                                                       k
                                                       X                       k
                                                                               X
                                (v1 , . . . , vk ) 7→ ( ⟨vℓ , ei ⟩ej , . . . ,   ⟨vℓ , ei ⟩ej
                                                       ℓ=1                    ℓ=1

does not depend on the choice of the basis e1 , . . . , es for Vf ixed . In particular, we can assume without
loss of generality that e1 , . . . , es are an orthonormal basis for Vf ixed .
Note that V can be written as a direct sum of two G invariant spaces V = Vf ixed ⊕ V⊥ , where V⊥ is
the space of vectors in V which are orthogonal to Vf ixed with respect to the given G invariant inner
product. It follows that V k = Vfkixed ⊕ V⊥
                                          k
                                            is a decomposition of V k into two G k invariant spaces.
In this situation, we know that any linear equivariant L : V k → V k can be written as L = Lf ixed +L⊥ ,
where Lf ixed : Vfkixed → Vfkixed and L⊥ : V⊥    k
                                                    → V⊥ k
                                                            are equivariant. We know that there are no
linear equivariant maps from Vf ixed to Vperp or vice versa, since Vperp cannot contain a trivial
irreducible subspace.
Let L : V⊥ → V⊥ be a linear equivariant map. We want to show that it is a ’Siamese mapping’.
Denote
                  L(v1 , . . . , vk ) = (L1 (v1 , . . . , vk ), . . . , Lk (v1 , . . . , vk )),
We define L̂ : V⊥ → V⊥ by
                                                 L̂(v) = L1 (v, 0, . . . , 0).
Note that L̂ is G equivariant because
                   L̂(gv) = L1 (gv, 0, . . . , 0) = gL1 (v, 0, . . . , 0) = g L̂(v),               ∀g ∈ G.


                                                              21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, note that for every v2 , . . . , vk ∈ V⊥ , we have that
                  L1 (0, v2 , . . . , vk ) = L1 (g · 0, v2 , . . . , vk ) = g · L1 (0, v2 , . . . , vk ).
                                  k
Thus, L1 (0, v2 , . . . , vk ) ∈ V⊥ , and since it is also in Vfkixed we deduce that it is equal to zero. We
deduce that
                                 L1 (v1 , . . . , vk ) = L1 (v1 , 0, . . . , 0) = L̂(v1 )
By Sk equivariance we can deduce that
                            Lj (v1 , . . . , vj . . .) = L1 (vj , . . . , v1 , . . .) = L̂(vj )
and we can also show, as we did for L1 , that
                                Lj (v1 , . . . , vj . . .) = Lj (0, . . . , 0, vj , 0 . . .).

Thus L is a Siamese mapping induced from L̂, that is

                             L(v1 , . . . , vk ) = L̂(v1 ), . . . , L̂(vk )

Now, let us consider linear equivariant mappings from Vfkixed to itself. Denote Si = {cei , c ∈ R},
and note that an irreducible decomposition of Vf ixed is given by
                                             Vf ixed = S1 ⊕ . . . ⊕ Ss ,
and Vfkixed can be written as a direct sum of the invariant subspaces Ski for i = 1, . . . , s. The action
of G k on Ski can be identified with the action of Sk on these spaces, which is then isomorphic to the
action of Sk on Rk , via the isomorphism ψi : Ski → Rk given by
                                  ψi (v1 , . . . , vk ) = (⟨v1 , ei ⟩, . . . , ⟨v1 , ek ⟩)
Note that since we assumed without loss of generality that e1 , . . . , es is an orthonormal basis, ψi is
zero on all other components of V k . Similarly we can define an isomrphism ψ̃i : Rk → Ski by

                                     ψ̃i (x1 , . . . , xk ) = (x1 ei , . . . , xk ei ).

As discussed in Section 4.1, an equivariant mapping from Rk to itself can be written as a linear
combination of the identity mapping x 7→ x (which is a Siamese mapping), and the mapping
                                            n              n
                                                                !
                                          X                X
                                  Tx =        xi , . . . ,   xi
                                                      i=1              i=1

Accordingly, a mapping from Ski to Skj is a linear combination of a Siamese map and the mapping
ψ̃j ◦ T ◦ ψi which is given by
                                                       k
                                                       X                       k
                                                                               X
                    ψ̃j ◦ T ◦ ψi (v1 , . . . , vk ) = ( ⟨vℓ , ei ⟩ej , . . . ,   ⟨vℓ , ei ⟩ej ).
                                                           ℓ=1                      ℓ=1

This concludes the proof.



E.1    B EYOND Sk

We now generalize the results from Theorem 5.2 to the case where Sk is replaced with any subgroup
H ≤ Sk which acts on {1, . . . , k} transitively:
Theorem E.2 (Generalization of Theorem 5.2). Let V be a real representation of a finite group G.
and let e1 , . . . , es be a basis to the subspace Vf ixed . Let ⟨·, ·⟩ be a G invariant inner product on V.
Let H be a subgroup of Sk which acts on {1, . . . , k} transitively. Let T1 , T2 , . . . , Th be a basis for
the H-equivariant mappings from Rk to itself, where Th is the identity mapping.


                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then every G ≀ H linear equivariant map L : V k → V k is of the form
                                            h−1
                                            X X s
                    L(v1 , . . . , vk ) =               aijℓ · (ψ̃j ◦ Tℓ ◦ ψi )(v1 , . . . , vk )
                                            ℓ=1 i,j=1

                                      + L̂(v1 ), . . . , L̂(vk )

where L̂ : V → V is a linear equivariant map, and aijℓ are real numbers. Conversely, every linear
mapping of the form defined in equation 9 is equivariant.

The proof is identical to the proof of Theorem 5.2.


                                                         23
