Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A P ROBABILISTIC P ERSPECTIVE ON U NLEARNING
AND A LIGNMENT FOR L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Yan Scholten, Stephan Günnemann, Leo Schwinn
 Department of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute
 Technical University of Munich
 {y.scholten, s.guennemann, l.schwinn}@tum.de



                                              A BSTRACT
           Comprehensive evaluation of Large Language Models (LLMs) is an open research
           problem. Existing evaluations rely on deterministic point estimates generated via
           greedy decoding. However, we find that deterministic evaluations fail to capture
           the whole output distribution of a model, yielding inaccurate estimations of model
           capabilities. This is particularly problematic in critical contexts such as unlearning
           and alignment, where precise model evaluations are crucial. To remedy this, we
           introduce the first formal probabilistic evaluation framework for LLMs. Namely,
           we propose novel metrics with high probability guarantees concerning the out-
           put distribution of a model. Our metrics are application-independent and allow
           practitioners to make more reliable estimates about model capabilities before de-
           ployment. Our experimental analysis reveals that deterministic evaluations falsely
           indicate successful unlearning and alignment, whereas our probabilistic evalua-
           tions better capture model capabilities. We show how to overcome challenges
           associated with probabilistic outputs in a case study on unlearning by introducing
           (1) a novel loss based on entropy optimization, and (2) adaptive temperature scal-
           ing. We demonstrate that our approach significantly enhances unlearning in prob-
           abilistic settings on recent benchmarks. Overall, our proposed shift from point
           estimates to probabilistic evaluations of output distributions represents an impor-
           tant step toward comprehensive evaluations of LLMs.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) are widely employed across various applications, from chatbots
to code generation, relying on outputs generated through probabilistic decoding methods such as
beam-search and multinominal sampling. Despite their probabilistic deployment, performance eval-
uations in LLMs predominately rely on deterministic point estimates, where outputs are generated
through greedy decoding. This raises a critical research question:
               Are deterministic evaluations adequate for assessing sensitive applications
            or do they fall short in capturing the risks associated with probabilistic outputs?
Current deterministic evaluations may be misaligned with practical usage by overlooking the inher-
ent variability in model outputs. As a result, they could fail to account for both utility and potential
risks associated with the model’s entire output distribution. Yet, use cases like model alignment
and unlearning require precise evaluations to mitigate the risk of harmful usage or privacy non-
compliance during deployment. As illustrated in Figure 1, an unlearning algorithm might seem to
successfully delete information in a deterministic setting but still leak it probabilistically.
In many scenarios, leakage in even a small fraction of samples (such as revealing social security
numbers, passwords, or copyrighted content) can be as problematic as widespread leakage. To
address this, we empirically assess whether deterministic methods adequately reflect the risk of
information leakage. We find that current deterministic evaluations are insufficient and do not cap-
ture practical risks in real-world probabilistic settings, and we propose evaluating the LLM’s entire
output distribution instead of relying on single-point estimates.
    1
        Project page: https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/probabilistic-unlearning/


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     How to accurately evaluate LLMs in sensitive applications?
 Q: Who are           Deterministically                    Probabilistically (ours)
    Harry Potter’s
                                             Greedy answer            Sampled answer              Sampled answer                   Sampled answer
    best friends?


                     Token probabilities
                                                                                                                            ...


                                                          Hermione


                                                                                      Hermione


                                                                                                                 Hermione


                                                                                                                                                 Hermione
                                                                            besides
                                                  maybe


                                                                            maybe


                                                                                                        maybe


                                                                                                                                         maybe
                                                          Frank


                                                                                      Frank


                                                                                                                 Frank


                                                                                                                                                 Frank
                                                          Peter


                                                                                      Peter


                                                                                                                 Peter


                                                                                                                                                 Peter
                                           John


                                                                     John


                                                                                                 John


                                                                                                                                  John
                                           Sara


                                                                     Sara


                                                                                                 Sara


                                                                                                                                  Sara
                                           Ron


                                                                     Ron


                                                                                                 Ron


                                                                                                                                  Ron
                                                  and


                                                                            and


                                                                                                        and


                                                                                                                                         and
                                                  or


                                                                                                        or


                                                                                                                                         or
                                           John    and    Peter      Sara   besides   Peter      Ron     and    Hermione          John    and    Frank
                                            Leak not detected         Leak not detected            Leak detected!                  Leak not detected
    Unlearned LLM
                     Leak never detected                                              High probability to detect leak
Figure 1: We propose a novel probabilistic evaluation framework as a more reliable method for as-
sessing LLM capabilities. Existing evaluations are deterministic and rely on greedy decoding, where
the most likely token is selected at each step, producing only a single output per query. Since in most
practical applications LLMs generate outputs probabilistically, previous evaluation schemes are in-
sufficient: They overlook potential information leaks and falsely suggest successful unlearning. In
contrast, in our probabilistic evaluation framework we directly consider the LLM’s output distribu-
tion by sampling from the token probability distribution at each step to generate multiple sequences.
In an empirical study, we show that all state-of-the-art unlearning methods leak information under
our probabilistic setting, demonstrating that current deterministic evaluations are insufficient.


Our main contributions are:
 • We demonstrate that simple multinominal sampling breaks all state-of-the-art unlearning algo-
   rithms and aligned models, retrieving most if not all of the unlearned or toxic information.
 • We are the first to formally model LLM evaluations from a probabilistic perspective and thereby
   capture the practical risk of information leakage more accurately than existing approaches.
 • We propose a probabilistic evaluation framework consisting of a suite of principled metrics for
   comparing LLM output distributions with high-probability guarantees.
 • We demonstrate how to reduce information leakage in probabilistic unlearning settings by intro-
   ducing (1) a novel loss based on entropy optimization, and (2) adaptive temperature scaling.

2     R ELATED WORK

Machine Unlearning. Machine unlearning aims to remove specific information from a model’s
weights while preserving its overall capabilities (Cao & Yang, 2015). Early works focus on classifi-
cation tasks (Guo et al., 2020; Golatkar et al., 2020; Tanno et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Pawelczyk
et al., 2024). Later works consider more complex scenarios, such as language models for text gen-
eration (Jang et al., 2023; Chen & Yang, 2023; Eldan & Russinovich, 2023; Kim et al., 2023; Maini
et al., 2024; Sheshadri et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024), which we will focus on. Maini et al. (2024) in-
troduce a synthetic benchmark dataset that allows for controlled learning and unlearning of fictional
information. Other works explore broader unlearning contexts, such as removing knowledge about
pop culture topics like Harry Potter (Eldan & Russinovich, 2023). Previous algorithms introduce
considerable trade-offs between model capability and effectiveness of unlearning, this includes gra-
dient ascent and gradient difference (Liu et al., 2022), Kullback-Leibler minimization, or preference
optimization (Rafailov et al., 2024). Zhang et al. (2024) propose negative preference optimization,
which shows notable improvements in balancing model capability and unlearning quality.
Attacks against unlearning. Towards more accurate evaluations of unlearning, recent studies have
explored whether information supposedly removed by unlearning algorithms can be retrieved using
extraction attacks. Patil et al. (2024) utilize a logit lens (Geva et al., 2021) approach to analyze hid-
den states of LLMs to extract unlearned information. Recently, adversarial attacks in the embedding
space of LLMs have been proposed to retrieve harmful (Schwinn et al., 2023) and unlearned infor-
mation (Schwinn et al., 2024). Subsequent works demonstrate that continuous attacks can be used to
defend models against such threats (Sheshadri et al., 2024; Xhonneux et al., 2024). Moreover, Lynch
et al. (2024) propose a diverse set of methods to robustly evaluate unlearning in LLMs. Beyond ex-
traction attacks, recent studies aim to quantify the degree of memorization in LLMs. Carlini et al.
(2023) estimate that these models memorize at least 1% of their training dataset. Schwarzschild
et al. (2024) introduce the adversarial compression ratio as a metric that measures the difficulty of
eliciting predefined responses with significantly shorter input prompts.


                                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Certified machine unlearning. Beyond empirical unlearning methods, first works guarantee exact
unlearning (Bourtoule et al., 2021), and approximate unlearning based on differential privacy (Guo
et al., 2020; Neel et al., 2021; Ullah et al., 2021; Chien et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023) and general-
ization theory (Sekhari et al., 2021). All of these methods propose adapted training techniques that
are aware of the need for later unlearning and consequently require training access. However, such
methods are not applicable in settings where models have already been trained on data that needs
to be unlearned, and are thereby particularly impracticable for LLMs. In contrast, we investigate
unlearning for LLMs after models have been trained on data that needs to be unlearned.

3    P RELIMINARIES
Language models. Without loss of generality, we model language models as parameterized func-
                           m
tions πθ : V ∗ → ∆|V | −1 mapping an input sequence of arbitrary length to a distribution over out-
                                                                                                                   m
put sequences of length m, where θ are the model parameters, V denotes a vocabulary, and ∆|V | −1
                                    m
is the probability simplex in R|V | . In other words, for a fixed input sequence x ∈ V ∗ , πθ (x) spans
a probability distribution over all possible output sequences V m of length m. While we are gener-
ally interested in the output distribution πθ (x), in practice we cannot directly access this distribution
since the number of possible output sequences |V |m quickly outgrows the number of atoms in the
observable universe. Instead, Q   we can only access and evaluate the language model sequentially as
                                   m
follows: πθ (y1 , . . . , ym |x) = t=1 πθ (yt |yt−1 , . . . , y1 , x), where πθ (yt |yt−1 , . . . , y1 , x) is the con-
ditional probability of token yt given previous tokens yt−1 , . . . , y1 and input sequence x. This rep-
resents a challenge: Without any further knowledge about the distribution πθ (x), practically we can
only learn about it via sampling the model’s responses for a given input sequence x, Y ∼ πθ (x).
Deterministic evaluation metrics. Assume we have a perfect oracle to decide if a generated text
leaks toxic or sensitive information. We model this using a function h : V m → [0, 1] that quantifies
how much information got leaked, where h(s) = 0 means s does not leak information, and h(s) = 1
means complete leakage. For example, h can be binary and indicate if specific data got leaked, or
the ROUGE score, which measures the similarity between the model’s response and a ground truth.
Machine unlearning. The goal of machine unlearning is to remove knowledge from a model while
preserving its overall performance. That is, given a model πθ , a forget set DF G , and a retain set
DRT , we seek an algorithm to transform the model’s parameters θ such that the response y of the
updated model πθ̃ does not answer the queries x for all (x, y) ∈ DF G of the forget set. The challenge
is that the model’s utility should remain high for queries from the retain set DRT at the same time.

4    A C OMPREHENSIVE EVALUATION FRAMEWORK FOR LLM S
Current evaluation schemes are insufficient to evaluate LLMs in sensitive applications since they are
based on point estimates. To remedy this, we propose a probabilistic evaluation framework. For
the sake of clarity, we introduce our framework using the application case of machine unlearning,
although our framework generalizes beyond unlearning to other domains as well. First, we properly
define four desiderata for machine unlearning that comprehensive evaluations must fulfill:
     Desiderata for comprehensive machine unlearning evaluations
      I: Must quantify the extent of unlearning.
     II: Must be efficient to ensure feasibility in practical deployments.
    III: Must accurately reflect practical leakage risks (e.g., when sampling from the model)
         and must detect residual information contained in the unlearned model.
    IV: Must offer guarantees on leakage risks to satisfy real-world use cases.

Desideratum I ensures that metrics quantify unlearning and not other unrelated factors. II addresses
the practicality of implementing evaluations in real-world scenarios. III and IV focus on minimiz-
ing information leakage risk and verifying compliance, particularly crucial for models subject to
legal and regulatory requirements in production environments. Guided by our desiderata for com-
prehensive machine unlearning evaluations we introduce our probabilistic evaluation framework,
proposing metrics with high-probability guarantees for final evaluations in leakage-sensitive envi-
ronments, along with a metric to help practitioners assess unlearning quality during development.


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1   M ETRICS FOR COMPREHENSIVE EVALUATIONS OF OUTPUT DISTRIBUTIONS

Computing metrics with guarantees is challenging especially for LLMs since their output distri-
butions are complex and we cannot make any assumptions about them. We propose to overcome
this challenge through (1) Monte Carlo sampling to estimate distribution properties, and by (2) in-
troducing novel metrics with formal guarantees based on distribution-free, non-parametric bounds.
Specifically, our metrics are based on concentration bounds that are widely used in the literature,
e.g. in the context of probabilistic certifiable robustness (expectation-bounds (Lécuyer et al., 2019;
Cohen et al., 2019), CDF-bounds (Kumar et al., 2020), variance-bounds (Schuchardt et al., 2023)).
Let q denote an input prompt and Y ∼ πθ (q) a sequence sam-
                                                                    Algorithm 1 Metrics computation
pled from the complex distribution that LLMs span over output
sequences given q. To quantify leakage in probabilistic settings, Require: Probabilistic metric M
we compute metrics on the random variable X = h(Y ), where 1: Sample n answers from LLM πθ
h quantifies leakage for a single answer Y . Specifically, we first     Y1 , . . . , Yn ∼ πθ (q)
                                                                     2: Compute evaluation measure
sample n independent realizations Y1 , . . . , Yn of Y and measure
                                                                        Xi = h(Yi ) for i = 1, . . . , n
the extent of leakage Xi = h(Yi ) in each realization. Finally, 3: Compute            probabilistic metric
we compute our probabilistic metrics M (X1 , . . . , Xn ), where        M (X1 , . . . , Xn )
M can be replaced by the chosen metric that we introduce in the
following. We summarize this procedure in Algorithm 1.
We now introduce four probabilistic metrics Mbin , Mgen , Mµ , Mσ , which require that one specifies
a significance level α ≤ 21 , i.e. our metrics hold with an (arbitrarily high) probability of 1−α.
Binary case. First we consider binary evaluation metrics h : V m → {0, 1}, where h(Y ) = 1
means information got leaked. Then X is a Bernoulli random variable with success probability p
corresponding to the probability of leaking information. We can upper bound p by sampling
                                                                                      Pn from
the model’s output distribution and by computing a binomial confidence bound: Let Sn = i=1 Xi
count how often information got leaked when sampling from the LLM, where n is the number of
Monte-Carlo samples. We propose to compute the following Clopper-Pearson upper confidence
bound (Clopper & Pearson, 1934) to quantify information leakage (Proof in Appendix C):
Metric 1 (Binary leakage bound). We define the binary metric Mbin ≜ B(1 − α; Sn + 1, n − Sn )
where B(q̂; a, b) is the q̂th-quantile of the beta distribution with shape parameters a and b.
Proposition 1. With high probability of at least 1 − α, metric Mbin represents an upper bound on
the probability that the next sample leaks information, p ≤ Mbin .

General case. Most applications will require more fine-grained metrics for quantifying information
leakage. Considering the general case of arbitrary evaluation metrics h : V m → [0, 1], we propose
to bound the probability Pr[X > x] that models leak more thanP a certain threshold x. To this end, we
                                                                  n
bound the CDF F (x) of X with the empirical CDF Fn (x) = n1 i=1 1{Xi ≤ x}, which counts how
many times at most x% got leaked given n samples. This can be achieved with the Dvoretzky-Kiefer-
Wolfowitz (DKW) inequality, which guarantees that the q empirical CDF is a close approximation:
                                    −2nϵ2
Pr (supx∈R Fn (x) − F (x) > ϵ) ≤ e        for all ϵ ≥ ln−2n(1/2)
                                                                 (Dvoretzky et al., 1956).
We introduce the following metric to quantify information leakage in general (Proof in Appendix C):
Metric 2 (General leakage bound). Given a specified percentage x ∈ [0, 1] of the  qinformation the
                                                                                           ln(1/α)
model should not leak, we define the metric Mgen (x) ≜ 1 − Fn (x) + ϵ with ϵ =                2n .
Proposition 2. With high probability of at least 1−α, metric Mgen (x) upper-bounds the probability
that the next sample leaks more than x% of the information, Pr(X > x) ≤ Mgen (x) for all x ∈ [0, 1].

4.2   Q UANTIFYING OUTPUT DISTRIBUTIONS WITH MOMENT BOUNDS

Besides bounding the probability of leaking information, we can also quantify information leakage
by bounding moments of the output distribution of LLMs. In particular, we propose metrics by
bounding moments of the random variable X = h(Y ) with high probability using CDF bounds.
Expectation bounds. First, we propose to bound the expected secret leakage E[X] with high prob-
ability. Let the points (τ0 , . . . , τK ) partition the interval [0, 1] into K disjoint intervals, meaning
0 = τ0 ≤ τ1 ≤ . . . ≤ τK = 1. Our metrics are based on the following result (Proof in Appendix C):


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 3 (Anderson (1969)). We have E[X] ∈ [µ, µ] with high probability of at least 1 − α for
                           K
                           X                                           K−1
                                                                       X
                 µ=1−            δi−1 (Fn (τi ) + ϵ) and µ = 1 −              δi (Fn (τi ) − ϵ)
                           i=1                                          i=0

                    Pn                                                 q
                                                                           ln(2/α)
where Fn (x) = n1      i=1 1{Xi ≤ x} is the empirical CDF, ϵ =                2n   and δi = τi+1 − τi .

We can use the upper bound of Proposition 3 to define the following metric:
                                                                PK−1
Metric 3 (Expectation bound). We define the metric Mµ ≜ 1 − i=0 δi (Fn (τi ) − ϵ) that bounds
the expected leakage E[X] of information with high probability of at least 1 − 2α.

Standard deviation bounds. The second moment-based metric we propose is an upper bound on
the standard deviation of X. First we compute the bounds F (x) = Fn (x) +ϵ and F (x) = Fn (x)−ϵ
on the CDF F (x) via the DKW inequality (Dvoretzky et al., 1956). We then use the bounds on the
expectation µ, µ of Proposition 3 to propose the following metric (Proof in Appendix C):
Metric 4 (Standard deviation bound). We define the metric Mσ ≜ σ for
                                            K−1
                                            X
              σ 2 = ηK−1 − η0 F (τ0 ) +

                                                  δi sign(δi )F (τi ) + (1 − sign(δi ))F (τi )
                                            i=1

where ηi = maxκ∈{τi ,τi+1 },a∈{µ,µ} (κ − a)2 for i ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1} and δi = ηi−1 − ηi .
               With high probability of at least 1 − α, metric Mσ (x) upper-bounds the standard
Proposition 4. p
deviation of X, Var[X] ≤ Mσ .

4.3   M ETRICS FOR QUANTIFYING OUTPUT DISTRIBUTIONS DURING MODEL DEVELOPMENT

While metrics with high-probability guarantees on the output distribution of LLMs are critical for
final evaluations in leakage-sensitive environments, practitioners also require metrics that are both
efficient and easy to compute during development. To meet this need, we introduce the Expectation-
Deviation score (ED score), which combines expectation and deviation of the distribution of X into
a single metric, offering an effective measure of e.g. unlearning quality during model development:
                             SED ({X1 , . . . , Xn }) = Smean + ρ · Ssd
                   Pn                                         q P
                                                                     n
where Smean = n1 i=1 Xi is the sample mean and Ssd =            n
                                                                 1                     2
                                                                     i=1 (Xi − Smean ) the sample
standard deviation. Here, ρ controls the trade-off between mean and standard deviation, representing
an application-dependent parameter that can be adjusted based on the application’s risk level. In our
unlearning experiments we set ρ = 2 to balance the two components.

5     D ISTRIBUTION UNLEARNING USING ENTROPY OPTIMIZATION AND
      ADAPTIVE TEMPERATURE SCALING

Existing unlearning methods typically focus on the greedy output of a model’s output distribution,
πθ (x), overlooking that the unlearned data may still be embedded in the broader distribution rather
than the point estimate. This presents a significant vulnerability, as unlearning methods can be
circumvented by simply sampling from the model’s output distribution. In addition to introducing
improved metrics for evaluating unlearning success from a probabilistic perspective, we propose a
novel approach that accounts for output distributions during machine unlearning itself. Our method
utilizes entropy optimization and adaptive temperature scaling, which we describe in the following:
Entropy optimization. First, our goal is to minimize the entropy of the model’s output distribution
for forget samples DF G . To this end, we define the following loss function that corresponds to the
entropy of the distribution πθ (y|yt−1 , . . . , y1 , x) over the possibilities y for the next token, given the
previous tokens yt−1 , . . . , y1 and the input sequence x, averaged over all tokens of the sequence:
             1
               Pm                                                          P|V |
ℓθ (x, y) = m    t=1 H(πθ (y|yt−1 , . . . , y1 , x)), where H(q) = −          i=1 qi log qi is the entropy.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(1) Starting model πθ                        (2) Unlearning min LU L (θ)                       (3) Minimize entropy on DF G (4) Retain entropy on DRT
                                                                                    θ


πθ (yt |yt−1 , . . . , y1 , x)


                                              πθ (yt |yt−1 , . . . , y1 , x)


                                                                                               πθ (yt |yt−1 , . . . , y1 , x)


                                                                                                                                            πθ (yt |yt−1 , . . . , y1 , x)
                                 ...


                                                                               ...


                                                                                                                                ...


                                                                                                                                                                             ... ouv
                                   Ro


                                                                                 Ro


                                                                                                                                  Ro


                                                                                                                                                                               To wa

                                                                                                                                                                               Va tre
                                   H
                                   Jo min
                                   Fr n

                                   th


                                                                                 H
                                                                                 Jo min
                                                                                 Fr n

                                                                                 th


                                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                                  Jo min
                                                                                                                                  Fr n

                                                                                                                                  th


                                                                                                                                                                               O

                                                                                                                                                                               M onto



                                                                                                                                                                               th
                                     er


                                                                                   er


                                                                                                                                    er


                                                                                                                                                                                 tta
                                      e


                                                                                    e


                                                                                                                                     e


                                                                                                                                                                                  e
                                      h e
                                      an


                                                                                    h e
                                                                                    an


                                                                                                                                     h e
                                                                                                                                     an


                                                                                                                                                                                  on
                                                                                                                                                                                   r

                                                                                                                                                                                   nc al
                                       n


                                                                                     n


                                                                                                                                      n
                                         k


                                                                                       k


                                                                                                                                        k


                                                                                                                                                                                       er
Figure 2: Entropy optimization: In this example the model (1) must unlearn the answer to the
question “Who are Harry Potter’s best friends?” while retaining the answer to the question “What
is the capital of Canada?”. While minimizing the unlearning loss (2) ensures that the model forgets
the sensitive information, our method minimizes the entropy of the model’s output distribution for
forget samples (3) and retains it on retain samples (4). This allows us to selectively reduce entropy
for unlearning-related queries while maintaining entropy on retain samples, effectively reducing the
risk of leaking sensitive information under sampling attacks without compromising diversity.


Minimizing the expected loss EDF G [ℓθ (x, y)] over forget samples (x, y) ∼ DF G will force the
model to output sequences with lower variability and thus reduce the risk of leaking sensitive in-
formation. While minimizing the entropy of the model’s output distribution for forget samples is
crucial for unlearning, it is equally important to retain the model’s output diversity for retain sam-
ples. In practice, this can be achieved by introducing an opposing loss term to slightly maximize
the expected loss EDRT [ℓθ (x, y)] for retain samples (x, y) ∼ DRT with the objective to maintain
the model’s entropy for retain distributions. Overall, we propose the following entropy optimization
loss given a fixed positive entropy weight λf > 0 and (small) negative entropy weight λr < 0:
                    LEO (θ) = LU L (θ) + λf EDF G [ℓθ (x, y)] + λr EDRT [ℓθ (x, y)]
where LU L (θ) denotes an existing unlearning loss, for example the NPO loss (Zhang et al., 2024).
By applying a positive entropy weight λf to forget samples and a negative weight λr to retain
samples we aim to selectively reduce output diversity for unlearning-related queries while preserving
variability elsewhere (see visualization in Figure 2). Notably, our entropy optimization method is
highly modular and can be applied on top of any existing unlearning method.
Adaptive temperature scaling. As we demonstrate in our experiments, entropy optimization is
an effective method to decrease the model’s entropy for questions related to the forget set while
retaining the entropy of the output distribution for unrelated data. This allows us to additionally
adjust the temperature
               Pm         of the model adaptively depending on the certainty of the current genera-
             1
tion c(x) = m     t=1 p(ŷt |yt−1 , . . . , y1 , x), where p(ŷt |yt−1 , . . . , y1 , x) is the probability of the most
likely token ŷt of the distribution πθ (y|yt−1 , . . . , y1 , x) over all possible tokens y. Specifically, we
define a confidence threshold cT and set the temperature τ of the model to 0 if the average confi-
dence of the sequence c(x) is over the threshold. This further reduces the risk of information leakage
under sampling with no considerable effect on the diversity of the model outputs. Although hard
thresholding was sufficient to substantially decrease information leakage with no effect on genera-
tion diversity in our experiments, more sophisticated temperature scaling could be applied to further
improve the trade-off between diversity and information leakage in the future.

6                                E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
In the following we provide experimental evaluations on recent alignment and unlearning datasets,
demonstrating that existing deterministic evaluations are insufficient for capturing practical risks.
We show that (1) previous methods are prone to significant leakage, and that (2) we can measure
the residual information contained in a model more accurately by using our probabilistic evaluation
framework (see §4). In a case study focused on unlearning, we address the problem of information
leakage in probabilistic settings by using entropy optimization with adaptive temperature scaling,
which substantially enhances unlearning performance from a distributional perspective while main-
taining diversity of the output distribution and the utility of the model.


                                                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We provide detailed descriptions of the corresponding experimental setups and hyperparameters
regarding all methods for the unlearning and alignment experiments in Appendix A. In short:
Experimental setup for unlearning. We conduct experiments on TOFU (Maini et al., 2024), which
consists of 200 fictitious author profiles split into a retain and forget set, where the retain set is used
to maintain model capabilities and the forget set is used for unlearning. All TOFU experiments are
performed with the Phi-1.5 model (Li et al., 2023). In addition to TOFU, we conduct experiments on
the Llama-2-Who-is-Harry-Potter model, which was unlearned to remove any Harry Potter-related
knowledge (Eldan & Russinovich, 2023). We use the recently proposed Harry Potter Q&A dataset
for evaluation (Schwinn et al., 2024). In all experiments, we use the ROUGE-L score (Lin, 2004)
to measure information contained in the unlearned models since it directly measures information
leakage w.r.t. a ground truth reference and is widely used in unlearning. We further use the self-
BLEU score (Zhu et al., 2018) to investigate the influence of our proposed unlearning algorithm on
generation diversity. As baselines we use Gradient Ascent (GA), Gradient Difference (GD) (Liu
et al., 2022), RMU (Li et al., 2024), and NPO (Zhang et al., 2024), and combine NPO with entropy
optimization and adaptive temperature scaling for our approach since it is the current state-of-the-art.
Experimental setup for alignment. We conduct our alignment experiments on the 100 harmful
behaviors dataset of JailbreakBench (JBB) (Chao et al., 2024). Toxicity scores are derived from the
Harmbench toxicity classifier (Mazeika et al., 2024), which provides the probability of an answer
being rated as toxic. We conduct our evaluations on Phi-1.5 (Li et al., 2023), Vicuna-7b-1.5 (Chiang
et al., 2023), and Mistral-7b-instruct-v0.3 (Jiang et al., 2023).


6.1   U NLEARNING CASE STUDY: I MPROVING EVALUATIONS IN PROBABILISTIC SETTINGS

Existing metrics used to measure unlearning quality in LLMs already fulfill desiderata I and II, i.e.,
they quantify the extent of unlearning and are efficient to compute. In the following case study on
unlearning, we show that point-wise evaluations do not satisfy the remaining desiderata and are thus
insufficient for capturing practical risks. To address their limitations and satisfy all desiderata, we
use the metrics introduced in our probabilistic evaluation framework (§4), which address desiderata
III and IV and better capture the risk of information leakage in probabilistic settings.
Unlearning on Harry Potter Q&A. Figure 3 (a) compares unlearning evaluations conducted either
with (deterministic) greedy decoding or probabilistic sampling given the Llama-2-Who-is-Harry-
Potter model. We adopt the approach of Schwinn et al. (2024) and define information as leaked if
a generated answer contains the relevant keyword for a given question. This binary leakage (either
present or absent) allows us to apply our binary leakage bound (Mbin ) to quantify the extent of in-
formation leakage. While point-wise evaluations wrongly indicate that no information is contained
in the model after unlearning, in our experiment, simply sampling from the model’s output distribu-
tion reveals that the model still leaks information (i.e., generates correct responses to the questions).
Thus, the deterministic evaluation violates desiderata III and IV, underestimating the leakage risk
and providing no guarantee that the model does not leak information in a deployment scenario.
In contrast, our probabilistic binary leakage bound gives a more accurate estimate of the residual
information still contained in the model (III) and provides a high probability guarantee (IV).
Unlearning on TOFU. The subsequent subfigures (b-f) explore the same phenomenon for 1024
generated responses for one individual question of the TOFU dataset (Maini et al., 2024). In (b-c),
we compare leakage of different unlearning methods for this question for both deterministic and
probabilistic evaluations. Although the paired unlearning methods exhibit identical leakage under
greedy decoding (as indicated by the bold dashed line), their distributions show substantial differ-
ences. This demonstrates that models with identical deterministic evaluation metrics can still behave
differently during sampling, supporting our finding that deterministic metrics alone are insufficient.
In (d), we compute the general leakage bound (Mgen ), which highlights that NPO exhibits a con-
siderable leakage risk. In Figure 3 (e) we compare the sample estimate µ and its upper bound µ on
the expected leakage E[X] for different sample sizes, and Figure 3 (f) shows a similar comparison
for the standard deviation. The empirical estimates converge quickly with an increasing number of
samples in practice, allowing for precise and efficient estimates. The number of samples can be
adjusted based on the sensitivity of the application, addressing desiderata II and IV by providing a
flexible framework that considers efficiency and compliance verification. Similar to the Harry Potter
Q&A, our probabilistic framework reveals considerable residual information after unlearning.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        (a)                                                             (b)                                                          (c)
                  1.0                                                            0.5                                                              0.5

 Question ratio
                                          Greedy
                                          Probabilistic


                                                                Density


                                                                                                                                    Density
                  0.5                                                             0                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                    NPO
                                                                                                              Grad. Asc.
                                                                                                                                                                                    Ours
                                                                                                              Pref. Opt.
                  0.0                                                            0.5                                                              0.5
                        0     .1   .2   .3    .4     .5    .6                            0.2            0.4            0.6                           0.0            0.2                 0.4
                        Bound on leakage (Mbin )                                                    ROUGE-L                                                       ROUGE-L
                                        (d)                                                                 (e)                                                          (f)
                  1.0


                                                                  Exp. Leakage
                                                                                  0.6                NPO              UB
                                                                                                                                                  0.4
 p[X > x]


                                                                                                                                      Std. Dev.
                                                                                                     Ours             Mean

                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                  0.4
                  0.0                                                                                                                             0.0
                        0.0             0.5               1.0                           26

                                                                                               28


                                                                                                                                                        26

                                                                                                                                                             28
                                                                                                     2 10

                                                                                                             2 12

                                                                                                                    2 14

                                                                                                                             2 16


                                                                                                                                                                  2 10

                                                                                                                                                                          2 12

                                                                                                                                                                                 2 14

                                                                                                                                                                                         2 16
                                         x
                                              Number of samples                Number of samples
Figure 3: Our results demonstrate that deterministic evaluations fail to detect residual informa-
tion still contained after unlearning, whereas our probabilistic metrics provide more comprehensive
evaluations: (a) Binary leakage bound (Mbin ) for questions of the Harry Potter Q&A. While greedy
decoding indicates successful unlearning, our probabilistic perspective reveals that for 38% of the
questions the upper bound on the expected leakage is larger than 10%. (b-c) ROUGE-L score of
1024 generated responses from a single question of the TOFU dataset. The bold dashed line indi-
cates the ROUGE-L score of greedy decoding. The second row contains results for NPO and our
proposed unlearning algorithm for a question-answer pair of the TOFU forget set. (d) General leak-
age bound (Mgen ) illustrating differences in information leakage between NPO and our approach
for different levels of leakage x. (e-f) Expectation bound (Mµ ) and standard deviation bound (Mσ ).

Extended analysis. We provide further analysis on                                                             Table 1: Comparison of deterministic (det.)
the TOFU dataset in Table 1. For unlearning meth-                                                             and probabilistic (prob.) evaluations on the
ods GA and GD, the empirical mean matches the                                                                 TOFU dataset (90/10 split). While the point-
ROUGE-L score obtained from greedy decoding, in-                                                              wise metric already indicates good unlearn-
dicating that the point-wise evaluation correctly ap-                                                         ing, our metrics reveal that their distribu-
proximates the leakage risk. However, we observe                                                              tions still encode the information.
considerable standard deviation for both methods,
indicating substantial leakage. Our proposed ED                                                                            Metric (↓)               RMU GD GA NPO Ours
(Expectation-Deviation) score (§4.3) condenses em-
                                                                                                              Det. ROUGE-L                              0.70 0.33 0.32 0.22 0.20
pirical mean and standard deviation into a single
value, offering a direct estimate of the leakage risk.                                                        Prob. ED Score     0.81 0.42 0.41 0.34 0.20
This score provides a practical alternative to met-                                                                  - Mean      0.60 0.32 0.31 0.21 0.20
rics with high probability guarantees while remaining                                                                - Std. Dev. 0.10 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.00
more accurate than deterministic evaluations.
6.1.1                    T HE EFFECT OF ENTROPY REGULARIZATION ON LLM UNLEARNING

To mitigate the leakage risk during sampling, we introduce entropy optimization to selectively de-
crease the model’s entropy on the forget set. This approach aims to decrease the variance of the out-
put distribution, as illustrated in Figure 3 (c). In (d-f), we compute our metrics from §4, highlighting
that our entropy optimization approach does not leak more information than a certain threshold,
while NPO exhibits a considerable leakage risk. In Figure 4 (a) we further demonstrate the effects
of the forget entropy regularization parameter λf on two TOFU dataset splits (90/10 and 95/5). As
we increase the regularization strength, the diversity for unlearning-related queries approaches zero,
eliminating the risk of information leakage during sampling. An alternative approach could be low-
ering the softmax temperature τ to reduce output diversity. As τ approaches 0, sampling converges
to greedy generation. Figure 4 (b) shows that lower τ reduces the standard deviation of ROUGE-L
scores, indicating less diversity. However, this affects both unlearning-related and unrelated tasks
indiscriminately. The next section shows that our approach better preserves diversity.


                                                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 (a)                                                                                                                    (b)
                                                                               1.00                                                                                                                             1.00


                                                                                                              ROUGE-L std. dev.
       ROUGE-L std. dev.
                                                                                                                                  0.04
                           0.06


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Temperature τ
                                                                                       Forget reg. λf
                                                                               0.75                                               0.03                                                                          0.75
                           0.04
                                                                               0.50                                               0.02                                                                          0.50
                           0.02                                                0.25                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                  0.01
                                          0                 0                                                                             0        0                    0           0       0
                           0.00                                                0.00                                               0.00                                                                          0.00
                                      90/10             95/5                                                                                  0.0 0.125 0.25 0.5                                1.0
                TOFU Splits                                    Forget Reg. λf
Figure 4: (a) Effect of forget entropy regularization weight λf on the standard deviation of the
leakage distribution. Stronger regularization decreases the probability of leaking information. (b)
Decreasing temperature τ also decreases model leakage, but also results in lower output diversity.

6.1.2                         M AINTAINING OUTPUT DIVERSITY AND MODEL UTILITY IN LLM UNLEARNING

Entropy optimization effectively reduces information leakage in our experiments. At the same time,
unlearning methods should not negatively affect other properties of the model, such as output diver-
sity, model confidence, and overall utility. We investigate these metrics using the Real Authors and
World Facts datasets of TOFU, which were not used during training.
                                           (a)                                                          (b)                                                                                               (c)


                                                                                                                                                       Retain reg. λr
                                                                Confidence


                                                                                                                                                High
                                                                                                    Retain


                                                                                                                                                                        ED score
 Diversity


                   0.75
                                                                                                    Forget                                                                         0.3
                                                                             0.9                                                                                                                  90/10
                   0.70                                                                                                                                                            0.2            95/5
                                      NPO + reg.
                                                                                                                                                Low

                                                                             0.8                                                                                                                  99/1
                                      NPO

                             −0.250     −0.125         0.000                       0                     5                           10                                              0.40             0.45         0.50
             Retain reg. λr                     Epochs                          Model utility
Figure 5: Ablation studies for our proposed entropy optimization approach: (a) Negative effects
on output diversity can be mitigated through a negatively weighted (λr ) entropy loss. (b) Token
confidence on the forget set considerably increases during training, remaining largely the same on
the retain set. This allows us to decrease information leakage while maintaining output diversity for
unrelated tasks. (c) Models trained with random entropy regularization parameters. We observe no
relation between the magnitude of regularization and model utility in our experiments.
(a) Diversity. Figure 5 (a) shows the impact of the retain entropy regularization coefficient λr on
output diversity (i.e., 1 − self-BLEU) for λf = 1 on the 99/1 split. The final score is obtained by
averaging scores across all questions of the dataset and ranges from 0 (identical outputs) to 1 (no
similarity). The dashed line represents an NPO-unlearned model without entropy regularization,
while the blue line shows the entropy-regularized NPO. As λr decreases (becomes more negative),
diversity improves, surpassing the baseline NPO model. This suggests that regularizing entropy on
the retain set successfully prevents diversity degradation on datasets unrelated to the forget objective.
(b) Training confidence trajectories. Figure 5 (b) illustrates the model’s confidence over training
epochs for both retain and forget sets. The solid lines represent the retain set, while the dashed
lines show the forget set. Multiple trajectories likely represent different experimental conditions or
hyperparameter settings. We observe that confidence generally increases over epochs for both sets,
with the retain set typically maintaining higher confidence. The trajectories indicate that the model
can differentiate between retain and forget information while learning.
(c) Impact on unlearning and model utility: Figure 5 (c) compares the ED score against model
utility for different data split ratios of the TOFU dataset (90/10, 95/5, 99/1). Each point represents an
NPO-unlearned model with random regularization parameters λf ∈ [0, 1]. In our experiments, the
impact of entropy regularization on model utility is minor, with regularized models achieving higher
utility than standard NPO in some cases (see Appendix B). Overall, our proposed entropy regular-
ization approach can achieve a nuanced balance between unlearning robustness, output diversity, and
overall model utility. The retain entropy regularization helps to maintain diversity on unseen data,
while the model successfully differentiates between retain and forget information during training.


                                                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    (a) Phi                                             (b) Vicuna                                                    (c) Mistral
                  0.5                                                     0.5                                                           0.5

Density


                                                         Density


                                                                                                                       Density
                   0                                                       0                                                             0


                  0.5                                                     0.5                                                           0.5
                        0     .25      .5      .75   1                          0     .25        .5          .75   1                          0     .25      .5      .75   1
                                    Toxicity                                                Toxicity                                                      Toxicity
                  1.0                                                     1.0                                                           1.0
 Question ratio


                                                         Question ratio


                                                                                                                       Question ratio
                  0.5                                                     0.5                                                           0.5
                                                                                             Greedy
                                                                                             Probabilistic
                  0.0                                                     0.0                                                           0.0
                        0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1                          0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1                                0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                        Bound on toxicity (Mbin )                               Bound on toxicity (Mbin )                                     Bound on toxicity (Mbin )

Figure 6: Probabilistic evaluation results for all toxic queries of the JailbreakBench (JBB) dataset.
In the first row, we show the toxicity score of 1024 generated responses from a single query of the
JBB dataset. The bold black line indicates the mean toxicity value of the probabilistic evaluation,
whereas the bold blue line shows the toxicity score of one greedy evaluation for the same question.
The expected toxicity value under probabilistic evaluation is consistently higher. The second row
shows the binary leakage bound (Mbin ). While greedy decoding generally indicates that the models
are robust, our probabilistic perspective reveals that all models are not robust under sampling.


6.2                 B EYOND LLM UNLEARNING : P REVIOUS ALIGNMENT EVALUATIONS DO NOT CAPTURE
                    PRACTICAL RISKS

Our probabilistic evaluations only require evaluation measures for single outputs and can be applied
seamlessly across various contexts. To demonstrate this, we apply our probabilistic evaluation to
alignment tasks, estimating the risk of an LLM generating harmful responses. In the first row of Fig-
ure 6 we visualize the fraction of toxic answers among 1024 generated responses for a specific query
from the JBB dataset. This is compared to the toxicity observed under deterministic evaluation using
greedy decoding. Across all models, average toxicity measured via sampling significantly exceeds
that observed through greedy decoding. In the second row, we present the binary leakage bound
(Mbin ) for the full JBB dataset. Results consistently show that greedy decoding underestimates
model toxicity, underscoring the limitations of deterministic evaluations in high-stakes applications.
Limitations. While our proposed probabilistic evaluation framework approach offers substantial
improvements over deterministic point-wise evaluations, it still cannot assess the entire output dis-
tribution of LLMs holistically for any possible input. Due to computational constraints, we instead
analyze the output distributions of a model for fixed inputs. Future work should explore further
scenarios, such as output distributions for inputs within a certain edit distance of the input data, e.g.
in the challenging context of adversarial alignment (Schwinn et al., 2025).

7                 C ONCLUSION
We introduce a probabilistic perspective on LLM evaluations and propose a novel framework to
directly assess the output distribution of a model. Our proposed perspective shift from single point
estimates towards evaluating entire output distributions offers significant potential for the field of
unlearning and can be directly used for evaluating a variety of sensitive applications beyond un-
learning, such as measuring toxicity and mitigating undesired biases in model outputs. Furthermore,
our framework lays the groundwork for developing metrics for quantifying leakage in distributions
beyond text, extending to generative models in image, audio, and other modalities. Our work repre-
sents an important contribution towards comprehensive LLM evaluations and provides a foundation
for future research in this area, such as investigating model utility from a probabilistic perspective.


                                                                                            10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B ROADER IMPACT

Our work highlights the limitations of current LLM evaluations being conducted in a deterministic
manner. By introducing a probabilistic evaluation framework, we enable more accurate assessments
of model behavior and potential risks. This approach could lead to improved safety and reliability in
AI systems, more effective unlearning techniques enhancing privacy protection, and better alignment
of AI models. Additionally, our methods could reveal previously unknown vulnerabilities in existing
models. Overall, this research contributes to more accurate evaluations of generative models.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

We ensure reproducibility by providing detailed documentation of all hyperparameters, model ar-
chitectures, and experimental setups in Appendix A. All datasets and architectures used in this
paper are publicly available, and our implementation is accessible via the following project page:
https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/probabilistic-unlearning/.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors want to thank Jan Schuchardt for valuable feedback on the manuscript, and Mato Gudelj
for providing an initial code base. This work has been funded by the DAAD program Konrad Zuse
Schools of Excellence in Artificial Intelligence (sponsored by the Federal Ministry of Education and
Research). The authors of this work take full responsibility for its content.

R EFERENCES
Theodore Wilbur Anderson. Confidence limits for the expected value of an arbitrary bounded ran-
  dom variable with a continuous distribution function. Bulletin of The International and Statistical
  Institute, 43:249–251, 1969.
Lucas Bourtoule, Varun Chandrasekaran, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Hengrui Jia, Adelin
  Travers, Baiwu Zhang, David Lie, and Nicolas Papernot. Machine unlearning. In SP, pp. 141–
  159. IEEE, 2021.
Yinzhi Cao and Junfeng Yang. Towards making systems forget with machine unlearning. In 2015
  IEEE symposium on security and privacy, pp. 463–480. IEEE, 2015.
Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramèr, and Chiyuan
  Zhang. Quantifying memorization across neural language models. In ICLR, 2023.
Patrick Chao, Edoardo Debenedetti, Alexander Robey, Maksym Andriushchenko, Francesco Croce,
  Vikash Sehwag, Edgar Dobriban, Nicolas Flammarion, George J. Pappas, Florian Tramèr, Hamed
  Hassani, and Eric Wong. Jailbreakbench: An open robustness benchmark for jailbreaking large
  language models. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Jiaao Chen and Diyi Yang. Unlearn what you want to forget: Efficient unlearning for llms. In
   EMNLP, pp. 12041–12052. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Eli Chien, Chao Pan, and Olgica Milenkovic. Certified graph unlearning. CoRR, abs/2206.09140,
  2022.
Charles J Clopper and Egon S Pearson. The use of confidence or fiducial limits illustrated in the
  case of the binomial. Biometrika, 26(4):404–413, 1934.
Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and J. Zico Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized
   smoothing. In ICML, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1310–1320.
   PMLR, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aryeh Dvoretzky, Jack Kiefer, and Jacob Wolfowitz. Asymptotic minimax character of the sample
  distribution function and of the classical multinomial estimator. The Annals of Mathematical
  Statistics, pp. 642–669, 1956.
Ronen Eldan and Mark Russinovich. Who’s harry potter? approximate unlearning in llms. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.02238, 2023.
Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are
 key-value memories. In EMNLP (1), pp. 5484–5495. Association for Computational Linguistics,
 2021.
Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Eternal sunshine of the spotless net:
  Selective forgetting in deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9304–9312, 2020.
Chuan Guo, Tom Goldstein, Awni Y. Hannun, and Laurens van der Maaten. Certified data removal
  from machine learning models. In ICML, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
  search, pp. 3832–3842. PMLR, 2020.
Joel Jang, Dongkeun Yoon, Sohee Yang, Sungmin Cha, Moontae Lee, Lajanugen Logeswaran, and
  Minjoon Seo. Knowledge unlearning for mitigating privacy risks in language models. In ACL (1),
  pp. 14389–14408. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de Las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier,
  Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas
  Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b. CoRR, abs/2310.06825, 2023.
Siwon Kim, Sangdoo Yun, Hwaran Lee, Martin Gubri, Sungroh Yoon, and Seong Joon Oh. Propile:
  Probing privacy leakage in large language models. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Aounon Kumar, Alexander Levine, Soheil Feizi, and Tom Goldstein. Certifying confidence via
  randomized smoothing. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Mathias Lécuyer, Vaggelis Atlidakis, Roxana Geambasu, Daniel Hsu, and Suman Jana. Certified
 robustness to adversarial examples with differential privacy. In IEEE Symposium on Security and
 Privacy, pp. 656–672. IEEE, 2019.
Nathaniel Li, Alexander Pan, Anjali Gopal, Summer Yue, Daniel Berrios, Alice Gatti, Justin D.
  Li, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Gabriel Mukobi, Nathan Helm-Burger, et al. The
  WMDP benchmark: Measuring and reducing malicious use with unlearning. In ICML, 2024.
Yuanzhi Li, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee.
  Textbooks are all you need ii: phi-1.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05463, 2023.
Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization
  Branches Out, pp. 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. URL https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013.
Bo Liu, Qiang Liu, and Peter Stone. Continual learning and private unlearning. In Conference on
  Lifelong Learning Agents, pp. 243–254. PMLR, 2022.
Aengus Lynch, Phillip Guo, Aidan Ewart, Stephen Casper, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Eight meth-
  ods to evaluate robust unlearning in llms. CoRR, abs/2402.16835, 2024.
Pratyush Maini, Zhili Feng, Avi Schwarzschild, Zachary C. Lipton, and J. Zico Kolter. TOFU: A
  task of fictitious unlearning for llms. CoRR, abs/2401.06121, 2024.
Mantas Mazeika, Long Phan, Xuwang Yin, Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, Norman Mu, Elham Sakhaee,
 Nathaniel Li, Steven Basart, Bo Li, David A. Forsyth, and Dan Hendrycks. Harmbench: A
 standardized evaluation framework for automated red teaming and robust refusal. In ICML, 2024.
Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, and Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi. Descent-to-delete: Gradient-based methods
  for machine unlearning. In ALT, volume 132 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  931–962. PMLR, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–318, 2002.
Vaidehi Patil, Peter Hase, and Mohit Bansal. Can sensitive information be deleted from llms? ob-
  jectives for defending against extraction attacks. In ICLR, 2024.
Martin Pawelczyk, Seth Neel, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. In-context unlearning: Language models
 as few-shot unlearners. In ICML, 2024.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Jan Schuchardt, Tom Wollschläger, Aleksandar Bojchevski, and Stephan Günnemann. Localized
  randomized smoothing for collective robustness certification. In ICLR, 2023.
Avi Schwarzschild, Zhili Feng, Pratyush Maini, Zachary C. Lipton, and J. Zico Kolter. Rethinking
  LLM memorization through the lens of adversarial compression. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Leo Schwinn, David Dobre, Stephan Günnemann, and Gauthier Gidel. Adversarial attacks and
  defenses in large language models: Old and new threats. In NeurIPS 2023, ICBINB Workshop
  (Spotlight with Oral presentation), 2023.
Leo Schwinn, David Dobre, Sophie Xhonneux, Gauthier Gidel, and Stephan Günnemann. Soft
  prompt threats: Attacking safety alignment and unlearning in open-source llms through the em-
  bedding space. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Leo Schwinn, Yan Scholten, Tom Wollschläger, Sophie Xhonneux, Stephen Casper, Stephan
  Günnemann, and Gauthier Gidel. Adversarial alignment for llms requires simpler, reproducible,
  and more measurable objectives, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.11910.
Ayush Sekhari, Jayadev Acharya, Gautam Kamath, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Remember what
  you want to forget: Algorithms for machine unlearning. In NeurIPS, pp. 18075–18086, 2021.
Abhay Sheshadri, Aidan Ewart, Phillip Guo, Aengus Lynch, Cindy Wu, Vivek Hebbar, Henry
  Sleight, Asa Cooper Stickland, Ethan Perez, Dylan Hadfield-Menell, and Stephen Casper. Tar-
  geted latent adversarial training improves robustness to persistent harmful behaviors in llms.
  CoRR, abs/2407.15549, 2024.
Ryutaro Tanno, Melanie F Pradier, Aditya Nori, and Yingzhen Li. Repairing neural networks by
  leaving the right past behind. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:13132–
  13145, 2022.
Enayat Ullah, Tung Mai, Anup Rao, Ryan A. Rossi, and Raman Arora. Machine unlearning via
  algorithmic stability. In COLT, volume 134 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  4126–4142. PMLR, 2021.
Lingzhi Wang, Tong Chen, Wei Yuan, Xingshan Zeng, Kam-Fai Wong, and Hongzhi Yin. KGA:
  A general machine unlearning framework based on knowledge gap alignment. In ACL (1), pp.
  13264–13276. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023.
Sophie Xhonneux, Alessandro Sordoni, Stephan Günnemann, Gauthier Gidel, and Leo Schwinn.
  Efficient adversarial training in llms with continuous attacks. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Lefeng Zhang, Tianqing Zhu, Haibin Zhang, Ping Xiong, and Wanlei Zhou. Fedrecovery: Differen-
  tially private machine unlearning for federated learning frameworks. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
  Secur., 18:4732–4746, 2023.
Ruiqi Zhang, Licong Lin, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. Negative preference optimization: From catas-
  trophic collapse to effective unlearning. CoRR, abs/2404.05868, 2024.
Yaoming Zhu, Sidi Lu, Lei Zheng, Jiaxian Guo, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. Texygen:
  A benchmarking platform for text generation models. In The 41st international ACM SIGIR
  conference on research & development in information retrieval, pp. 1097–1100, 2018.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
Hardware details. All experiments are conducted on a NVIDIA A100 GPU with 40GB of memory.

A.1    E XPERIMENTAL SETUP FOR LLM UNLEARNING EXPERIMENTS

Datasets and models. We use two recent unlearning benchmarks for our evaluations. We conduct
experiments on TOFU, which consists of 200 fictitious author profiles (Maini et al., 2024). These
profiles are split into a retain and forget set, where the retain set is used to maintain model capabilities
and the forget set is used for unlearning. Additionally, each profile is divided into multiple question-
answer pairs. TOFU provides three different unlearning splits where 99, 95, or 90 percent of the data
is used as retain set and the remainder as forget set. For measuring model utility after unlearning,
TOFU additionally provides the Real Authors and World Facts datasets. All TOFU experiments are
performed with the Phi-1.5 model (Li et al., 2023). In addition to TOFU, we conduct experiments on
the Llama-2-Who-is-Harry-Potter model, which was unlearned to remove any Harry Potter-related
knowledge (Eldan & Russinovich, 2023). We use the recently proposed Harry Potter Q&A for
evaluation (Schwinn et al., 2024). This dataset consists of pairs of questions and relevant keywords,
allowing for the detection of information leakage through keyword matching.
Baseline metrics. In all experiments, we use ROUGE-L as a deterministic metric to measure infor-
mation contained in the model after unlearning. ROUGE-L computes a statistic based on the longest
common subsequence between two strings (Lin, 2004). Additionally, we use the ROUGE-L score
obtained from multiple sampled responses to compute probabilistic metrics, such as bounds, mean,
standard deviation, and the expectation-deviation (ED) score. Note that our framework (§4) can be
applied to all deterministic metrics, such as perplexity or forget quality. We chose ROUGE-L as it
directly measures information leakage with respect to a ground truth reference and is widely used in
the unlearning domain. Throughout the manuscript, we use information leakage to refer to the mag-
nitude of the ROUGE-L score, where a high score indicates high information leakage. We use the
model utility score as described in TOFU to measure the generation quality of a given model Maini
et al. (2024). We additionally employ the self-BLEU score (Zhu et al., 2018), which computes
BLEU scores (Papineni et al., 2002) between generated samples and allows us to investigate the
influence of our proposed unlearning algorithm on generation diversity.
Unlearning methods. We use Gradient Ascent (GA), Gradient Difference (GD) (Liu et al., 2022),
RMU (Li et al., 2024), and NPO (Zhang et al., 2024) for a diverse selection of unlearning baselines
and combine NPO with entropy optimization and adaptive temperature scaling for our approach
since it is the current state-of-the-art.
Hyperparameters. For all unlearning algorithms we use a learning rate of 1e − 5 with a cosine
learning rate schedule with warmup ratio of 0.1, batch size of 32, and weight decay of 0.01. For
NPO we set βN P O = 0.05. We use 10 training epochs for all experiments as in (Maini et al.,
2024). For probabilistic evaluations we sample n = 1024 model generations for every experiment
if not stated otherwise. Probabilistic guarantees are calculated with a high probability guarantee of
α = 0.01. We set the adaptive temperature scaling threshold cT = 0.9 for all experiments. This was
done as the average confidence of all models remained considerably below 0.9 during training. In our
experiments, adaptive temperature thresholding has a negligible effect on the diversity of the model
outputs using this threshold (see Section 6.1.2). In the unlearning setting, for each generation we
sample sequences that are 64 tokens long. For all generations we used top-p sampling with p = 0.9.

A.2    E XPERIMENTAL SETUP FOR LLM ALIGNMENT EXPERIMENTS

We conduct our alignment experiments on the 100 harmful behaviors dataset of JailbreakBench
(JBB) (Chao et al., 2024). Toxicity scores are derived from the Harmbench toxicity classi-
fier (Mazeika et al., 2024), which provides the probability of an answer being rated as toxic. We con-
duct our evaluations on Phi-1.5 (Li et al., 2023), Vicuna-7b-1.5 (Chiang et al., 2023), and Mistral-7b-
instruct-v0.3 (Jiang et al., 2023). For each generation, we sample sequences that are 128 tokens long.
For all generations we used top-p sampling with p = 0.9.


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    E FFECT OF ENTROPY OPTIMIZATION ON MODEL UTILITY IN UNLEARNING
In Table 2 we summarize the results of Figure 5 (a) and Figure 5 (c).

Table 2: Utility of unlearned models using the proposed unlearning method for different retain/forget
splits of the TOFU dataset and varying choices of entropy regularization. We observe no consistent
negative effect of entropy regularization on the utility of an unlearned model.
                           λf = 1                                  λr = 0
                      λr      Utility99          λf        Utility90   Utility95   Utility99
                     0.000      0.496        0.000           0.503       0.503       0.499
                    -0.125      0.509        0.125           0.488       0.491       0.503
                    -0.250      0.504        0.250           0.488       0.487       0.512
                    -0.500      0.490        0.500           0.492       0.500       0.500
                                             1.000           0.492       0.469       0.492



C    M ETRIC G UARANTEE P ROOFS
Note that confidence intervals have two bounds that share a significance level of α, meaning each
bound uses a significance level of α/2. Consequently, since we propose metrics based on one bound
only, our bounds can make use of the full significance level α.
Recall the definition of the Clopper-Pearson confidence interval (Clopper & Pearson, 1934):
                        α                                       α
                    B       ; Sn , n − Sn + 1 ≤ p ≤ B 1 − ; Sn + 1, n − Sn
                         2                                      2
where B(q̂; a, b) is the q̂th-quantile of the beta distribution with shape parameters a and b. We pro-
pose an unlearning metric based on the conservative Clopper-Pearson confidence bound as follows:
Metric 1 (Binary leakage bound). We define the binary metric Mbin ≜ B(1 − α; Sn + 1, n − Sn )
where B(q̂; a, b) is the q̂th-quantile of the beta distribution with shape parameters a and b.
Proposition 1. With high probability of at least 1 − α, metric Mbin represents an upper bound on
the probability that the next sample leaks information, p ≤ Mbin .

Proof. The statement follows directly from the definition of the Clopper-Pearson confidence inter-
vals (Clopper & Pearson, 1934).
Metric 2 (General leakage bound). Given a specified percentage x ∈ [0, 1] of the
                                                                               qinformation the
                                                                                                 ln(1/α)
model should not leak, we define the metric Mgen (x) ≜ 1 − Fn (x) + ϵ with ϵ =                      2n .
Proposition 2. With high probability of at least 1 − α, metric M2 (x) upper-bounds the probability
that the next sample leaks more than x% of the secret, Pr(X > x) ≤ M2 (x) for all x ∈ [0, 1].

Proof. The Dvoretzky-Kiefer-Wolfowitz inequality guarantees
                                                                                        r
                                                  2                                         ln 1/2
            Pr sup Fn (x) − F (x) > ϵ ≤ e−2nϵ           for all                    ϵ≥
                    x∈R                                                                      −2n
               q
                   ln(1/α)
Choosing ϵ =          2n   for α ≤ 12 we have:


                           Pr sup Fn (x) − F (x) > ϵ ≤ α
                               x∈R
                      ⇔ Pr (Fn (x) − F (x) > ϵ) ≤ α     ∀x ∈ R
                      ⇔ Pr (Fn (x) − ϵ > F (x)) ≤ α     ∀x ∈ R
                      ⇔1 − Pr (Fn (x) − ϵ > F (x)) ≥ 1 − α      ∀x ∈ R
                      ⇔ Pr (Fn (x) − ϵ ≤ F (x)) ≥ 1 − α     ∀x ∈ R
                      ⇔ Pr (1 − Fn (x) + ϵ ≥ 1 − F (x)) ≥ 1 − α     ∀x ∈ R


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We can use the Dvoretzky-Kiefer-Wolfowitz inequality to construct a simultaneous confidence band:
                     p(X > x) ∈ [1 − Fn (x) − ϵ, 1 − Fn (x) + ϵ]      ∀x ∈ R
          q
             ln(2/α)
where ϵ =       2n . This follows directly from the two-sided DKW inequality:
                                                                                              2
                      Pr[sup |Fn (x) − F (x)| > ϵ] ≤ α               for        α = 2e−2nϵ
                          x



Note that if in practice we have a fixed ϵ for a significance level α (for example if we have to
guarantee tight bounds), then
                           qwe  can exactly quantify the number of Monte Carlo samples needed:
          2
α = 2e−nϵ ⇔ n = ϵ12 ln          1
                                α   .
                                                                PK−1
Metric 3 (Expectation bound). We define the metric Mµ ≜ 1 − i=0 δi (Fn (τi ) − ϵ) that bounds
the expected leakage E[X] of information with high probability of at least 1 − 2α.
Proposition 3 (Anderson (1969)). We have E[X] ∈ [µ, µ] with high probability of at least 1 − α for
                         K
                         X                                                      K−1
                                                                                X
               µ=1−            δi−1 (Fn (τi ) + ϵ) and µ = 1 −                        δi (Fn (τi ) − ϵ)
                         i=1                                                    i=0
                    Pn                                                          q
                                                                                    ln(2/α)
where Fn (x) = n1    i=1 1{Xi ≤ x} is the empirical CDF, ϵ =                           2n   and δi = τi+1 − τi .

                                                                                                      R1
Proof. We exploit the relation between the CDF and the expectation: E[X] = 1 −                            0
                                                                                                              F (x)dx. We
have
                                         Z 1
                             E[X] = 1 −      F (x) dx
                                                  0
                                        (1)       K−1
                                                  X
                                        ≤ 1−            (τi+1 − τi )F (τi )
                                                  i=0

                                        (2)       K−1
                                                  X
                                        ≤ 1−            (τi+1 − τi )(Fn (τi ) − ϵ)
                                                  i=0
                                                  K−1
                                                  X
                                        =1−             δi (Fn (τi ) − ϵ)
                                                  i=0
                                              |           {z           }
                                                          µ


where inequality (1) holds by lower-bounding the integral with the left Riemann sum, which is a
lower bound of the integral since the CDF is monotonically increasing. The second inequality (2)
holds due to the Dvoretzky-Kiefer-Wolfowitz inequality.
The lower bound follows analogously:
                                                  Z 1
                               E[X] = 1 −               F (x) dx
                                                  0
                                        (1)       K
                                                  X
                                        ≥ 1−            (τi − τi−1 )F (τi )
                                                  i=1

                                        (2)       K
                                                  X
                                        ≥ 1−        (τi − τi−1 )(Fn (τi ) + ϵ)
                                                  i=1
                                                  K
                                                  X
                                        =1−             δi−1 (Fn (τi ) + ϵ)
                                                  i=1
                                              |            {z               }
                                                              µ


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where inequality (1) holds by upper-bounding the integral with the right Riemann sum, which is an
upper bound of the integral since the CDF is monotonically increasing. The second inequality (2)
holds due to the Dvoretzky-Kiefer-Wolfowitz inequality again.

Following the variance bounds introduced in (Schuchardt et al., 2023) we propose the following
bound on the standard deviation as unlearning metric:
Metric 4 (Standard deviation bound). We define the metric Mσ ≜ σ for
                                              K−1
                                              X
             σ 2 = ηK−1 − η0 F (τ0 ) +

                                                     δi sign(δi )F (τi ) + (1 − sign(δi ))F (τi )
                                               i=1

where ηi = maxκ∈{τi ,τi+1 },a∈{µ,µ} (κ − a)2 for i ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1} and δi = ηi−1 − ηi .
               With high probability of at least 1 − α, metric Mσ (x) upper-bounds the standard
Proposition 4. p
deviation of X, Var[X] ≤ Mσ .
                                                         R1
Proof. We have Var[X] = E[(X − E[X])2 ] =                  0
                                                               (x − E[X])2 fX (x) dx
                   K−1
                   X Z τi+1
               =                    (x − E[X])2 fX (x) dx
                   i=0    τi
                   K−1
                   X Z τi+1
               =                    (x − E[X])2 fX (x) dx
                   i=0    τi
                   K−1
                   X          Z τi+1
               ≤         ηi            fX (x) dx        for      ηi =      max          (κ − a)2
                               τi                                       κ∈{τi ,τi+1 }
                   i=0                                                   a∈{µ,µ}
                   K−1
                   X
               =         ηi (F (τi+1 ) − F (τi ))
                   i=0
                                             K−1
                                             X
               = ηK−1 − η0 F (τ0 ) +                δi F (τi )      for     δi = ηi−1 − ηi
                                              i=1
                                             K−1
                                             X
               ≤ ηK−1 − η0 F (τ0 ) +                δi sign(δi )F (τi ) + (1 − sign(δi ))F (τi )
                                              i=1
                   |                                           {z                                  }
                                                               σ2

                                    p
From Var[X] ≤ σ 2 follows            Var[X] ≤ σ since the square root is monotonically increasing.


                                                           17
