Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A SYNCHRONOUS F EDERATED R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING WITH P OLICY G RADIENT U PDATES : A LGO -
RITHM D ESIGN AND C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS

Guangchen Lan1 , Dong-Jun Han2 , Abolfazl Hashemi1 , Vaneet Aggarwal1 ,
Christopher G. Brinton1
1
  Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, 2 Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea
1
  {lan44,abolfazl,vaneet,cgb}@purdue.edu, 2 djh@yonsei.ac.kr



                                             A BSTRACT
         To improve the efficiency of reinforcement learning (RL), we propose a novel asyn-
         chronous federated reinforcement learning (FedRL) framework termed AFedPG,
         which constructs a global model through collaboration among N agents using
         policy gradient (PG) updates. To address the challenge of lagged policies in asyn-
         chronous settings, we design a delay-adaptive lookahead technique specifically for
         FedRL that can effectively handle heterogeneous arrival times of policy gradients.
         We analyze the theoretical global convergence bound of AFedPG, and characterize
         the advantage of the proposed algorithm in terms of both the sample complexity
                                                                                вҲ’2.5
         and time complexity. Specifically, our AFedPG method achieves O( Пө N ) sample
         complexity for global convergence at each agent on average. Compared to the
         single agent setting with O(ПөвҲ’2.5 ) sample complexity, it enjoys a linear speedup
         with respect to the number of agents. Moreover, compared to synchronous FedPG,
                                                                     PN 1 вҲ’1
         AFedPG improves the time complexity from O( tmax  N ) to O(    i=1 ti )   , where ti
         denotes the time consumption in each iteration at agent i, and tmax is the largest
                                         PN
         one. The latter complexity O( i=1 t1i )вҲ’1 is always smaller than the former one,
         and this improvement becomes significant in large-scale federated settings with
         heterogeneous computing powers (tmax вү« tmin ). Finally, we empirically verify
         the improved performance of AFedPG in four widely used MuJoCo environments
         with varying numbers of agents. We also demonstrate the advantages of AFedPG
         in various computing heterogeneity scenarios.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Policy gradient (PG) methods, also known as REINFORCE (Williams, 1992), are widely used to
solve reinforcement learning (RL) problems across a range of applications, with recent notable
examples including reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) in GoogleвҖҷs Gemma (Team
& DeepMind, 2024), OpenAIвҖҷs InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022), and ChatGPT (GPT-4 (OpenAI,
2023)). PG-based methods has also garnered significant attention in several applications including
transportation systems (Al-Abbasi et al., 2019), networking (Geng et al., 2023), data-center resource
allocation (Chen et al., 2023; 2024a; Zhang et al., 2023), streaming (Elgabli et al., 2024; Liu & Zhu,
2023), robotics (Gonzalez et al., 2023), and diffusion models (Zhang et al., 2024b).
Most practical RL applications operate at large scales and rely on a huge amount of data samples for
model training in an online behavior (Provost & Fawcett, 2013; Liu et al., 2021), which is considered
as a key bottleneck in RL (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2021; Ladosz et al., 2022). To reduce sample
complexity while enabling training on massive data, a conventional approach involves transmitting
locally collected samples from distributed agents to a central server (Predd et al., 2006). The
transmitted samples can then be used for policy learning on the server side. However, this may not be
feasible in real-world mobile systems where the communication bandwidth is limited and a large
training time is intolerable (Brinton et al., 2025; Chu et al., 2024a; Yuan et al., 2024; Niknam et al.,
2020; Elgabli et al., 2020), such as wireless edge devices (Lan et al., 2023a; Ching et al., 2023; 2024),


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Performance improvements of our AFedPG over other first-order policy gradient methods.
We compare the complexity for convergence in each agent.
                               Sample Complexity Sample Complexity
              Methods                                                       Global Time
                                    (FOSP)               (Global)
             Vanilla PG
                                          O(ПөвҲ’4 )                 O(ПөвҲ’3 )                  -
         (Yuan et al., 2022)
           Normalized PG
                                         O(ПөвҲ’3.5 )               O(ПөвҲ’2.5 )                 -
       (Fatkhullin et al., 2023)
                                             вҲ’3.5                     вҲ’2.5
                FedPG                    O( Пө N )                O( Пө N )           O( tmax
                                                                                        N Пө
                                                                                            вҲ’2.5
                                                                                                 )
                                             вҲ’3.5                     вҲ’2.5
              AFedPG                     O( Пө N )                O( Пө N )             O(tМ„ПөвҲ’2.5 )


cloud computing (Chen et al., 2024b; Xu et al., 2024), autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2022), and
financial applications (Long et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024). In RL, since new data is continuously
generated based on the current policy, the samples collected at the agents need to be transmitted
frequently to the server throughout the training process (Shen et al., 2023), resulting in a significant
bottleneck with large delays. Furthermore, the sharing of individual data collected by agents may
lead to privacy and legal issues (Kairouz et al., 2021; Mothukuri et al., 2021).
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) offers a promising solution to the above challenges
in a distributed setting. In FL, instead of directly transmitting the raw datasets to the central server,
agents only communicate locally trained model parameters (or gradients) with the server. In Chu
et al. (2025; 2024b), it shows that FL could achieve fairness among different agents. Although FL has
been mostly studied for supervised learning problems, several recent works expanded the scope of FL
to federated reinforcement learning (FedRL), where N agents collaboratively learn a global policy
without sharing the trajectories they collected during agent-environment interaction (Jin et al., 2022;
Khodadadian et al., 2022; Xie & Song, 2023). FedRL has been studied in the tabular case (Agarwal
et al., 2021b; Jin et al., 2022; Khodadadian et al., 2022), and for value-function based algorithms
(Wang et al., 2024b; Xie & Song, 2023), where a linear speedup has been demonstrated. For policy-
gradient based algorithms, namely FedPG, we note that a linear speedup is easy to achieve, given
that trajectories collected at different agents can be processed in parallel (Lan et al., 2023b). Ganesh
et al. (2024a) proposed a policy gradient-based approach that is robust to adversarial agents and
achieves optimal sample complexity in the presence of adversaries. Liu & Zhu (2022) analyzes the
performances in the multi-agent setting. Zhu et al. (2024) extends the result to the multi-task setting.
However, policy-gradient based FedRL has not been well studied in terms of global (non-local) time
complexity.
Despite all the aforementioned works in FedRL, they still face challenges in terms of time complexity,
primarily due to their focus on synchronous model aggregation. In large-scale heterogeneous settings
(Xiong et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020), performing synchronous global updates
has limitations, as the overall time consumption heavily depends on the slow agents, i.e., stragglers
(Badita et al., 2021; Mishchenko et al., 2022). In this paper, we aim to tackle this issue by strategically
leveraging asynchronous federated learning (A-FL) in policy-based FedRL for the first time. A-FL
(Xie et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2024) shows superiority compared to synchronous FL, and recent
works (Mishchenko et al., 2022; Koloskova et al., 2022) further improve convergence performances
with theoretical guarantees.
Challenges: However, compared to prior A-FL approaches focusing on supervised learning, integrat-
ing A-FL with policy-based FedRL introduces new challenges due to the presence of lagged policies
in asynchronous settings. Unlike supervised FL where the datasets of the clients are fixed, in RL,
agents collect new samples in each iteration based on the current policy. This dynamic nature of
the data collection process makes both the problem itself and the theoretical analysis challenging.
Guaranteeing the global convergence of the algorithm is especially non-trivial under the asynchronous
FedRL setting with lagged policies. This problem setting and its challenges have been largely over-
looked in existing research, despite the significance of employing FL in RL. The key question that
this paper aims to address is:


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Despite the inherent challenge of dealing with lagged policies among different agents, can we improve
the efficiency of FedPG through asynchronous methods while ensuring theoretical convergence?
We answer this question in the affirmative by proposing AFedPG, an algorithm that asynchronously
updates the global policy using policy gradients from federated agents. The key components of the
proposed approach include a delay-adaptive lookahead technique tailored to PG, which addresses
the inconsistent arrival times of updates during the training process. This new approach eliminates
the second-order correction terms that do not appear in conventional supervised FL, effectively
addressing the unique challenges of asynchronous FedRL. The improvement of AFedPG over other
approaches is summarized in Table 1. Here, the global time is measured by the number of global
updates Г— time complexity in each iteration. In terms of sample complexity, the federated learning
technique brings a linear speedup with respect to the number of agents N . As for the global time,
                                                                        PN
AFedPG improves from O( tmax   N Пө
                                   вҲ’2.5
                                        ) to O(tМ„ПөвҲ’2.5 ), where tМ„ := 1/ i=1 t1i is a harmonic average
which is less than or equal to tmax /N , and ti denotes the time complexity in each iteration at agent i.


1.1    S UMMARY OF C ONTRIBUTIONS

Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

  1. New methodology with a delay-adaptive technique: We propose AFedPG, an asynchronous
     training method tailored to FedRL. To handle the delay issue in the asynchronous FedRL setting,
     we design a delay-adaptive lookahead technique. Specifically, in the k-th iteration of training,
                                                                                      1вҲ’ОұkвҲ’Оҙk
     the agent collects samples according to the local model parameters Оёek вҶҗ Оёk + ОұkвҲ’Оҙ        (Оёk вҲ’
                                                                                           k
     ОёkвҲ’1 ), where Оҙk is the delay. Unlike (supervised) FL, a second-order correction term (marked
     blue in equation 32) only occurs in RL because of the sampling mechanism. This updating
     technique cancels out the second-order correction terms ((1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )вҲҮ2 J(Оёk )(ОёkвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оёk ) +
     ОұkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҮ2 J(Оёk )(Оёek вҲ’ Оёk ) = 0) and thus assists the convergence analysis. This technique is
     specifically designed for AFedRL, and not developed by previous FL works.

  2. Convergence analysis: This work gives both the global and the first-order stationary point
     (FOSP) convergence guarantees of the asynchronous federated policy-based RL for the first
     time. We analytically characterize the convergence bound of AFedPG using the key lemmas,
     and show the impact of various parameters including delay and number of iterations.

  3. Linear speedup in sample complexity: As shown in Table 1, our AFedPG approach improves
                                                                                 вҲ’2.5
     the sample complexity in each agent from O(ПөвҲ’2.5 ) (single agent PG) to O( Пө N ), where N is
     the number of federated agents. This represents the linear speedup of our method with respect
     to the number of agents N .

  4. Time complexity improvement: Our AFedPG also reduces the time complexity of synchronous
     FedPG from O( tmax
                     N ) to O(tМ„
                                 := PN1 1 ). The latter is always smaller than the former. This
                                           i=1 ti
      improvement is significant in large-scale federated settings with heterogeneous delays (tmax вү«
      tmin ).

  5. Experiments under the MuJoCo environment: We empirically verify the improved perfor-
     mances of AFedPG in four different MuJoCo environments with varying numbers of agents. We
     also demonstrate the improvements with different computing heterogeneity.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to successfully integrate policy-based reinforcement
learning with asynchronous federated learning and analyze its behavior, accompanied by theoretical
convergence guarantees. This new setting necessitates us to deal with the lagged policies under a
time-varying data scenario depending on the updated policy.
Notation: We denote the Euclidean norm by вҲҘ В· вҲҘ, and the vector inner product by вҹЁВ·вҹ©. For a vector
a вҲҲ Rn , we use aвҠӨ to denote the transpose of a. A calligraphic font letter denotes a set, e.g., C, and
|C| denotes its cardinality. We use C \ {j} to denote a set that contains all the elements in C except
for j.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2    R ELATED W ORK

In this section, we review previous works that are most relevant to the present work.
Policy gradient methods: For vanilla PG, the state-of-the-art result is presented in Yuan et al. (2022),
achieving a sample complexity of O(Пө  e вҲ’4 ) for the local convergence. Several recent works have
improved this boundary with PG variants. In Huang et al. (2020), a PG with momentum method is
proposed with convergence rate O(ПөвҲ’3 ) for the local convergence. The authors of Ding et al. (2022)
further improve the convergence analysis of PG with momentum and achieve a global convergence
with the rate O(ПөвҲ’3 ). In Fatkhullin et al. (2023), a normalized PG technique is introduced and
improves the global convergence rate to O(ПөвҲ’2.5 ). In Mondal & Aggarwal (2024), an acceleration-
based natural policy gradient method is proposed with sample complexity O(ПөвҲ’2 ), but second-
order matrices are computed in each iteration (with first-order information), which brings more
computational cost. However, all previous works have focused on the single-agent scenario, and the
federated PG has not been explored. Compared to these works, we focus on a practical federated PG
setting with distributed agents to improve the efficiency of RL. Our scheme achieves a linear speedup
with respect to the number of agents, significantly reducing the sample complexity compared to the
conventional PG approaches.
Asynchronous FL: In Xie et al. (2020), the superiority of asynchronous federated learning (A-FL)
has been empirically shown compared to synchronous FL in terms of convergence performances. In
Chen et al. (2020), the asynchronous analysis is extended to the vertical FL with a better convergence
performance compared to the synchronous setting. In Dun et al. (2023), a dropout regularization
method is introduced to handle the heterogeneous problems in A-FL. About the same time, recent
works (Mishchenko et al., 2022; Koloskova et al., 2022) further improve the convergence performance
with theoretical guarantees, and show that A-FL always exceeds synchronous FL without any changes
to the algorithm. We note that all previous A-FL works focus on supervised learning with fixed
datasets on the client side. However, in RL, agents collect new samples that depend on the current
policy (model parameters) in each iteration, which makes the problem fundamentally different and
challenging. In this work, we address this challenge by developing an A-FL method highly tailored
to policy gradient, leveraging the proposed delay-adaptive lookahead technique.
FedRL: For value-function based algorithms, Zheng et al. (2024); Jin et al. (2022); Woo et al. (2023)
analyze the convergence performances with environment heterogeneity. Salgia & Chi (2024) analyzes
the trade-off between sample and communication complexity. Zheng et al. (2024); Khodadadian
et al. (2022) shows a linear speedup with respect to the number of agents. Zhang et al. (2024a)
extends the result with linear function approximation. However, all of the above works are limited to
tabular or linear approximation analysis (without deep learning). For actor-critic (AC) based method,
Wang et al. (2024b) analyzes the convergence performances with the linear function approximation.
Mnih et al. (2016) builds a practical system to implement the neural network approximation. Yang
et al. (2024) analyzes the sample complexity in the multi-task setting. In Xie & Song (2023), it
adds KL divergence and experimentally validates the actor-critic based method with neural network
approximation. For policy-based methods, Chen et al. (2021) gives a convergence guarantee for the
vanilla FedPG. (Wang et al., 2024a) analyzes the performance in the heterogeneous setting. Lan et al.
(2023b) further shows the simplicity compared to the other RL methods, and a linear speedup has been
demonstrated in the synchronous setting. Further, optimal sample complexity for global optimality
in federated RL even in the presence of adversaries is studied in Ganesh et al. (2024a). However,
with online behavior, it is not practical to perform synchronous global updates with heterogeneous
computing power, and the global time consumption heavily depends on the stragglers (Mishchenko
et al., 2022). This motivates us to consider the asynchronous policy-based method for FedRL. We
demonstrate both theoretically and empirically that our method further reduces the time complexity
compared to the synchronous FedRL approach.


3    P ROBLEM S ETUP

Markov decision process: We consider the Markov decision process (MDP) as a tuple
(S, A, P, R, Оі), where S is the state space, A is a finite action space, P : S Г— A Г— S вҶ’ R is
a Markov kernel that determines transition probabilities, R : S Г— A вҶ’ R is a reward function, and
Оі вҲҲ (0, 1) is a discount factor. At each time step t, the agent executes an action at вҲҲ A from the


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


current state st вҲҲ S, following a stochastic policy ПҖ, i.e., at вҲј ПҖ(В·|st ). The corresponding reward is
defined as rt . The state value function is defined as
                                                   "вҲһ                        #
                                                     X
                                                          t
                           VПҖ (s) =        E            Оі r(st , at )|s0 = s .                      (1)
                                         at вҲјПҖ(В·|st ),
                                       st+1 вҲјP (В·|st ,at )     t=0

Similarly, the state-action value function (Q-function) is defined as
                                               "вҲһ                                 #
                                                X
                    QПҖ (s, a) =        E            Оі t r(st , at )|s0 = s, a0 = a .                       (2)
                                     at вҲјПҖ(В·|st ),
                                   st+1 вҲјP (В·|st ,at )    t=0

An advantage function is then define as AПҖ (s, a) = QПҖ (s, a) вҲ’ VПҖ (s). With continuous states, the
policy is parameterized by Оё вҲҲ Rd , and then the policy is referred as ПҖОё (Deep RL parameterizes ПҖОё
by deep neural networks). A state-action visitation measure induced by ПҖОё is given as
                                            "вҲһ                                 #
                                              X
                                                    t
                  ОҪПҖОё (s, a) = (1 вҲ’ Оі) E          Оі P (st = s, at = a|s0 , ПҖОё ) ,                (3)
                                                 s0 вҲјПҒ
                                                         t=0

where the starting state s0 is drawn from a distribution ПҒ. The goal of the agent is to maximize the
expected discounted return defined as follows:
                                          max J(Оё) := E [VПҖОё (s)] .                                        (4)
                                             Оё                 sвҲјПҒ


The gradient of J(Оё) (Schulman et al., 2018) can be written as:
                                    "вҲһ                                        #
                                       X
                       вҲҮОё J(Оё) = E        вҲҮОё log ПҖОё (at |st ) В· AПҖОё (st , at ) ,                           (5)
                                        П„
                                                 t=0

where П„ = (s0 , a0 , r0 , s1 , a1 , r1 В· В· В· ) is a trajectory induced by policy ПҖОё . We omit the Оё notation in
the gradient operation and denote the policy gradient by g for short. Then, g is estimated by
                                          вҲһ
                                          X                            вҲһ
                                                                       X
                             g(Оё, П„ ) =           вҲҮ log ПҖОё (at |st )         Оі h r(sh , ah ).              (6)
                                            t=0                        h=t


Federated policy gradient: We aim to solve the above problem in an FL setting, where N agents
collaboratively train a common policy ПҖОё . Specifically, each agent collects trajectories and corre-
sponding reward r(sh , ah ) based on its local policy. Then, each agent i estimates g(Оёi , П„ ) for training
the model Оё, and the updated models are aggregated at the server. Motivated by the limitations of
synchronous model aggregation in terms of time complexity, in the next section, we present our
AFedPG methodology that takes an asynchronous approach to solve equation 4 in an FL setting.

4    P ROPOSED A SYNCHRONOUS F ED PG
The proposed algorithm consists of K global iterations, indexed by k = 0, 1, . . . , K вҲ’ 1. We first
introduce the definition of concurrency and delay in our asynchronous federated setting. We then
present the proposed AFedPG methodology.
Definition 4.1. (Concurrency) We denote Ck as the set of active agents in the k-th global iteration,
and define Пүk := |Ck | as the concurrency. We define the average and maximum concurrency as
      1
        PKвҲ’1
ПүМ„ := K   k=0 Пүk , and Пүmax := max Пүk , respectively.

In each global iteration of AFedPG, the server applies only one gradient to update the model from the
agent who has finished its local computation, while the other N вҲ’ 1 agents keep computing local
gradients (unapplied gradients) in parallel. In this asynchronous setting, the models used in each
agent are outdated, as the server keeps updating the model. Thus, we introduce the notion of delay
(or staleness) Оҙ вҲҲ N, which measures the difference between the current global iteration and the past
global iteration when the agent received the updated model from the server.


                                                               5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   1                      2                 k   Global Steps

                                       updating
  received       delay
                adapted
                             samples                   Server                  Server           Server
   policy                              direction

 computing finished computing


      1                 2              N
                                                   1    2       N         1     2       N   1    2       N
             sampling       sampling
  Environment     Environment    Environment

                                                                              Environment



Figure 1: An illustration of the asynchronous federated policy gradient updates. Each agent has a
local copy of the environment, and agents may collect data according to different local policies. At
each iteration, the agent in the yellow color finishes the local process and then communicates with
the server, while the other agents keep sampling and computing local gradients in parallel. In the k-th
global iteration, Оҙk вҲҲ N is the delay, П„ekвҲ’Оҙk is the sample collected according to the policy ПҖОёekвҲ’Оҙ ,
                                                                                                     k
and dkвҲ’Оҙk is the updating direction calculated from the sample П„ekвҲ’Оҙk .


Definition 4.2. (Delay) In the k-th global iteration, we denote the delay of the applied gradient as
Оҙk вҲҲ N (an integer), and the delays of the unapplied gradients as {Оҙki }iвҲҲCk \{jk } , where jk denotes
the agent that communicates with the server. Оҙki is the difference between the k-th iteration and the
iteration where the agent i started to compute the latest gradient. In the final K-th global iteration,
we have K applied gradients {Оҙk }KвҲ’1                                 i
                                    k=0 and unapplied gradients {Оҙk }iвҲҲCK \{jK } . The average delay
can be expressed as
                                                 KвҲ’1
                                        1        X             X
                                                                         i

                         ОҙМ„ :=                        Оҙk +             ОҙK    .                      (7)
                                 K вҲ’ 1 + |CK |
                                                                    k=0       iвҲҲCK \{jK }

Asynchronous FedPG: Our goal is to train a global policy with parameters Оё вҲҲ Rd via FL across N
distributed agents. As shown in Figure 1, during the training process, agent i collects trajectories in
an online behavior, and computes gradients or updating directions using its local trajectories (also
known as samples). Then, agent i transmits local gradients to the central server. In particular, in the
k-th global iteration, the training of our AFedPG consists of the following three steps:

             вҖў Local computation and uplink transmission: Agent i receives the previous policy ПҖОёj
               from the server in the j-th global iteration. Agent i collects its own local trajectory П„j based
               on its current policy ПҖОёj . Agent i then computes its local updating direction dj вҲҲ Rd based
               on the trajectory П„j , and sends it back to the server.
             вҖў Server-side model update: The server starts to operate the k-th global iteration as soon
               as it receives dj from agent i. Thus, denote dkвҲ’Оҙk = dj , where Оҙk is the delay in the k-th
               global iteration. The server updates global policy parameters by Оё вҶҗ Оё вҲ’ О·dkвҲ’Оҙk , where О·
               is the learning rate.
             вҖў Downlink transmission: The server transmits the current global policy parameters Оё вҲҲ Rd
               back to the agent i as soon as it finishes the global update.

The server side procedure of AFedPG is shown in Algorithm 1 and the process at the agent side is
shown in Algorithm 2. In the k-th global iteration, the server operates one global update (Steps 4
and 5) as soon as it receives a direction dkвҲ’Оҙk from an agent with delay Оҙk . After the global update,
the server sends the updated model back to that agent. In Algorithm 2, after receiving the global
model from the server, an agent first gets model parameters Оёek according to Step 2, and then collects
samples based on the policy ПҖОёek (Steps 3). At last, the agent computes the updating direction dk ,
and sends it to the server as soon as it finishes the local process. Overall, all agents conduct local
computation in parallel, but the global model is updated in an asynchronous manner as summarized
in Figure 1.
Normalized update at the server: In Step 5 of Algorithm 1, to handle the updates with various
delays, we use normalized gradients with controllable sizes. Specifically, the error term вҲҘek вҲҘ in


                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 AFedPG: Server.
Require: MDP (S, A, P, R, Оі); Number of iterations K; Step size О·k , Оұk ; Initial Оё0 , d0 вҲҲ Rd .
 1: Broadcast Оё0 to N agents.
 2: for k = 1, В· В· В· , K do
 3:      в–· Uplink Transmit
 4:      Receive g(e   П„kвҲ’Оҙk , ОёekвҲ’Оҙk ) from the agent ik .
 5:      dkвҲ’Оҙk вҶҗ (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )dkвҲ’1вҲ’ОҙkвҲ’1 + ОұkвҲ’Оҙk g(e          П„kвҲ’Оҙk , ОёekвҲ’Оҙk )
 6:      в–· Server update
                                  d
 7:      Оёk вҶҗ ОёkвҲ’1 + О·kвҲ’1 вҲҘdkвҲ’Оҙ        k
                                   kвҲ’Оҙ вҲҘ
                                      k
                     1вҲ’ОұkвҲ’Оҙk
 8:      Оёek вҶҗ Оёk + ОұkвҲ’Оҙ      (Оёk вҲ’ ОёkвҲ’1 ) # Lookahead
                           k
 9:      в–· Downlink Transmit
10:      Transmit Оёek back to the agent ik .
11: end for
Ensure: ОёK

Algorithm 2 AFedPG: Agent i Update, i = 1, В· В· В· , N .
Require: ОёekвҖІ вҲҲ Rd
 1: Receive ОёekвҖІ from the server.
 2: П„ekвҖІ вҲј p(В·|ПҖОёe вҖІ ) # Sampling
                   k

 3: Estimate policy gradient g(e  П„kвҖІ , ОёekвҖІ ) according to equation 6.
 4: When finish computing, transmit g(e       П„kвҖІ , ОёekвҖІ ) to the server. # When the server receives the policy
    gradient, it is the k-th step on the server, where k вҲ’ Оҙk = k вҖІ .
Ensure: g(e П„kвҖІ , ОёekвҖІ )


Lemma B.9 is related to вҲҘвҲҮJ(ОёekвҲ’Оҙk ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёek )вҲҘ and вҲҘвҲҮJ(ОёkвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ. With the smoothness
in Lemma B.7, we are able to bound the error as вҲҘОёkвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оёk вҲҘ = О·kвҲ’1 . The details of the boundaries
are shown in equation 34.
Delay-adaptive lookahead at the agent: In Step 7 of Algorithm 1 (in blue), we design a delay-
adaptive lookahead update technique, which is designed specifically for asynchronous FedPG. It
operates as follows:
                                 Оёk = (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )ОёkвҲ’1 + ОұkвҲ’Оҙk Оёek .                            (8)
We note that equation 8 is not the conventional momentum method, because the orders are different.
Here, Оёek вҖңlooks aheadвҖқ based on global policies ОёkвҲ’1 and Оёk , and the learning rate ОұkвҲ’Оҙk depends
on the delay Оҙk .
In equation 8, the agent collects samples according to the current parameter Оёek in an online behavior,
which only happens in the RL setting. This makes the problem fundamentally different from the
conventional FL on supervised learning with a fixed dataset. This mechanism cancels out the
second-order Hessian correction terms:
                (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙ )вҲҮ2 J(Оёk )(ОёkвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оёk ) + ОұkвҲ’Оҙ вҲҮ2 J(Оёk )(Оёek вҲ’ Оёk ) вҶ’ 0,
                            k                                   k
                                                                                                   (9)
and thus assists the convergence analysis. The details of the derivation are shown in Appendix B.4
marked in blue.

5     C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS
In this section, we derive the convergence rates of AFedPG with the following criterions for the FOSP
and global convergence, respectively.
Global Criterion: We focus on the global convergence, i.e., finding the parameter Оё s.t. J вӢҶ вҲ’ J(Оё) вүӨ
ПөвҖІ , where J вӢҶ is the optimal expected return.
FOSP Criterion: We focus on the first-order stationary convergence, i.e., finding the parameter Оё s.t.
вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оё)вҲҘ вүӨ Пө.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We use several standard assumptions listed in Appendix B.1. Based on these assumptions, the
convergence rates of AFedPG are given in Theorem 5.2 and 5.1.
Theorem 5.1. (Global) Let Assumption B.1 and B.2 hold. With suitable learning rates О·k and Оұk ,
after K global iterations, AFedPG satisfies
                                                                вҲҡ
                                               2                  Пөbias
                       J вӢҶ вҲ’ E[J(ОёK )] вүӨ O K вҲ’ 5 В· (1 вҲ’ Оі)вҲ’3 +

                                                                        ,                 (10)
                                                                1вҲ’Оі
                                                                     вҲҡ                             вҲ’2.5
                                                                         Пө                       Пө
where Пөbias is from equation 13. Thus, to satisfy J вӢҶ вҲ’ J(ОёK ) вүӨ Пө + 1вҲ’Оіbias
                                                                             , we need K = O( (1вҲ’Оі) 7.5 )

iterations. As only one trajectory is required in each iteration, the number of trajectories is equal to
                                        ПөвҲ’2.5
K, i.e., the sample complexity is O( (1вҲ’Оі)  7.5 ).


Theorem 5.2. (FOSP) Let Assumption B.1 hold. With suitable learning rates О·k and Оұk , after K
global iterations, AFedPG satisfies
                                                  2
                            E[вҲҘвҲҮJ(ОёМ„K )вҲҘ] вүӨ O K вҲ’ 7 В· (1 вҲ’ Оі)вҲ’3 ,

                                                                                          (11)
                           PK
                                О·k EвҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ
where EвҲҘвҲҮJ(ОёМ„K )вҲҘ :=         k=1P
                                 K              is the average of gradient expectations. To satisfy
                                 k=1 О·k
                                    вҲ’3.5
                                   Пө
вҲҮJ(ОёМ„K ) вүӨ Пө, we need K = O( (1вҲ’Оі)    7.5 ) iterations. As only one trajectory is required in each itera-

                                                                                               ПөвҲ’3.5
tion, the number of collected trajectories is equal to K, i.e., the sample complexity is O( (1вҲ’Оі)  7.5 ).



Comparison to the synchronous setting: Synchronous FedPG needs O(ПөвҲ’2.5 ) trajectories in total,
                            вҲ’2.5
and each agent needs O( Пө N ) trajectories. However, in synchronous FedGP the server has to wait
for the slowest agent at each global step, which can still slow down the training process. Let ti denote
the time consumption for agent i = 1, В· В· В· , N at local steps with finite values. As the agent has the
same computation requirement in each iteration (The number of collected samples is the same.),
we assume that the time complexity in each iteration is the same. Then, the waiting time on the
server for each step becomes tmax := max ti for FedPG. Our AFedPG approach keeps the same
sample complexity as FedPG, but the server processes the global step as soon as it receives an update,
speeding up training. Specifically, the average waiting time on the server is tМ„ := PN1 1 < tmax     N
                                                                                          i=1 ti
at each step. Thus, the asynchronous FedPG achieves less time complexity than the synchronous
approach regardless of the delay pattern. The advantage is significant when tmax вү« tmin , which
occurs in many practical settings with heterogeneous computation powers across different agents. We
illustrate the advantage of AFedPG over synchronous FedPG in Figure 5 in Appendix A.1. As the
server only operates one simple summation, without loss of generality, the time consumption at the
server side is negligible.

6     E XPERIMENTS

6.1   S ETUP

Environment: To validate the effectiveness of our approach via experiments, we consider four
popular MuJoCo environments for robotic control (Swimmer-v4, Hopper-v4, Walker2D-v4, and
Humanoid-v4) (Todorov et al., 2012) with the MIT License. Both the state and action spaces are
continuous. Environmental details are described in Table 2 in Appendix A.2, and the MuJoCo tasks
are visualized in Figure 2.
Measurement: All convergence performances are measured over 10 runs with random seeds from
0 to 9. The solid lines in our main experimental results are the averaged results, and the shadowed
areas are confidence intervals with the confidence level 95%. The lines are smoothed for better
visualization.
Implementation: Policies are parameterized by fully connected multi-layer perceptions (MLPs)
with settings listed in Table 3 in Appendix A.1. We follow the practical settings in stable-baselines3
(Raffin et al., 2021) to update models with generalized advantage estimation (GAE) (0.95) (Schulman
et al., 2018) in our implementation. We use PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) to implement deep neural
networks (DNNs). All tasks are trained on NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 40 GB of memory.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Baselines: We first consider the conventional PG approach with N = 1, to see the effect of using
multiple agents for improving sample complexity. We then consider the synchronous FedPG method
as a baseline to observe the impact of asynchronous updates on enhancing the time complexity. To
see the effect of our delay-adaptive technique, we also consider the performance of AFedPG without
the delay-adaptive updates, namely vanilla in Figure 4. Finally, we consider A3C (Mnih et al., 2016),
an asynchronous method designed for RL. We note that only a few prior works could be used on the
federated PG problem, e.g., A3C, and many existing works in federated supervised learning are not
directly applicable to our federated RL setting.
Performance metrics: We consider the following metrics:

       1. Rewards: the average trajectory rewards collected at each iteration;
       2. Convergence: rewards versus iterations during the training process;
       3. Time consumption: global time with certain numbers of collected samples.


      (a) Swimmer-v4            (b) Hopper-v4          (c) Walker2D-v4          (d) Humanoid-v4


      Figure 2: Visualization of the four MuJoCo tasks considered in this paper for experiments.


6.2    R ESULTS

Sample complexity improvement: First, to verify the improvement of sample complexity in the
first row of Table 1, we evaluate the speedup effects of the number of federated agents N . In Figure
3, with different numbers of agents, we test the convergence performances of AFedPG (N = 2, 4, 8)
and the single agent PG (N = 1). The x-axis is the number of samples collected by each agent on
average, and the y-axis is the reward. In all four MuJoCo tasks, AFedPG beats the single-agent PG:
AFedPG converges faster, has lower variances, and achieves higher final rewards when more agents
are involved in collecting trajectories and estimating policy gradients. These results confirm the
advantage of AFedPG in terms of sample complexity.


      (a) Swimmer-v4            (b) Hopper-v4          (c) Walker2D-v4          (d) Humanoid-v4


Figure 3: Reward performances of AFedPG (N = 2, 4, 8) and PG (N = 1) on various MuJoCo
environments, where N is the number of federated agents. The solid lines are averaged results over
10 runs with random seeds from 0 to 9. The shadowed areas are confidence intervals with 95%
confidence level.

Speedup in global time complexity: Second, to verify the improvement of global time complexity in
the second row of Table 1, we compared the time consumption in the asynchronous and synchronous
settings. In Figure 4, we set N = 4, 8 and fix the number of samples collected by all agents. Here,
tmax is about 4 times more than tmin . The numbers of total samples (trajectories) are 8 Г— 103 ,


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (a) Swimmer-v4             (b) Hopper-v4            (c) Walker2D-v4           (d) Humanoid-v4


Figure 4: Global time of AFedPG and FedPG with certain numbers of collected samples on various
MuJoCo environments, where N is the number of federated agents. The solid lines are averaged
results over 10 runs. The shadowed areas are confidence intervals with 95% confidence level.


1.6 Г— 104 , 8 Г— 104 , and 1.2 Г— 105 for the Swimmer-v4 task, the Hopper-v4 task, the Walker2D-v4
task, and the Humanoid-v4 task individually when N = 8. When N = 4, the numbers are halved.
In all four environments, AFedPG has much lower time consumption compared to the synchronous
FedPG, confirming the enhancement in terms of time complexity. Compared to the A3C baseline,
AFedPG achieves much higher rewards with less variance.
Ablation study: In Figure 4, we also observe the impact of our delay-adaptive lookahead approach.
It is seen that the vanilla scheme without the delay-adaptive lookahead technique does not provide a
satisfactory performance, confirming the importance of the proposed approach. We also analyze the
effect of computation heterogeneity in Appendix A.3.


7   D ISCUSSIONS

Conclusions: We proposed AFedPG, a novel asynchronous FedRL framework that updates the global
model using PGs from multiple agents. To handle the challenge of lagged (heterogeneous) policies in
the asynchronous setting, we designed a delay-adaptive lookahead technique and used normalized
updates to integrate PGs. We then analytically characterized the convergence bound of AFedPG and
showed both global and first-order stationary point convergence guarantees. We also showed that
AFedPG achieves a speedup for both sample complexity and time complexity. First, our AFedPG
                       вҲ’2.5
method achieves O( Пө N ) sample complexity at each agent for global convergence. Compared to the
SOTA result in the single agent setting, i.e. PG, with O(ПөвҲ’2.5 ) sample complexity, it enjoys a linear
speedup with respect to the number of agents N . Second, compared to synchronous FedPG, AFedPG
                                                     PN 1 вҲ’1
improves the time complexity from O( tmaxN ) to O(     i=1 ti )  , where ti denotes the time complexity
                                                                                          PN
in each iteration at the agent i, and tmax is the largest one. The latter complexity O( i=1 t1i )вҲ’1 is
always smaller than the former one, and this improvement is significant in a large-scale federated
setting with heterogeneous computing powers (tmax вү« tmin ). Finally, we empirically verified the
performances of AFedPG compared to various baselines in four MuJoCo environments with different
N . We also demonstrated improvements with different computing heterogeneity. It is shown that
AFedPG achieves speedup in terms of both sample complexity and time complexity, especially in
scenarios with high computing power heterogeneity.
Limitations and future work directions: (i) Although the system is resilient to stragglers, addressing
threats posed by adversarial or malicious workers in this setup remains an open problem. While
robustness to such attacks has been explored in the synchronous setting (Ganesh et al., 2024a),
extending these methods to an asynchronous environment is both a challenging and promising avenue
for future research. (ii) It is worth studying whether the asynchronous method is compatible with other
methods, e.g., local update, quantization, and low-rank decomposition, to improve communication
efficiency in the deep RL setting. (iii) Extending second-order policy optimization methods, such as
natural policy gradient methods, which achieve optimal sample complexity in centralized settings
(Mondal & Aggarwal, 2024), to an asynchronous federated setup is an important direction for future
work. (iv) While this paper focuses on discounted rewards, exploring such results for average reward
setup (Bai et al., 2024; Ganesh et al., 2025; 2024b) is an important open direction.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
In this statement, we discuss the efforts that have been made to ensure reproducibility.
For theoretical results, we clearly explain all assumptions in Appendix B.1, and a complete proof of
the lemmas and theorems in Appendix B.
For algorithms, we provide the pseudocode in Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2.
For datasets used in the experiments, we use open source datasets, and describe them in Section 6.1
and Appendix A.2.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under grants CPS-2313109
and ITE-2326898, and by the Office of Naval Research (ONR) under grants N00014-22-1-2305 and
N00014-23-1-2532.

R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Sham M. Kakade, Jason D. Lee, and Gaurav Mahajan. On the theory of policy
  gradient methods: Optimality, approximation, and distribution shift. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 22(1):4431вҖ“4506, 2021a.
Mridul Agarwal, Bhargav Ganguly, and Vaneet Aggarwal. Communication efficient parallel rein-
 forcement learning. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), volume 161 of Proceedings of
 Machine Learning Research, pp. 247вҖ“256. PMLR, 27вҖ“30 Jul 2021b.
Abubakr O. Al-Abbasi, Arnob Ghosh, and Vaneet Aggarwal. DeepPool: Distributed model-free
  algorithm for ride-sharing using deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
 Transportation Systems, 20(12):4714вҖ“4727, 2019.
Ajay Badita, Parimal Parag, and Vaneet Aggarwal. Single-forking of coded subtasks for straggler
  mitigation. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 29(6):2413вҖ“2424, 2021.
Qinbo Bai, Washim Uddin Mondal, and Vaneet Aggarwal. Regret analysis of policy gradient
  algorithm for infinite horizon average reward Markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 10980вҖ“10988, 2024.
Christopher G Brinton, Mung Chiang, Kwang Taik Kim, David J Love, Michael Beesley, Morris
  Repeta, John Roese, Per Beming, Erik Ekudden, Clara Li, et al. Key focus areas and enabling
  technologies for 6G. IEEE Communications Magazine, 2025.
Zhan-Lun Chang, Seyyedali Hosseinalipour, Mung Chiang, and Christopher G. Brinton. Asyn-
  chronous multi-model dynamic federated learning over wireless networks: Theory, modeling, and
  optimization. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, 10(5):1989вҖ“2004,
  2024.
Chang-Lin Chen, Hanhan Zhou, Jiayu Chen, Mohammad Pedramfar, Vaneet Aggarwal, Tian Lan,
  Zheqing Zhu, Chi Zhou, Tim Gasser, Pol Mauri Ruiz, et al. Two-tiered online optimization
  of region-wide datacenter resource allocation via deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.17054, 2023.
Jianlong Chen, Jue Xiao, and Wei Xu. A hybrid stacking method for short-term price forecasting
   in electricity trading market. In 2024 8th International Conference on Information Technology,
   Information Systems and Electrical Engineering (ICITISEE), pp. 1вҖ“5, 2024a.
Tianyi Chen, Xiao Jin, Yuejiao Sun, and Wotao Yin. VAFL: A method of vertical asynchronous
  federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.06081, 2020.
Tianyi Chen, Kaiqing Zhang, Georgios B Giannakis, and Tamer BasМ§ar. Communication-efficient
  policy gradient methods for distributed reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Control of
  Network Systems, 9(2):917вҖ“929, 2021.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuning Chen, Kang Yang, Zhiyu An, Brady Holder, Luke Paloutzian, Khaled M. Bali, and Wan
  Du. MARLP: Time-series forecasting control for agricultural managed aquifer recharge. In
  Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
  KDD вҖҷ24, pp. 4862вҖ“4872. Association for Computing Machinery, 2024b.

Cheng-Wei Ching, Jia-Ming Chang, Jian-Jhih Kuo, and Chih-Yu Wang. Dual-objective personalized
  federated service system with partially-labeled data over wireless networks. IEEE Transactions on
  Services Computing, 16(5):3265вҖ“3279, 2023.

Cheng-Wei Ching, Xin Chen, Taehwan Kim, Bo Ji, Qingyang Wang, Dilma Da Silva, and Liting
  Hu. Totoro: A scalable federated learning engine for the edge. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth
  European Conference on Computer Systems, EuroSys вҖҷ24, pp. 182вҖ“199. Association for Computing
  Machinery, 2024.

Yun-Wei Chu, Dong-Jun Han, and Christopher G Brinton. Only send what you need: Learning to
  communicate efficiently in federated multilingual machine translation. In Companion Proceedings
  of the ACM on Web Conference (WWW), pp. 1548вҖ“1557, 2024a.

Yun-Wei Chu, Dong-Jun Han, Seyyedali Hosseinalipour, and Christopher G Brinton. Rethinking
  the starting point: Enhancing performance and fairness of federated learning via collaborative
  pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02225, 2024b.

Yun-Wei Chu, Dong-Jun Han, Seyyedali Hosseinalipour, and Christopher G Brinton. Unlocking the
  potential of model calibration in federated learning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025.

Dongsheng Ding, Kaiqing Zhang, Tamer Basar, and Mihailo Jovanovic. Natural policy gradient
  primal-dual method for constrained Markov decision processes. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, pp. 8378вҖ“8390. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.

Yuhao Ding, Junzi Zhang, and Javad Lavaei. On the global optimum convergence of momentum-based
  policy gradient. In Proceedings of The 25th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics (AISTATS), volume 151 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1910вҖ“1934.
  PMLR, 28вҖ“30 Mar 2022.

Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Nir Levine, Daniel J Mankowitz, Jerry Li, Cosmin Paduraru, Sven Gowal,
  and Todd Hester. Challenges of real-world reinforcement learning: Definitions, benchmarks and
  analysis. Machine Learning, 110(9):2419вҖ“2468, 2021.

Chen Dun, Mirian Hipolito, Chris Jermaine, Dimitrios Dimitriadis, and Anastasios Kyrillidis. Efficient
  and light-weight federated learning via asynchronous distributed dropout. In Proceedings of The
  26th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), volume 206 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6630вҖ“6660, Palau de Congressos, Valencia, Spain,
  25вҖ“27 Apr 2023. PMLR.

Anis Elgabli, Jihong Park, Amrit Singh Bedi, Chaouki Ben Issaid, Mehdi Bennis, and Vaneet
 Aggarwal. Q-GADMM: Quantized group ADMM for communication efficient decentralized
  machine learning. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 69(1):164вҖ“181, 2020.

Anis Elgabli, Mohammed S Elbamby, Cristina Perfecto, Mounssif Krouka, Mehdi Bennis, and Vaneet
  Aggarwal. Cross layer optimization and distributed reinforcement learning for wireless 360В° video
  streaming. In Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Mobile Ad-Hoc and Smart Systems
 (MASS), 2024.

Ilyas Fatkhullin, Anas Barakat, Anastasia Kireeva, and Niao He. Stochastic policy gradient methods:
   Improved sample complexity for Fisher-non-degenerate policies. In International Conference
   on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
   9827вҖ“9869, Honolulu, HI, USA, 23вҖ“29 Jul 2023. PMLR.

Zuyue Fu, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Single-timescale actor-critic provably finds globally
  optimal policy. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Swetha Ganesh, Jiayu Chen, Gugan Thoppe, and Vaneet Aggarwal. Global convergence guarantees
  for federated policy gradient methods with adversaries. Transactions on Machine Learning
  Research, 2024a. ISSN 2835-8856.
Swetha Ganesh, Washim Uddin Mondal, and Vaneet Aggarwal. Order-optimal global convergence for
  average reward reinforcement learning via actor-critic approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.18878,
  2024b.
Swetha Ganesh, Washim Uddin Mondal, and Vaneet Aggarwal. Order-optimal regret with novel
  policy gradient approaches in infinite horizon average reward mdps. In International Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS). PMLR, 2025.
Mudit Gaur, Amrit S. Bedi, Di Wang, and Vaneet Aggarwal. Closing the gap: Achieving global conver-
 gence (last iterate) of actor-critic under Markovian sampling with neural network parametrization.
 In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
Nan Geng, Qinbo Bai, Chenyi Liu, Tian Lan, Vaneet Aggarwal, Yuan Yang, and Mingwei Xu. A
  reinforcement learning framework for vehicular network routing under peak and average constraints.
  IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 72(5):6753вҖ“6764, 2023.
Glebys Gonzalez, Mythra Balakuntala, Mridul Agarwal, Tomas Low, Bruce Knoth, Andrew W
  Kirkpatrick, Jessica McKee, Gregory Hager, Vaneet Aggarwal, Yexiang Xue, et al. ASAP: A
  semi-autonomous precise system for telesurgery during communication delays. IEEE Transactions
  on Medical Robotics and Bionics, 5(1):66вҖ“78, 2023.
Feihu Huang, Shangqian Gao, Jian Pei, and Heng Huang. Momentum-based policy gradient methods.
  In International conference on machine learning (ICML), volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 4422вҖ“4433. PMLR, 13вҖ“18 Jul 2020.
Hao Jin, Yang Peng, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. Federated reinforcement
  learning with environment heterogeneity. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics (AISTATS), volume 151 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 18вҖ“37.
  PMLR, 28вҖ“30 Mar 2022.
Peter Kairouz, H. Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, AureМҒlien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and trendsВ® in machine learning,
  14(1вҖ“2):1вҖ“210, 2021.
Sajad Khodadadian, Pranay Sharma, Gauri Joshi, and Siva Theja Maguluri. Federated reinforcement
  learning: Linear speedup under Markovian sampling. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), volume 162, pp. 10997вҖ“11057, Baltimore, MD, USA, 2022. PMLR.
B. Ravi Kiran, Ibrahim Sobh, Victor Talpaert, Patrick Mannion, Ahmad A. Al Sallab, Senthil
  Yogamani, and Patrick PeМҒrez. Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A survey.
  IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23(6):4909вҖ“4926, 2022.
Anastasiia Koloskova, Sebastian U. Stich, and Martin Jaggi. Sharper convergence guarantees for
  asynchronous SGD for distributed and federated learning. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pp. 17202вҖ“17215, New Orleans, LA, USA, 28 Nov вҖ“ 9
  Dec 2022. PMLR.
Pawel Ladosz, Lilian Weng, Minwoo Kim, and Hyondong Oh. Exploration in deep reinforcement
  learning: A survey. Information Fusion, 85:1вҖ“22, 2022.
Guangchen Lan, Xiao-Yang Liu, Yijing Zhang, and Xiaodong Wang. Communication-efficient
  federated learning for resource-constrained edge devices. IEEE Transactions on Machine Learning
  in Communications and Networking, 1:210вҖ“224, 2023a.
Guangchen Lan, Han Wang, James Anderson, Christopher Brinton, and Vaneet Aggarwal. Improved
  communication efficiency in federated natural policy gradient via ADMM-based gradient updates.
  In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36,
  pp. 59873вҖ“59885, New Orleans, LA, USA, 10вҖ“16 Dec 2023b. Curran Associates, Inc.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yaxin Liang, Erdi Gao, Yuhan Ma, Qishi Zhan, Dan Sun, and Xingxin Gu. Contextual analysis
  using deep learning for sensitive information detection. In International Conference on Computers,
  Information Processing and Advanced Education (CIPAE), 2024.

Shicheng Liu and Minghui Zhu. Distributed inverse constrained reinforcement learning for multi-
  agent systems. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pp.
  33444вҖ“33456, 2022.

Shicheng Liu and Minghui Zhu. Learning multi-agent behaviors from distributed and streaming
  demonstrations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.

Xiao-Yang Liu, Zechu Li, Zhuoran Yang, Jiahao Zheng, Zhaoran Wang, Anwar Walid, Jian Guo,
  and Michael I Jordan. ElegantRL-Podracer: Scalable and elastic library for cloud-native deep
  reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems Workshop on Deep
  Reinforcement Learning, 2021.

Yanli Liu, Kaiqing Zhang, Tamer Basar, and Wotao Yin. An improved analysis of (variance-reduced)
  policy gradient and natural policy gradient methods. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, pp. 7624вҖ“7636. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.

Shiqing Long, Didi Yi, Mohan Jiang, Minghao Liu, Guanming Huang, and Junliang Du. Adaptive
  transaction sequence neural network for enhanced money laundering detection. In International
  Conference on Electronics and Devices, Computational Science (ICEDCS), 2024.

Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), volume 54 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 1273вҖ“1282, Ft. Lauderdale, FL, USA, 20вҖ“22 Apr 2017. PMLR.

Konstantin Mishchenko, Francis Bach, Mathieu Even, and Blake E Woodworth. Asynchronous
  SGD beats minibatch SGD under arbitrary delays. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pp. 420вҖ“433, New Orleans, LA, USA, 28 Nov вҖ“ 9 Dec 2022.
  PMLR.

Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1928вҖ“1937, New York, NY, USA,
  20вҖ“22 Jun 2016. PMLR.

Washim U Mondal and Vaneet Aggarwal. Improved sample complexity analysis of natural policy
 gradient algorithm with general parameterization for infinite horizon discounted reward Markov
 decision processes. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS),
 pp. 3097вҖ“3105. PMLR, 2024.

Viraaji Mothukuri, Reza M. Parizi, Seyedamin Pouriyeh, Yan Huang, Ali Dehghantanha, and Gautam
  Srivastava. A survey on security and privacy of federated learning. Future Generation Computer
  Systems, 115:619вҖ“640, 2021.

Solmaz Niknam, Harpreet S. Dhillon, and Jeffrey H. Reed. Federated learning for wireless communi-
  cations: Motivation, opportunities, and challenges. IEEE Communications Magazine, 58(6):46вҖ“51,
  2020.

OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Gray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton,
  Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and
  Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pp. 27730вҖ“27744, New Orleans,
  LA, USA, 28 Nov вҖ“ 9 Dec 2022. Curran Associates, Inc.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Matteo Papini, Damiano Binaghi, Giuseppe Canonaco, Matteo Pirotta, and Marcello Restelli. Stochas-
 tic variance-reduced policy gradient. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on
 Machine Learning (ICML), volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4026вҖ“
 4035, Stockholm, Sweden, 10вҖ“15 Jul 2018. PMLR.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. PyTorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), volume 32, Vancouver, Canada, 8 вҖ“ 14 Dec 2019. Curran Associates, Inc.
Joel B. Predd, Sanjeev B. Kulkarni, and H. Vincent Poor. Distributed learning in wireless sensor
  networks. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 23(4):56вҖ“69, 2006.
Foster Provost and Tom Fawcett. Data science and its relationship to big data and data-driven decision
  making. Big Data, 1(1):51вҖ“59, 2013.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1вҖ“8, 2021.
Sudeep Salgia and Yuejie Chi. The sample-communication complexity trade-off in federated Q-
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.16981, 2024.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional
  continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438,
  2018.
Han Shen, Kaiqing Zhang, Mingyi Hong, and Tianyi Chen. Towards understanding asynchronous
  advantage actor-critic: Convergence and linear speedup. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
  71:2579вҖ“2594, 2023.
Gemma Team and Google DeepMind. Gemma: Open models based on Gemini research and
  technology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08295, 2024.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5026вҖ“5033,
 Vilamoura-Algarve, Portugal, 2012.
Han Wang, Sihong He, Zhili Zhang, Fei Miao, and James Anderson. Momentum for the win: Col-
  laborative federated reinforcement learning across heterogeneous environments. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024a.
Han Wang, Aritra Mitra, Hamed Hassani, George J Pappas, and James Anderson. Federated TD
  learning with linear function approximation under environmental heterogeneity. Transactions on
 Machine Learning Research, 2024b. ISSN 2835-8856.
Lingxiao Wang, Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Neural policy gradient methods: Global
  optimality and rates of convergence. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2020.
Ronald J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine learning, 8:229вҖ“256, 1992.
Jiin Woo, Gauri Joshi, and Yuejie Chi. The blessing of heterogeneity in federated Q-learning: Linear
   speedup and beyond. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 37157вҖ“37216.
   PMLR, 2023.
Cong Xie, Sanmi Koyejo, and Indranil Gupta. Asynchronous federated optimization. In 12th Annual
  Workshop on Optimization for Machine Learning (OPT), 2020.
Zhijie Xie and Shenghui Song. FedKL: Tackling data heterogeneity in federated reinforcement
  learning by penalizing KL divergence. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 41(4):
  1227вҖ“1242, 2023.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Guojun Xiong, Shufan Wang, Daniel Jiang, and Jian Li. Personalized federated reinforcement learning
  with shared representations. In Deployable RL: From Research to Practice @ Reinforcement
  Learning Conference, 2024.
Pan Xu, Felicia Gao, and Quanquan Gu. Sample efficient policy gradient methods with recursive
  variance reduction. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Yifei Xu, Yuning Chen, Xumiao Zhang, Xianshang Lin, Pan Hu, Yunfei Ma, Songwu Lu, Wan
  Du, Zhuoqing Mao, Ennan Zhai, et al. CloudEval-YAML: A practical benchmark for cloud
  configuration generation. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 6:173вҖ“195, 2024.
Tong Yang, Shicong Cen, Yuting Wei, Yuxin Chen, and Yuejie Chi. Federated natural policy gradient
  and actor critic methods for multi-task reinforcement learning. In The Thirty-eighth Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.
Liangqi Yuan, Dong-Jun Han, Su Wang, Devesh Upadhyay, and Christopher G Brinton.
  Communication-efficient multimodal federated learning: Joint modality and client selection.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.16685, 2024.
Rui Yuan, Robert M. Gower, and Alessandro Lazaric. A general sample complexity analysis of vanilla
  policy gradient. In Proceedings of The 25th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics (AISTATS), volume 151 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3332вҖ“3380.
  PMLR, 28вҖ“30 Mar 2022.
Chenyu Zhang, Han Wang, Aritra Mitra, and James Anderson. Finite-time analysis of on-policy
  heterogeneous federated reinforcement learning. In The Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024a.
Daoan Zhang, Guangchen Lan, Dong-Jun Han, Wenlin Yao, Xiaoman Pan, Hongming Zhang,
  Mingxiao Li, Pengcheng Chen, Yu Dong, Christopher Brinton, and Jiebo Luo. SePPO: Semi-
  policy preference optimization for diffusion alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05255, 2024b.
Jingyuan Zhang, Ao Wang, Xiaolong Ma, Benjamin Carver, Nicholas John Newman, Ali Anwar,
   Lukas Rupprecht, Vasily Tarasov, Dimitrios Skourtis, Feng Yan, and Yue Cheng. Infinistore:
   Elastic serverless cloud storage. Proc. VLDB Endow., 16(7):1629вҖ“1642, 2023.
Kaiqing Zhang, Alec Koppel, Hao Zhu, and Tamer Basar. Global convergence of policy gradient
  methods to (almost) locally optimal policies. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 58(6):
  3586вҖ“3612, 2020.
Zhong Zheng, Haochen Zhang, and Lingzhou Xue. Federated Q-learning with reference-advantage
  decomposition: Almost optimal regret and logarithmic communication cost. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.18795, 2024.
Feng Zhu, Robert W Heath Jr, and Aritra Mitra. Towards fast rates for federated and multi-task
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.05291, 2024.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     S UPPLEMENTARY R ESULTS

In this section, we first compare the time complexity between the synchronous and the asynchronous
settings. We then list the experimental settings in Appendix A.2. At last, we have supplementary
experiments in Appendix A.3.


A.1    C OMPARISON TO THE S YNCHRONOUS S ETTING

Let T be the computation time during the entire training process to achieve a given number K of
cumulative communication rounds of all agents, where K = O(ПөвҲ’2.5 ) for a global convergence
according to Theorem 5.1.
In AFedPG, for agent i, the number of communication rounds is tTi . For all agents, the total number
  PN           PN
is i=1 tTi . As i=1 tTi = K, we have T = PNK 1 = O( PN1 1 ПөвҲ’2.5 ) as a harmonic average of
                                                 i=1 ti         i=1 ti
all agents.
                                                                      T         T
In FedPG, the number of global communication rounds on the server is tmax . As tmax =K
                                                                                     N , we have
     Ktmax       tmax вҲ’2.5          1    вҲ’2.5
T = N = O( N Пө             ) вүҘ O( PN 1 Пө      ) as the harmonic mean is always smaller or equal
                                       i=1 ti
to the maximum one.
The asynchronous FedPG achieves better time complexity than the synchronous approach regardless
of the delay pattern. The advantage is significant when tmax вү« tmin , which occurs in many practical
settings with heterogeneous computation powers across different agents. We illustrate the advantage
of AFedPG over synchronous FedPG in Figure 5. As the server only operates one simple summation,
without loss of generality, the time consumption at the server-side is negligible.
It is noticeable that we do not make any assumptions or requirements on tmax in the analysis of
AFedPG. In the extreme case, the slowest agent does not communicate with the server, and thus,
tmax is infinite. In this scenario, the time consumption of AFedPG does not hurt a lot, while the time
consumption of FedPG becomes infinite.


                                       Synchronous
               Agent 1
                                           1                    2
               Agent 2

                                                                    time
               Agent 1                     2                    5
               Agent 2             1            3           4
                                     Asynchronous

Figure 5: Comparison of time consumptions between synchronous and asynchronous approaches.
The circled numbers denote the indices of global steps.


A.2    S UPPLEMENTARY E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

In Section 6.1, we list the key experimental settings. We list the rest with details in this subsection.
The environmental details (the four MuJoCo tasks) are described in Table 2. The policies ПҖОё are
parameterized by fully connected multi-layer perceptions (MLPs) with settings listed in Table 3.


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Table 2: Detailed descriptions of the four tasks in the MuJoCo environment.
                                                          Action Space     State Space
                MuJoCo Tasks          Agent Types
                                                           Dimension       Dimension
                                       Three-link
                 Swimmer-v4                                     2                8
                                    swimming robot
                                   Two-dimensional
                  Hopper-v4                                     3               11
                                    one-legged robot
                                   Two-dimensional
                 Walker2D-v4                                    6               17
                                     bipedal robot
                                   Three-dimensional
                 Humanoid-v4                                    17             376
                                     bipedal robot


      Table 3: Hyperparameters of AFedPG and the MLP policy parameterization settings.
      Hyperparameter                               Setting
      Task                    Swimmer-v4       Hopper-v4      Walker2D-v4       Humanoid-v4
      MLP                       64 Г— 64        256 Г— 256       512 Г— 512       512 Г— 512 Г— 512
      Activation function        ReLU            ReLU            ReLU               ReLU
      Output function            Tanh            Tanh            Tanh               Tanh
      Learning rate (Оұ)        1 Г— 10вҲ’3        1 Г— 10вҲ’3        1 Г— 10вҲ’3           1 Г— 10вҲ’3
      Discount (Оі)                0.99            0.99            0.99               0.99
      Timesteps (T )             2048            1024            1024                512
      Iterations (K)            1 Г— 103         2 Г— 103         5 Г— 103           1.5 Г— 104
      Learning rate (О·)        3 Г— 10вҲ’4        1 Г— 10вҲ’4        5 Г— 10вҲ’5           1 Г— 10вҲ’5



A.3    S UPPLEMENTARY E XPERIMENTS

In this subsection, we show three experimental results to study the effect of computation heterogeneity,
communication overhead, and reward performances with long runs.
Effect of computation heterogeneity. We study the effect of the computation heterogeneity among
federated agents. The heterogeneity of computing powers is measured by the ratio ttmax  min
                                                                                            , and the
effect is measured by the speedup, which is the global time of FedPG divided by that of AFedPG.
Without loss of generality, we test the performances with (1) One straggler, which is one agent has
tmin time consumption, and all the other agents have tmax time consumption. This is the scenario
with the largest speedup. (2) One leader, which is one agent has tmax and the others have tmin . This
is the scenario with the smallest speedup.
In Figure 6, the results show that the speedup increases as the heterogeneity ratio ttmax min
                                                                                               increases.
With one leader, as more agents participate, the speedup approximately decreases to a quadratic
function w.r.t. the time heterogeneity ratio. With one straggler, the more agents that participate in the
training process, the higher speedup they achieve. The overall results indicate that AFedPG has the
potential to scale up to a very large RL system, particularly in scenarios with extreme stragglers (The
ratio is large: tmax вү« tmin ).
Communication overhead analysis. We compare the communication overhead of FedPG and
AFedPG in Figure 7. For neural network parameters, we use the standard format float32. The
communication overhead is measured by the number of transmitted bytes. The number of federated
agents N is set to 8. The MuJoCo task is Swimmer-v4. Overall, the commutative communication
overhead is similar. However, when we dive deep into the agent side and the server side separately in
fine-grained time, AFedPG shows advantages on both sides.
On the agent side, Figure 7 (a) shows the cumulative communication bytes during the training
process. The cumulative communication overhead is similar in FedPG and AFedPG. In AFedPG,
the faster ones, e.g., Agent 8, communicate more, and the slower ones, e.g., Agent 1, communicate


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               (a) With one straggler                                 (b) With one leader


Figure 6: The time complexity speedup of AFedPG compared to FedPG. N is the number of agents.
The x-axis is the heterogeneity ratio of computing power measured by ttmax
                                                                       min
                                                                           . The y-axis is the global
time of FedPG divided by that of AFedPG.


less, which is more reasonable than the equal allocation in the synchronous setting. The Agent 1, in
fact, commutes with the server during the training process, but it is insignificant in the plot with a log
scale.
The agents have heterogeneous resources, but equal allocation could bring too much burden for the
slower ones. In AFedPG, it naturally shifts these burdens to the faster ones considering the local
resources.
On the server side, we show the downlink communication overhead in a time window in Figure
7 (b). The time window is set as вҖңone global round in the synchronous settingвҖқ. At time step 5, it is
higher because two agents communicate with the server in a short time period. The total amounts of
AFedPG and FedPG are similar. In AFedPG, it is almost evenly distributed during the time span,
while in FedPG, the server has a huge burden with a peak. This makes the server in FedPG require
huge resources.


                (a) On the agent side                           (b) Downlink on the server side


Figure 7: The communication overhead of AFedPG compared to FedPG. The number of agents
is N = 8. (a) The cumulative communication overhead on the agent side. (b) The downlink
communication overhead in a time window on the server side.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Reward performances with long runs. To further enhance the results in Figure 3, we extend the
running time with more samples. Compared to the results in Figure 3, we increase the number of
samples by 5 times in each Mujoco task in Figure 8. The solid lines are averaged results over 5 runs
with random seeds from 0 to 4. The shadowed areas are confidence intervals with 95% confidence
level.
With enough samples, it basically achieves a similar reward performance for different numbers of
agents N in AFedPG. However, the more agents engage, the faster it achieves. Notably, the solid line
is the average result with 5 independent runs. With different numbers of agents, the shadowed area has
a large overlap. The more overlaps they have, the more runs that have similar reward performances
because of the inherent randomness (with different random seeds) in the deep reinforcement learning
tasks.
For the Humanoid-v4 task, though in some runs (shadowed area), PG achieves the optimal reward
performance, the average (solid line) performance of PG is relatively lower than the others in AFedPG.
The reason is that the Humanoid-v4 task has the largest state and action space, which makes the
hyperparameter tuning difficult, e.g., learning rates, and brings huge GPU hours. The hyperparameter
setting of PG is suboptimal here, as it has no contribution to our main claim. Recall that we aim to use
these experiments to verify the speedup effect in AFedPG in Table 1. The suboptimal hyperparameters
of PG in the Humanoid-v4 task do not influence the conclusion: The more agents in AFedPG, the
faster the optimal reward will be achieved.


                  (a) Swimmer-v4                                      (b) Hopper-v4


                 (c) Walker2D-v4                                    (d) Humanoid-v4

Figure 8: Reward performances of AFedPG (N = 2, 4, 8) and PG (N = 1) on various MuJoCo
environments, where N is the number of federated agents. The solid lines are averaged results
over 5 runs with random seeds from 0 to 4. The shadowed areas are confidence intervals with 95%
confidence level.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     T HEORETICAL P ROOFS
In this section, we give the assumptions in Appendix B.1, the technical lemmas in Appendix B.2, our
key lemmas in Appendix B.3, the proof of Theorem 5.1 (the global convergence) in Appendix B.4,
and the proof of Theorem 5.2 (the FOSP convergence) in Appendix B.5.

B.1    A SSUMPTIONS

In order to derive the global convergence rates, we make the following standard assumptions (Agarwal
et al., 2021a; Ding et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Papini et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2020) on policy gradients,
and rewards.
Assumption B.1.

      1. The score function is bounded as вҲҘвҲҮ log ПҖОё (a | s)вҲҘ вүӨ Mg , for all Оё вҲҲ Rd , s вҲҲ S, and
         a вҲҲ A.
      2. The score function is Mh -Lipschitz continuous. In other words, for all Оёi , Оёj вҲҲ Rd , s вҲҲ
         S, and a вҲҲ A, we have
                            вҲҮ log ПҖОёi (a | s) вҲ’ вҲҮ log ПҖОёj (a | s) вүӨ Mh вҲҘОёi вҲ’ Оёj вҲҘ .                      (12)

      3. The reward function is bounded as r(s, a) вҲҲ [0, R], for all s вҲҲ S, and a вҲҲ A.

These standard assumptions naturally state that the reward, the first-order, and the second-order
derivatives of the score function are not infinite, and they hold with common practical parametrization
methods, e.g., softmax policies. With function approximation ПҖОё , the approximation error may not be
0 in practice.
Thus, we follow previous works Liu et al. (2020); Agarwal et al. (2021a); Ding et al. (2022); Huang
et al. (2020) with an assumption on the expressivity of the policy parameterization class.
Assumption B.2. (Function approximation) вҲғ Пөbias вүҘ 0 s.t. for all Оё вҲҲ Rd , the transfer error satisfies
                                                                    2
                  E[ AПҖОё (s, a) вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ Оі)uвӢҶ (Оё)вҠӨ вҲҮ log ПҖОё (a | s) ] вүӨ Пөbias ,                     (13)

where uвӢҶ (Оё) := FПҒ (Оё)вҖ  вҲҮJ(Оё), and FПҒ (Оё)вҖ  is the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse of the Fisher matrix
FПҒ .

It means that the parameterized policy ПҖОё makes the advantage function AПҖОё (s, a) approximated by
the score function вҲҮ log ПҖОё (a | s) as the features. This assumption is widely used with Fisher-non-
degenerate parameterization. Пөbias can be very small with rich neural network parameterization, and
0 with a soft-max parameterization (Wang et al., 2020).
To achieve the global convergence, we make a standard assumption on the Fisher information matrix
(Liu et al., 2020; Ding et al., 2022; Lan et al., 2023b).
Assumption B.3. (Positive definite) For all Оё вҲҲ Rd , there exists a constant ВөF > 0 s.t. the Fisher
information matrix FПҒ (Оё) induced by the policy ПҖОё and the initial state distribution ПҒ satisfies
                                                 FПҒ (Оё) вүҪ ВөF В· I,                                        (14)
where I вҲҲ RdГ—d is an identity matrix.

For any two symmetric matrices A and B with the same dimension, A вүҪ B denotes that the
eigenvalues of A вҲ’ B are greater or equal to zero.

B.2    T ECHNICAL L EMMAS

Lemma B.4. For arbitrary n vectors {ai вҲҲ Rd }ni=1 , we have
                                           n
                                           X                 n
                                                             X
                                       вҲҘ         ai вҲҘ2 вүӨ n         вҲҘai вҲҘ2 .                              (15)
                                           i=1               i=1


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       c p
Lemma B.5. Let Оұk = ( t+c ) . вҲҖp вҲҲ [0, 1] and c вүҘ 1, we have
                                                                     Оұk+1
                                                    1 вҲ’ Оұk+1 вүӨ            .                              (16)
                                                                      Оұk

Proof.
                                                                      c
                                           1 вҲ’ Оұk+1 = 1 вҲ’ (              )p
                                                                   t+1+c
                                                                     1
                                                            вүӨ1вҲ’                                          (17)
                                                                  t+1+c
                                                              Оұk+1
                                                            вүӨ      .
                                                               Оұk
Straightforwardly, we have
                                               KвҲ’1
                                               Y                       ОұK
                                                      (1 вҲ’ Оұi+1 ) вүӨ       .                              (18)
                                                                       Оұk
                                                i=k



                       1 p                 1 q
Lemma B.6. Let Оұk = ( k+1 ) and О·k = О·0 ( k+1 ) . вҲҖp вҲҲ [0, 1), q вүҘ 0 and О·0 вүҘ 0, we have
                                     KвҲ’1            KвҲ’1
                                     X              Y                           О·K
                                               О·k         (1 вҲ’ Оұi ) вүӨ c(p, q)      ,                     (19)
                                                                                ОұK
                                     k=0            i=k+1

                         2qвҲ’p               p 1вҲ’p

where c(p, q) :=         1вҲ’p a exp (1 вҲ’ p)2 a                   is a constant with specified p and q, and a =
                      1               1
                             2(qвҲ’p) 1вҲ’p
              q

max      ( (1вҲ’p)2 p)
                     1вҲ’p , (
                             (1вҲ’p)2 )     .

B.3      K EY L EMMAS

In this subsection, we list four useful (key) lemmas to construct the proofs of Theorem 5.1 and
Theorem 5.2.
Under Assumption B.1 on score functions, the following lemma holds based on the results (Lemma
5.4) in Zhang et al. (2020).
Lemma B.7. The gradient of the expected return is Lg -continuous and Lh -smooth as follows
                                       вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(ОёвҖІ )вҲҘ вүӨ Lg вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ,
                                                                                                         (20)
                                     вҲҘвҲҮ2 J(Оё) вҲ’ вҲҮ2 J(ОёвҖІ )вҲҘ вүӨ Lh вҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ,
                R(Mg2 +Mh )          RMg3 (1+Оі)   RMg Mh            вҲ’1

where Lg :=       (1вҲ’Оі)2    and Lh := (1вҲ’Оі) 3   + (1вҲ’Оі)2 + O (1 вҲ’ Оі)     .

Under Assumption B.1, B.2 and B.3, we utilize the result (Lemma 4.7) in Ding et al. (2022) as the
Lemma B.8.
Lemma B.8. (Relaxed weak gradient domination) Under Assumptions B.1, B.2 and B.3, it holds that
                                             p
                           вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оё)вҲҘ + Пөg вүҘ      2Вө(J вӢҶ вҲ’ J(Оё)),                             (21)
                   вҲҡ
               Вө       Пө              Вө2
where Пөg = MFg (1вҲ’Оі)
                 bias
                      and Вө = 2MF 2 .
                                           g


Based on Lemma B.7, we derive our milestone (new), the ascent lemma with delayed updates, as
follows:
Lemma B.9. (Ascent Lemma with Delay) Under Assumptions B.1, it holds that
                                                1              8           Lg 2
                           вҲ’J(Оёk+1 ) вүӨ вҲ’J(Оёk ) вҲ’ О·k вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ + О·k вҲҘek вҲҘ +   О· ,                         (22)
                                                3              3           2 k
where ek := dkвҲ’Оҙk вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk ).


                                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This ascent lemma is specific to the asynchronous setting, which constructs the lower bound for the
global increment, J(Оёk+1 ) вҲ’ J(Оёk ), through the normalized policy gradients and our updating rules
with delay Оҙk .

Proof. With the smoothness of the expected return J(Оё) and the updating rule, we have
                                                                  Lg
                вҲ’J(Оёk+1 ) вүӨ вҲ’J(Оёk ) вҲ’ вҹЁвҲҮJ(Оёk ), Оёk+1 вҲ’ Оёk вҹ© +        вҲҘОёk+1 вҲ’ Оёk вҲҘ2
                                                                   2
                                                                                                     (23)
                                               вҹЁвҲҮJ(Оёk ), dkвҲ’Оҙk вҹ© Lg 2
                                = вҲ’J(Оёk ) вҲ’ О·k                  +   О· .
                                                  вҲҘdkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҘ        2 k

If вҲҘek вҲҘ вүӨ 12 вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ, we have

                            вҹЁвҲҮJ(Оёk ), dkвҲ’Оҙk вҹ©     вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ2 + вҹЁвҲҮJ(Оёk ), ek вҹ©
                        вҲ’                     = вҲ’
                               вҲҘdkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҘ                   вҲҘdkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҘ
                                                вҲ’вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘвҲҘek вҲҘ
                                              вүӨ
                                                          вҲҘdkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҘ
                                                                                                     (24)
                                                    вҲ’вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ2 + 21 вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ2
                                                  вүӨ
                                                       вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ + вҲҘek вҲҘ
                                                     1
                                                  вүӨ вҲ’ вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ.
                                                     3

If вҲҘek вҲҘ вүҘ 21 вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ, we have
                             вҹЁвҲҮJ(Оёk ), dkвҲ’Оҙk вҹ©
                         вҲ’                     вүӨ вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ
                                вҲҘdkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҘ
                                                  1           4                                      (25)
                                               = вҲ’ вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ + вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ
                                                  3           3
                                                  1           8
                                               вүӨ вҲ’ вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ + вҲҘek вҲҘ.
                                                  3           3

Combining these two conditions, and plugging the result into equation 23, the lemma can be proved
as follows
                                             вҹЁвҲҮJ(Оёk ), dkвҲ’Оҙk вҹ© Lg 2
                 вҲ’J(Оёk+1 ) вүӨ вҲ’J(Оёk ) вҲ’ О·k                       +     О·
                                                  вҲҘdkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҘ          2 k
                                                                                              (26)
                                          1                   8            Lg 2
                            вүӨ вҲ’J(Оёk ) вҲ’ О·k вҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ + О·k вҲҘek вҲҘ +             О·k .
                                          3                   3            2


Next, we construct the relationship between the average concurrency ПүМ„ and the average delay ОҙМ„ in
Lemma B.10. This lemma gives the boundary (our result) of delays as a corollary of the result in
Koloskova et al. (2022).
Lemma B.10. The average delay ОҙМ„ depends on the average concurrency ПүМ„, and they can be upper
bounded as
                                     K +1
                           ОҙМ„ =                 ПүМ„ вүӨ ПүМ„ вүӨ N.                             (27)
                                  K вҲ’ 1 + |CK |

Proof. Recall that {Оҙki }iвҲҲCk \{jk } is the set of delays at the k-th global steps. After one global step,
the number of cumulative delays over all agents increases by the current concurrency. Thus, we have
the following connection
                  k
                  X                 X                     kвҲ’1
                                                          X                X
                                                  i
                        Оҙi +                     Оҙk+1 =          Оҙi +                 Оҙki + Пүk+1 .   (28)
                  i=0          iвҲҲCk+1 \{jk+1 }             i=0          iвҲҲCk \{jk }


                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We note that there is no delay at the initial step (0-th iteration) of the algorithm. Therefore, we have
Оҙ0i = 0 for all agents. Unrolling the above expression, at the K-th step, we have
                       KвҲ’1
                       X               X                 K
                                                         X
                                                   i
                             Оҙi +                 ОҙK =         Пүk+1 = (K + 1)ПүМ„.                   (29)
                       i=0          iвҲҲCK \{jK }          i=0

According to equation 7 and |CK | вүҘ 2, we achieve
                                              K +1
                                    ОҙМ„ =                 ПүМ„ вүӨ ПүМ„ вүӨ N.                              (30)
                                           K вҲ’ 1 + |CK |


In practice, we need to use all the resources to speed up the training process. Thus, all agents engage
in training, and ПүМ„ = Пүmax = N . Since the maximum concurrency is equal to the number of agents
N , we have the upper boundary of the average delay as ОҙМ„ вүӨ Пүmax вүӨ N .
Notably, we do not make any assumption on the largest delay Оҙmax , while we achieve the upper
boundary of the average delay ОҙМ„.

B.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.1 (G LOBAL C ONVERGENCE R ATE )

Under Assumption B.1 and Assumption B.2, we derive the global convergence rate of the proposed
AFedPG.
First, we denote the difference between the policy gradient estimation g(e
                                                                         П„k , Оёek ) and the true policy
gradient as
                                            П„k , Оёek ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёek ),
                                    Оҫk := g(e                                                      (31)
and the expectation of the norm is bounded by Пғg .
Second, according to the updating rules in Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 , we expand the error term
in Lemma B.9 as follows
     ek = (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )dkвҲ’1вҲ’ОҙkвҲ’1 вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk ) + ОұkвҲ’Оҙk g(e    П„kвҲ’Оҙk , ОёekвҲ’Оҙk )

        = (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ) dkвҲ’1вҲ’ОҙkвҲ’1 вҲ’ вҲҮJ(ОёkвҲ’1 ) + (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ) вҲҮJ(ОёkвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk )

          + ОұkвҲ’Оҙk g(e  П„kвҲ’Оҙk , ОёekвҲ’Оҙk ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk )

        = ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОҫkвҲ’Оҙk + (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )ekвҲ’1 + (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ) вҲҮJ(ОёkвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk )

          + ОұkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҮJ(ОёekвҲ’Оҙk ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk )

        = ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОҫkвҲ’Оҙk + (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )ekвҲ’1 + (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ) вҲҮJ(ОёkвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk )

          + ОұkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҮJ(ОёekвҲ’Оҙk ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёek ) + ОұkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҮJ(Оёek ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk )
                                                                                              (32)
        = ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОҫkвҲ’Оҙk + (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )ekвҲ’1 + ОұkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҮJ(ОёekвҲ’Оҙk ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёek )
          + (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ) вҲҮJ(ОёkвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk ) + вҲҮ2 J(Оёk )(ОёkвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оёk )


          + ОұkвҲ’Оҙ вҲҮJ(Оёek ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk ) + вҲҮ2 J(Оёk )(ОёkвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оёk )

                   k

           вҲ’(1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )вҲҮ2 J(Оёk )(ОёkвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оёk ) вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҮ2 J(Оёk )(Оёek вҲ’ Оёk )
         8
         = ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОҫkвҲ’Оҙk + (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )ekвҲ’1 + ОұkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҮJ(ОёekвҲ’Оҙk ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёek )
           + (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ) вҲҮJ(ОёkвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk ) + вҲҮ2 J(Оёk )(ОёkвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оёk )


           + ОұkвҲ’Оҙ вҲҮJ(Оёek ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk ) + вҲҮ2 J(Оёk )(ОёkвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оёk ) .

                   k

Thus, the error term ek can be written in a recursive way (contains ekвҲ’1 ) with serval terms that
contain policy gradients. We aim to derive the upper boundary for each term at the next step.
Remark: The Hessian correction terms (in blue) are equal to 0 according to our updating rules
(delay-adaptive lookahead update) in Step 8 of Algorithm 1. We design this technique to cancel out
the second-order terms, and thus achieve the desired convergence rate. Without our technique, it
would be hard to bound the above errors.


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, we denote each term in equation 32 separately as follows



                         Ak := вҲҮJ(ОёkвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk ) + вҲҮ2 J(Оёk )(ОёkвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оёk ),
                         Bk := вҲҮJ(Оёek ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёk ) + вҲҮ2 J(Оёk )(ОёkвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оёk ),                             (33)
                         Ck := вҲҮJ(ОёekвҲ’Оҙk ) вҲ’ вҲҮJ(Оёek ).


Now, we start to bound each term. With the smoothness of the expected discounted return function in
Lemma B.7 and the non-increasing learning rates, we have



            вҲҘAk вҲҘ вүӨ Lh вҲҘОёkвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оёk вҲҘ2 = Lh О·kвҲ’1
                                           2
                                               ,
                                                               2
                                         (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ) 2
            вҲҘBk вҲҘ вүӨ Lh вҲҘОёek вҲ’ Оёk вҲҘ2 = Lh      2       О·kвҲ’1 ,
                                            ОұkвҲ’Оҙ k

             вҲҘCk вҲҘ вүӨ Lg вҲҘОёekвҲ’Оҙk вҲ’ Оёek вҲҘ
                               kвҲ’1
                               X
                    = Lg                 Оёei+1 вҲ’ Оёei
                             i=kвҲ’Оҙk
                              kвҲ’1
                              X
                    вүӨ Lg             вҲҘОёei+1 вҲ’ Оёei вҲҘ
                            i=kвҲ’Оҙk
                              kвҲ’1
                              X              1                    1 вҲ’ ОұiвҲ’Оҙi
                    = Lg                           (Оёi+1 вҲ’ Оёi ) +           (Оёi вҲ’ ОёiвҲ’1 )               (34)
                                         Оұi+1вҲ’Оҙi+1                  ОұiвҲ’Оҙi
                            i=kвҲ’Оҙk
                              kвҲ’1
                              X              1                    1 вҲ’ ОұiвҲ’Оҙi
                    вүӨ Lg                           (Оёi+1 вҲ’ Оёi ) +           (Оёi вҲ’ ОёiвҲ’1 )
                                         Оұi+1вҲ’Оҙi+1                  ОұiвҲ’Оҙi
                            i=kвҲ’Оҙk
                              kвҲ’1
                              X              1          1 вҲ’ ОұiвҲ’Оҙi
                    = Lg             (             О·i +           О·iвҲ’1 )
                                         Оұi+1вҲ’Оҙi+1        ОұiвҲ’Оҙi
                            i=kвҲ’Оҙk
                              kвҲ’1
                              X            2
                    вүӨ Lg             (          О·kвҲ’Оҙk )
                                         ОұkвҲ’1
                            i=kвҲ’Оҙk
                               2О·kвҲ’Оҙk
                    = Оҙ k Lg          ,
                                ОұkвҲ’1



where the equalities are simple plugins according to the updating rules in Algorithm 1. The last step
in equation 34 happens, because there is no index i inside the summation operation, and it sums a
constant for Оҙk times.
                   QK
We denote ОІk := i=k+1 (1 вҲ’ ОұiвҲ’Оҙi ) with ОІK = 1. Next, unrolling the recursion equation 32, we
have the error at the K-th step as follows



                   K
                   X                            K
                                                X                         K
                                                                          X
  e K = ОІ0 e 0 +         ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОІk ОҫkвҲ’Оҙk +           (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )ОІk Ak +         ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОІk (Bk + Ck ).   (35)
                   k=1                          k=1                       k=1


                                                          25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                1             4     1
Choose learning rates Оұk = ( k+1  ) 5 and О·k = О·0 k+1  , where О·0 is a constant and we will show the
value later. Using JensenвҖҷs inequality and technical lemmas, we achieve the following bound


                                    пЈ« пЈ®                                          2
                                                                                     пЈ№пЈ¶ 12
                                             K
                                             X                                                 K
                                                                                               X
 E[вҲҘeK вҲҘ] вүӨ ОІ0 E[вҲҘe0 вҲҘ] + пЈӯE пЈ°                      ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОІk ОҫkвҲ’Оҙk                   пЈ»пЈё +               (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )ОІk E[вҲҘAk вҲҘ]
                                             k=1                                               k=1
                      K
                      X
                  +         ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОІk (E[вҲҘBk вҲҘ] + E[вҲҘCk вҲҘ])
                      k=1

                                       K
                                                                        !1   K
                                       X                    h          i 2 X
                                              2                      2
             вүӨ ОІ0 E[вҲҘe0 вҲҘ] +                 ОұkвҲ’Оҙ ОІ2E
                                                 k k
                                                             вҲҘОҫkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҘ      +   (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )ОІk E[вҲҘAk вҲҘ]
                                       k=1                                                    k=1
                      K
                      X
                  +         ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОІk (E[вҲҘBk вҲҘ] + E[вҲҘCk вҲҘ])
                      k=1

                                K
                                                                          ! 12               K
             34                 X                   h
                                                                  2
                                                                      i                      X
                                       2
             вүӨ ОІ0 Пғ g +               ОұkвҲ’Оҙ ОІ 2 E вҲҘОҫkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҘ
                                          k k
                                                                                 + Lh                            2
                                                                                                 (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )ОІk О·kвҲ’1
                                k=1                                                          k=1
                         K                                                       K
                         X                             2
                                                    2 О·kвҲ’1
                                                                                 X                   О·2                           (36)
                  + Lh          ОІk (1 вҲ’ ОұkвҲ’Оҙk )                  + 2Lg                    ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОІk Оҙk kвҲ’Оҙk
                                                         ОұkвҲ’Оҙk                                       ОұkвҲ’1
                         k=1                                                     k=1

                                K
                                                                          ! 12               K           2
                                X
                                       2     2
                                                 h
                                                           2
                                                             i                               X          О·kвҲ’1
             вүӨ ОІ0 Пғ g +               ОұkвҲ’Оҙ ОІ
                                          k k
                                               E  вҲҘОҫkвҲ’Оҙk вҲҘ                       + Lh              ОІk
                                                                                                        ОұkвҲ’Оҙk
                                k=1                                                          k=1
                            K                      2
                            X                     О·kвҲ’Оҙ k
                  + 2Lg           ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОІk Оҙk
                                                  ОұkвҲ’1
                            k=1

                                K
                                                  ! 12                K                           K
                                X                                     X                2
                                                                                      О·kвҲ’1        X            О·2
             вүӨ ОІ0 Пғ g +                2
                                      ОұkвҲ’Оҙ ОІ2
                                          k k
                                                         Пғg + Lh                 ОІk         + 2Lg   ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОІk Оҙk kвҲ’Оҙk
                                                                                      ОұkвҲ’Оҙk                    ОұkвҲ’1
                                k=1                                   k=1                                  k=1

                                K
                                                  ! 12                     K                             K
                                X                                9Lh       X              О·k2            X              О·2
             вүӨ ОІ0 Пғ g +                2
                                      ОұkвҲ’Оҙ ОІ2
                                          k k
                                                         Пғg +                        ОІk       + 2Lg          ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОІk Оҙk kвҲ’Оҙk
                                                                  4                       Оұk                            ОұkвҲ’1
                                k=1                                     k=1k=1
                                            вҲҡ               2           2
                  37,39,40,41                       9     О·            О·K
                       вүӨ          ОұK Пғg + c1 ОұK Пғg + c2 Lh K2 + c3 Lg Оұ1.75 ОҙМ„,
                                                    4     ОұK           K


             q                                         q
where c1 := 2 c( 45 , 45 ), c2 := c( 45 , 65 ), c3 := 8 c( 45 , 16
                                                                 5 ) are constants, and the values of c(В·, В·) are
defined in Lemma B.6.
Notably, as we state in the last paragraph in Section 5, ti is pre-determined by the computation
resource at agent i and is fixed. Thus, the delay Оҙk is pre-determined by the system. It is not a random
variable, but unknown until given the exact system setting. This allows us to derive the first inequality
in equation 36. This pre-determined property is also suitable for all the derivations below.


                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We explain the boundary derivation details here. We first derive the first term of the boundary in
equation 36 as follows
                                            K
                                            Y
                                    ОІ0 =       (1 вҲ’ ОұiвҲ’Оҙi )
                                                   i=1
                                                   K
                                                   Y
                                              вүӨ         (1 вҲ’ Оұi )
                                                   i=1
                                                   KвҲ’1                                           (37)
                                                   Y
                                              =           (1 вҲ’ Оұi+1 )
                                                    i=0
                                              18 ОұK
                                              вүӨ
                                                Оұ0
                                              = ОұK .
In the training process, at step k, when an agent sends the update to the server, as long as the agent
communicates with the server during the last half training process, the delay Оҙk вүӨ k2 . This becomes
almost certain when k is large and k is usually much larger than the upper bound of the currency N .
Thus, we have
                                                  1       4
                                  ОұkвҲ’Оҙk = (              )5
                                             k + 1 вҲ’ Оҙk
                                               1    4     k+1         4
                                         =(        )5 (             )5
                                             k+1        k + 1 вҲ’ Оҙk
                                               1    4     k+1        4                            (38)
                                         вүӨ(        )5 (            )5
                                             k+1        k + 1 вҲ’ k2
                                                1     4
                                         вүӨ 2(       )5
                                              k+1
                                         = 2Оұk .
We then derive the second term of the boundary in equation 36 as follows
                   K                   K
                   X             38    X
                          2
                         ОұkвҲ’Оҙ ОІ2 вүӨ 4
                             k k
                                             Оұk2 ОІk2
                   k=1                 k=1
                                       K
                                       X            K
                                                    Y                        K
                                                                             Y
                                 =4          Оұk2          (1 вҲ’ ОұiвҲ’Оҙi )           (1 вҲ’ ОұiвҲ’Оҙi )
                                       k=1         i=k+1                    i=k+1
                                       K
                                       X            K
                                                    Y                   K
                                                                        Y
                                 вүӨ4          Оұk2          (1 вҲ’ Оұi )           (1 вҲ’ Оұi )
                                       k=1         i=k+1              i=k+1
                                       K
                                       X           KвҲ’1
                                                   Y                  KвҲ’1
                                                                      Y
                                 вүӨ4          Оұk2          (1 вҲ’ Оұi )         (1 вҲ’ Оұi+1 )
                                       k=1         i=k+1              i=k
                                       K           KвҲ’1                                           (39)
                                 18    X           Y                  ОұK
                                 вүӨ4          Оұk2          (1 вҲ’ Оұi )
                                                                      Оұk
                                       k=1         i=k+1
                                         K
                                         X               KвҲ’1
                                                         Y
                                 = 4ОұK             Оұk           (1 вҲ’ Оұi )
                                         k=1            i=k+1
                                         KвҲ’1
                                         X                KвҲ’1
                                                          Y
                                 вүӨ 4ОұK             Оұk           (1 вҲ’ Оұi )
                                             k=0         i=k+1
                                 19      4 4 ОұK
                                 вүӨ 4ОұK c( , )
                                         5 5 ОұK
                                         4 4
                                 = 4ОұK c( , ).
                                         5 5

                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, we derive the third term of the boundary in equation 36 as follows


                         K                     K
                         X О·2                  X             1    6
                                k
                                    ОІk = О·02            (       ) 5 ОІk
                               Оұk                           k+1
                         k=1                   k=1
                                               K                   K
                                               X             1   6
                                                                   Y
                                       = О·02            (       )5   (1 вҲ’ ОұiвҲ’Оҙi )
                                                            k+1
                                               k=1                  i=k+1
                                               K                   K
                                               X             1   6
                                                                   Y
                                       вүӨ О·02            (       )5   (1 вҲ’ Оұi )
                                                            k+1
                                               k=1                  i=k+1
                                               K                   KвҲ’1
                                               X             1   6
                                                                   Y                               (40)
                                       вүӨ О·02            (       )5     (1 вҲ’ Оұi )
                                                            k+1
                                               k=1                  i=k+1
                                               KвҲ’1                 KвҲ’1
                                               X             1   6
                                                                   Y
                                       вүӨ О·02            (       )5     (1 вҲ’ Оұi )
                                                            k+1
                                                  k=0                i=k+1
                                       19      4 6   1   2
                                       вүӨ О·02 c( , )(    )5
                                               5 5 K +1
                                                   2
                                            4 6 О·K
                                       = c( , ) 2 .
                                            5 5 ОұK


At last, we derive the fourth term of the boundary in equation 36. We use CauchyвҖ“Schwarz inequality
and the fact that the second norm of a vector is always equal or smaller than the first norm.


            K                  2      K
            X                 О·kвҲ’Оҙ    X
                                         2
                  ОұkвҲ’Оҙk ОІk Оҙk     k
                                    вүӨ   О·kвҲ’Оҙ  ОІ Оҙ
                                             k k k
                              ОұkвҲ’1
            k=1                             k=1
                                            K
                                            X                 k + 1  2
                                      =           О·k2                  ОІk Оҙ k
                                            k=1
                                                            k + 1 вҲ’ k2
                                                  K
                                                  X           1  2
                                      вүӨ 4О·02                       ОІk Оҙ k
                                                             k+1
                                                  k=1

                                                    K             K
                                                                         ! 12
                                                    1
                                                    X   4       X
                                      вүӨ 4О·02              ОІk2 В·      Оҙk2
                                                   k+1
                                              k=1               k=1

                                                K
                                                              ! 21 K
                                              X   1  4             X
                                      вүӨ 4О·02              ОІk2           Оҙk
                                                   k+1
                                              k=1                  k=1

                                                  K
                                                                  ! 12
                                           2
                                                  X    1  4 2
                                      вүӨ 4О·0 K ОҙМ„              ОІk
                                                      k+1
                                                            k=1

                                                            K              K
                                                                                            ! 12
                                                            X      1  4    Y
                                      вүӨ 4О·02 K ОҙМ„                       ОІk   (1 вҲ’ ОұiвҲ’Оҙi )
                                                                  k+1
                                                            k=1                 i=k+1


                                                             28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      K
                                                                  ! 12
                                      X       1  4 ОұK
                        вүӨ 4О·02 K ОҙМ„               ОІk
                                             k+1     Оұk
                                      k=1

                                            K
                                                                   ! 21
                                            X      1   16
                                                       5
                        = 4О·02 K ОҙМ„ ОұK                    ОІk
                                                  k+1
                                            k=1

                                            K             K
                                                                        ! 12
                                            X      1   16
                                                       5
                                                          Y
                        = 4О·02 K ОҙМ„ ОұK                      (1 вҲ’ ОұiвҲ’Оҙi )
                                                  k+1
                                            k=1                   i=k+1

                                            K             K
                                                                                      ! 12
                                            X      1   16
                                                       5
                                                          Y
                        вүӨ 4О·02 K ОҙМ„ ОұK                      (1 вҲ’ Оұi )
                                                  k+1
                                            k=1                   i=k+1
                                                                                      ! 12           (41)
                                            K                16   KвҲ’1
                                            X      1         5
                                                                  Y
                        вүӨ 4О·02 K ОҙМ„ ОұK                                    (1 вҲ’ Оұi )
                                                  k+1
                                            k=1                   i=k+1
                                                              12
                       19                 4 16     1     12
                        вүӨ 4О·02 K ОҙМ„ ОұK c( , )(          )5
                                          5 5 K +1
                                   r
                                       4 16     1     8
                        вүӨ 4О·02 K ОҙМ„ c( , )(          )5
                                       5 5 K +1
                                r
                             2       4 16     1    3
                        вүӨ 4О·0 ОҙМ„ c( , )(          )5
                                     5 5 K +1
                             r
                                           2
                                   4 16 О·K
                        = 4ОҙМ„ c( , ) 1.75 .
                                   5 5 ОұK

Now, we derive the final convergence rate. After plugging the result into Lemma B.9 and using
Lemma B.8 (Ascent Lemma with Delay), we achieve the following inequality
                              вҲҡ
     вӢҶ                          2ВөО·k                    О·k        8               Lg 2
    J вҲ’ E[J(Оёk+1 )] вүӨ (1 вҲ’           ) J вӢҶ вҲ’ E[J(Оёk )] + Пөg + О·k E[вҲҘek вҲҘ] +         О·
                              вҲҡ  3                        3       3               2 k
                      36        2ВөО·k                    О·k        Lg 2
                      вүӨ (1 вҲ’         ) J вӢҶ вҲ’ E[J(Оёk )] + Пөg +         О·                  (42)
                                 3                        3        2 k
                           8               вҲҡ         9      О·2           О·k2
                         + О·k Оұk Пғg + c1 Оұk Пғg + c2 Lh k2 + c3 Lg 1.75       ОҙМ„ .
                           3                         4      Оұk          Оұk
Unrolling this recursion, we have
                               О·0      J вӢҶ вҲ’ E[J(Оё0 )]       8О·03  Lg            О·02 Lg
           J вӢҶ вҲ’ E[J(ОёK )] вүӨ      Пөg +                 +  c3               ОҙМ„ +
                               3          (K + 1)2            3 (K + 1) 53        2 K +1
                                                                                                     (43)
                                  8О·0     Пғg          8О·0     Пғg              3     Lh
                               +              4 + c1              2 + 6c2 О·0            2 .
                                   3 (K + 1) 5         3 (K + 1) 5              (K + 1) 5

Note that, introduced in Lemma B.7, the discount factor Оі is contained in Lg = O (1 вҲ’ Оі)вҲ’2 and


Lh = O (1 вҲ’ Оі)вҲ’3 . Comparing with the definition of Пөg in Lemma B.8, we choose О·0 = 3Вө
                                                                                          F
                                                                                         Mg for
                                                                                             вҲҡ
                                                                                                 Пө
the criteria. Thus, to satisfy the global convergence criterion J вӢҶ вҲ’ E[J(ОёK )] вүӨ Пө + 1вҲ’Оіbias
                                                                                              , we have
                                      вҲ’2.5
the iteration complexity K = O(Пө           ). In our algorithms, the sample complexity is equal to the
iteration complexity, which is also O(ПөвҲ’2.5 ).

B.5   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2 (FOSP C ONVERGENCE R ATE )

Under Assumption B.1 and Assumption B.3, we derive the first-order stationary convergence rate of
AFedPG. Notably, the FOSP convergence does not require Assumption B.2, which makes assumptions
on the neural network approximation error.


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


First, we denote the average of gradient expectations as
                                               PK
                                                      О·k EвҲҘвҲҮJ(Оёk )вҲҘ
                              EвҲҘвҲҮJ(ОёМ„K )вҲҘ := k=1PK                  .                                  (44)
                                                         k=1 О·k

Next, rearranging the terms in Lemma B.9 (Ascent Lemma with Delay) and summing up the inequality,
we achieve the inequality below
                                                                                     K
                              3                                      8               X
              EвҲҘвҲҮJ(ОёМ„K )вҲҘ вүӨ PK                   J вӢҶ вҲ’ E[J(Оё0 )] + PK                    О·k E[вҲҘek вҲҘ]
                                    k=1 О·k                               k=1 О·k k=1
                                                                                                       (45)
                                                    K
                                         3Lg        X
                                +       PK              О·k2 .
                                    2    k=1 О·k k=1

                              1      4              1           5
Choose learning rates Оұk = ( k+1 ) 7 and О·k = О·0 ( k+1 ) 7 . Plug in the result into equation 36 that we
have shown in Appendix B.4, we have
                             3(J вӢҶ вҲ’ E[J(Оё0 )])                     Lg               3О·0 Lg
           EвҲҘвҲҮJ(ОёМ„K )вҲҘ вүӨ                     2       + 16c3 О·03           3   ОҙМ„ +            5
                                (K + 1)      7          (K + 1)      (K + 1) 7
                                                                          7
                                                                                                       (46)
                                       Пғg                  Пғg             3    Lh
                             + 16О·0         4 + 16c1 О·0         2 + 36c2 О·0         2 .
                                    (K + 1) 7           (K + 1) 7           (K + 1) 7

Thus, to satisfy the FOSP convergence criterion EвҲҘвҲҮJ(ОёМ„K )вҲҘ вүӨ Пө, we have the iteration complexity
K = O(ПөвҲ’3.5 ). In our algorithms, the sample complexity is equal to the iteration complexity, which
is also O(ПөвҲ’3.5 ).
Notably, this result does not rely on Lemma B.8 and Assumption B.1. The norm of the average
gradient is approaching an arbitrarily small value during the training process, regardless of the
function approximation error Пөbias .


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     F URTHER D ISCUSSIONS
C.1   C OMPARISON WITH P REVIOUS W ORKS

Comparison with (Shen et al., 2023). We first acknowledge the theoretical contribution of this
pioneer work. However, there are several limitations and differences.
1. (Different RL Algorithm Class) Instead of PG, Shen et al. (2023) is an actor-critic (AC) method
with extra value networks, which requires much more computation and memory cost compared to the
pure policy gradient (PG) method. Thus, the fine-tuning of Gemini (Team & DeepMind, 2024) and
GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) uses PG methods instead of AC methods.
2. (General Function Parameterization) Shen et al. (2023) only has Linear Parameterization (Deep
RL is not included.) for the global convergence analysis, which has limited practical meaning. With a
General Function Parametrization, e.g., neural networks (Deep RL), there is no such a result. We
consider a general and practical setting with a General Function Parameterization in our work.
3. (Convergence Performance) Even in the single-agent setting (without federated agents), the SOTA
result of the AC method is O(ПөвҲ’3 ) (Gaur et al., 2024) and the previous approach is O(ПөвҲ’6 ) (Fu
et al., 2021), which is still worse than our O(ПөвҲ’2.5 ). In the federated setting, there is no result that
achieves O(ПөвҲ’3 ) for AC methods. Moreover, with a general function parameterization, we compare
the performances of their A3C in Figure 4, which is much worse.
4. (Assumptions) Shen et al. (2023) relies on a strong and unpractical assumption, their Assumption
2. It assumes that the largest delay is bounded by a constant K0 . However, in practice, the slowest
agent may not communicate with the server, and thus, has an infinite delay. In our analysis, we do
not require any boundary for the largest delay, because we only contain the average delay in the
convergence rate, and the average delay is naturally bounded by the number of agents in Lemma B.10
(our corollary).

C.2   D IFFERENCE BETWEEN FL, F ED RL, AND AF ED RL

Unlike supervised FL where local datasets are fixed or pre-specified, in RL, agents collect new
samples in each iteration based on the current local policies. The new data are collected with dynamic
dependencies, which do not appear in all prior FL and A-FL works.
In synchronous FedRL, each agent collects samples according to the same global policy ПҖОё . However,
in AFedRL, even if all agents have an identical environment, each agent collects samples according to
different policies П„k вҲј p(В·|ПҖОёk ), because of the delay. This dynamic nature makes both the problem
itself and the theoretical analysis challenging. We propose a new delay-adaptive model aggregation
strategy to tackle these unique challenges of FedRL.
Moreover, data collected by each agent are naturally (non-manually controlled) heterogeneous.
Despite having identical environments, agents collect data according to their own (different) policies,
a fundamental difficulty that our AFedPG paper solves, as verified theoretically and empirically.


                                                   31
