Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S CALING UP THE BANDED M ATRIX FACTORIZATION
M ECHANISM FOR D IFFERENTIALLY P RIVATE ML
 Ryan McKenna∗



                                               A BSTRACT

            Correlated noise mechanisms such as DP Matrix Factorization (DP-MF) have
            proven to be effective alternatives to DP-SGD in large-epsilon few-epoch training
            regimes. Significant work has been done to find the best correlated noise strategies,
            and the current state-of-the-art approach is DP-BAND MF, which optimally bal-
            ances the benefits of privacy amplification and noise correlation. Despite it’s utility
            advantages, severe scalability limitations prevent this mechanism from handling
            large-scale training scenarios where the number of training iterations may exceed
            104 and the number of model parameters may exceed 107 . In this work, we present
            techniques to scale up DP-BAND MF along these two dimensions, significantly
            extending it’s reach and enabling it to handle settings with virtually any number of
            model parameters and training iterations, with negligible utility degradation.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Modern machine learning is done at unprecedented scales; state-of-the-art large language models
have billions of parameters and are trained on super computers with thousands of accelerators for
hundreds of thousands of iterations (Kaplan et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023). Many applications
would benefit from training these large-scale models on user data, but this raises a host of privacy
concerns (Yao et al., 2024). Differential privacy (DP) offers a formal definition and algorithmic
framework to train such models while protecting individual-level information. The most widely
used DP mechanism for machine learning is DP-SGD (Abadi et al., 2016), of which there are many
variants. DP-SGD relies crucially on privacy amplification by subsampling, and generally benefits
significantly from training with huge batch sizes for many epochs (Ponomareva et al., 2023), which
can be difficult or infeasible in large-scale compute-constrained settings. A promising alternative, the
DP-FTRL algorithm (Kairouz et al., 2021b) instead relies on carefully correlated noise, and tends to
work better than DP-SGD when training with smaller batches and fewer epochs, especially in the
low privacy regime (  ≈ 10) that is common in real-world scenarios.
There are many variants of the DP-FTRL algorithm that primarily differ in how they generate cor-
related noise (Kairouz et al., 2021b; Denisov et al., 2022; Choquette-Choo et al., 2023b; 2024;
McMahan et al., 2024a; Fichtenberger et al., 2023; Henzinger et al., 2023; Kalinin & Lampert, 2024;
Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a). The best variants of the DP-FTRL mechanism utilize numerical
optimization to find the best noise correlation strategy, and are usually referred to as matrix factor-
ization mechanisms (DP-MF). The space of DP-MF mechanisms is rapidly evolving, with recent
work focusing intensely on improving the constant factors (Denisov et al., 2022; Choquette-Choo
et al., 2023b; 2024). The variant with the best constant factors in this space is the Banded Matrix
Factorization mechanism (DP-BAND MF), which utilizes banded correlation matrices and enjoys
the benefits of both privacy amplification and noise correlation. By setting the number of bands to
one, DP-BAND MF reduces to DP-SGD, and by setting the number of bands equal to the number of
training iterations, DP-BAND MF reduces to un-amplified variants of DP-MF. By optimally choosing
the number of bands, DP-BAND MF enjoys significantly better constant factors than both DP-SGD
and other DP-MF-style mechanisms in many settings.
Despite its advantages, severe scalability limitations of DP-BAND MF (and other DP-MF-style
mechanisms more broadly) has hindered its wider use, and prevented it from scaling effectively to
large-scale training regimes where typical models have billions of parameters and are trained for tens
    ∗
        Google Research, mckennar@google.com


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to hundreds of thousands of iterations. Existing DP-BAND MF implementations face computational
bottlenecks stemming from two places: (1) an expensive optimization problem linked to the n × n
strategy matrix C (where n is the number of training iterations), requiring O(n3 ) time and O(n2 )
memory to evaluate the expected error, limiting its use to approximately 104 training iterations. (2)
During training, DP-BAND MF incurs an O(b ⋅ d) memory overhead (where b is the number of bands
in C, and d is model dimensionality), which is b× more than DP-SGD but n/b× less than D ENSE -
DP-MF. In this work, we develop techniques to overcome DP-BAND MF’s scalability limitations,
without sacrificing on the constant factors that make it an appealing mechanism:

• Efficient Strategy Optimization: We exploit the structure of banded strategies to reduce the
  per-iteration complexity of strategy optimization to O(n2 ⋅ b) time and O(n ⋅ b) space, which allows
  DP-BAND MF to scale to approximately n = 105 training iterations. For scenarios demanding even
  more iterations (up to and beyond n > 107 ), we restrict attention to banded Toeplitz strategies,
  whose structure enables O(n ⋅ b) time and O(n) space complexity during strategy optimization.
  Experiments show the approximation quality loss to be less than 2% in terms of expected error.
• Distributed Noise Generation: Prior implementations of DP-MF-style mechanisms add noise on
  a single machine, even when training is coordinated across 1000’s of machines (Denisov et al.,
  2022; Choquette-Choo et al., 2023b). We show how to effectively distribute the noise generation
  process, allowing DP-BAND MF to effectively take advantage of multi-machine environments
  common in large scale training regimes, and scale to larger models and more bands than was
  previously possible. Experiments demonstrate negligible training-time overhead compared to
  DP-SGD, even with hundreds of bands.
• State-of-the-art Performance: We conduct comprehensive experiments on expected error, and
  show that our scalable DP-BAND MF mechanism offers lower expected error than all other scalable
  MF-style mechanisms across all settings tested, including DP-SGD, and concurrent works that
  also improve scalability of DP-MF (McMahan et al., 2024a;b; Kalinin & Lampert, 2024).

2       BACKGROUND
We assume the reader has familiarity with differential privacy (Dwork, 2006; 2008). Below we
provide background on DP-BAND MF, which includes DP-SGD and DP-MF-style mechanisms as
special cases. DP-BAND MF is completely characterized by a b-banded lower triangular strategy
matrix1 C ∈ Rn×n (i.e., Cij = 0 if i < j or i ≤ j + b).

2.1       T RAINING DYNAMICS

DP-BAND MF (Algorithm 2) is similar to the more well known DP-SGD algorithm (Abadi et al.,
2016): minibatches are sampled randomly, gradients are clipped and aggregated, and noise is added
to preserve privacy. The key innovation of DP-BAND MF is in the noise addition step: while DP-
SGD adds i.i.d. Gaussian noise in each iteration, DP-BAND MF adds noise from a richer class.
Specifically, the strategy matrix C is used to generate noise that is correlated across iterations, and
the key subroutine for generating this correlated noise is shown in Algorithm 1.
When instantiated with C = I (the identity matrix, b = 1), Algorithm 2 is identical to DP-SGD, as it is
easy to verify the output of Algorithm 1 is simply the i.i.d. Gaussian noise vectors zi passed as input.
When instantiated with a dense lower triangular strategy matrix C (b = n), Algorithm 2 captures
    1
        sometimes simply referred to as the “strategy”.


Algorithm 1 Banded Inverse Multiplication (Choquette-Choo et al., 2024)
    Input: lower triangular b-Banded matrix C ∈ Rn×n , stream of vectors z1 , . . . , zn ∈ Rd , where Z is
    the matrix with rows zi .
    Output: Y = C−1 Z, one row at a time.
    for i = 1, . . . , n do
        yi = (zi − ∑i−1  j=i−b+1 Cij yj )/Cii
        yield yi


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Iterative Machine Learning with DP-BAND MF
  Input: b-banded strategy C ∈ Rn×n , noise multiplier σ, loss function `, initial parameters ω 0 ,
  dataset D, expected participations k, clipping norm R
  Output: Learned parameters ω n
  Partition D into b (approximately) equal sized subsets D0 , . . . Db−1 arbitrarily
  for yi in Algorithm 1(C, zi ∼i.i.d N (0, 1)d ) do                      ▷ Stream of correlated noise
      Sample B ⊆ Di mod b by Poisson sampling each example with probability bk/n.
      gi = ∑x∈B clip(∇`(ω i−1 ; x), R)                               ▷ Clipped + aggregated gradient
      g̃i = gi + Rσyi                                                   ▷ Noisy (privatized) gradient
      ω i = Update(ω i−1 , g̃i )              ▷ Post-processing noisy gradient using any optimizer
  return ω n


D ENSE -DP-MF (Denisov et al., 2022). DP-SGD benefits from privacy amplification by sampling
but uses uncorrelated noise while D ENSE -DP-MF benefits from correlated noise, but does not enjoy
any privacy amplification due to sampling. DP-SGD tends to work better in the small-epsilon,
many-epoch regime, while D ENSE -DP-MF tends to work better in the large-epsilon, few-epoch
regime (Choquette-Choo et al., 2024). By using a b-banded strategy matrix, DP-BAND MF operates
between these two extremes and benefits from both privacy amplification by sampling and correlated
noise. Specifically, the proposition below states that the privacy properties of DP-BAND MF relate
very naturally to the simpler DP-SGD mechanism whose privacy properties are well-understood.
Proposition 2.1 (Noise Calibration (Choquette-Choo et al., 2024)). Let σSGD ( , δ, k, n) denote the
noise multiplier required for DP-SGD to achieve ( , δ)-DP when run for n iterations with sampling
probability k/n. Given a b-banded strategy matrix C satisfying ∥C∥1,2 ≤ 1, Algorithm 2 satisfies
( , δ)-DP for σBandM F = σSGD ( , δ, k, n/b).

The function σSGD is typically computed using numerical privacy accounting methods such as the
PLD accountant (Sommer et al., 2018; Doroshenko et al., 2022).
Remark 2.1 (Memory Overhead). Algorithm 1 requires storing a state of size b×d (yi−1 , . . . , yi−b+1 ),
where b is the number of bands and d is the model dimensionality. This is b× larger than DP-SGD,
but n/b× smaller than D ENSE -DP-MF. For large models (d ≥ 108 ) and many bands (b ≥ 100), this
can require hundreds of Gigabytes of space.

2.2   S TRATEGY O PTIMIZATION

In this section, we describe how DP-BAND MF optimally selects the number of bands b and the
strategy matrix C. The matrix C and it’s number of bands is chosen by solving a numerical
optimization problem to minimize the expected total squared error added to the (clipped + aggregated)
minibatch gradients during training.
Proposition 2.2 (Expected Error (Choquette-Choo et al., 2024)). The expected total squared error of
DP-BAND MF given a b-banded strategy matrix C is equal to:
                     E[∥AC−1 Z∥2F ] = σBandM
                                       2
                                             F ( , δ, b, k, n)∥C∥1,2 ∥AC ∥F
                                                                 2      −1 2


where ∥C∥1,2 is the maximum L2 column norm of C and is related to it’s sensitivity, and A is the
workload, typically taken to be the lower triangular matrix of ones (Kairouz et al., 2021b), and
σBandM F ( , δ, b, k, n) = σSGD ( , δ, k, n/b) is the noise multiplier required to run DP-BAND MF
under the given privacy budget.

The optimization problem at the heart of DP-BAND MF follows immediately from this expression and
is stated below. Note that smaller values of b give better privacy amplification (smaller σBandM F ),
but reduces the benefits of correlated noise (more restricted space of strategies). Since b is a discrete
parameter, we solve the un-amplified version of the problem for fixed b ⊆ [1, n] (not accounting
for σBandM F ), and choose the strategy matrix and number of bands that minimizes expected error
accounting for σBandM F in a brute force manner.
Problem 2.1 (DP-BAND MF Strategy Optimization (Choquette-Choo et al., 2024)). Given a work-
load matrix A, and the desired number of bands b, the optimization problem underlying DP-BAND MF


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 (Efficient) Expected Total Squared Error
    Input: Θ ∈ Rb×n
    Output: ∥AC(Θ)−1 ∥2F
    b0 = 0
    loss = 0
    for i = 1, . . . , n do
        ei = √
             ith row of the n × n identity matrix
       ci =       b
                ∑j=1 Θ2ji                                           ▷ Column normalization constant
        yi = ci (ei − ∑bj=1 Θji yj )/Θ1i                                         ▷ ith row of C(Θ)−1
        bi = bi−1 + yi                                                         ▷ ith row of AC(Θ)−1
        loss += b⊺i bi                                               ▷ partial squared Frobenius norm
    return loss



can be formulated as:
              minimize ∥C∥21,2 ∥AC−1 ∥2F      subject to Cij = 0 if (j > i) or (i ≤ j + b)           (1)
                  C

Absent the bandedness constraint, this optimization problem has received considerable attention (Li
et al., 2015; Yuan et al., 2016; McKenna et al., 2023; Denisov et al., 2022), and the algorithm for
solving it in the banded case is closely related (Choquette-Choo et al., 2024). Prior work (Choquette-
Choo et al., 2024) solves Problem 2.1 by reformulating it in terms of the object X = C⊺ C. This
reformulation is convex and unconstrained, meaning standard optimization tools like L-BFGS can
efficiently find the best solution with access to an oracle that computes the loss and gradient with
respect to X. We note that the problem as it is stated in Problem 2.1 is not convex with respect to
C (Li et al., 2015; Yuan et al., 2016; McKenna et al., 2023; 2018). The drawback of this solution
approach is that it materializes several n × n matrices in each iteration, even though there are only
roughly b ⋅ n free (non-zero) variables. As a result, it requires O(n3 ) time and O(n2 ) space to
evaluate the objective once, and cannot be practically done beyond n ≈ 104 .

3     S CALABLE S TRATEGY O PTIMIZATION AND N OISE G ENERATION
In this section, we propose two approaches to implicitly compute the objective function, bypassing
the need to materialize n × n matrices explicitly. These innovations enable scalability up to n ≈ 105
and n > 107 respectively. For simplicity, we specialize the presentation to the Prefix workload
(lower triangular matrix of ones), banded strategies, and the expected total squared error objective
(Proposition 2.2). In App. D, we show that the same core approach taken here easily translates to
more general classes of workloads, strategies, and objective functions.

3.1    E FFICIENT STRATEGY OPTIMIZATION

The complexity of solving Problem 2.1 using L-BFGS is proportional to the complexity of evaluating
the objective function and its corresponding gradient. Our first key idea to scale up DP-BAND MF is
to utilize Algorithm 1 to efficiently evaluate the objective function. Specifically, we will materialize
one row of AC−1 at a time and compute the norm in an online fashion as shown in Algorithm 3.
Let Θ be a b × n matrix of parameters which will define our banded strategy matrix C(Θ).
                                                                                       √
                                                                                             We
define C(Θ) to be the column-normalized b-banded matrix satisfying: Cij = Θ(j−i+1)j/ ∑bj=1 Θ2ji .
By construction, we have ∥C(Θ)∥1,2 = 1. Thus, to evaluate the objective function we simply need
to compute ∥AC(Θ)−1 ∥2F , and Algorithm 3 gives an algorithm for doing that efficiently. The key
idea is to generate rows of AC(Θ)−1 one at a time and compute the Frobenius norm in a streaming
manner.
Each iteration of Algorithm 3 requires O(n ⋅ b) time, as the vectors ei and yi are size n, and there is a
sum over b such vectors. Thus, the total time complexity of Algorithm 3 is O(n2 ⋅ b). The algorithm


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


must keep track of yi−b , . . . , yi in each iteration, and hence the space complexity is O(n ⋅ b). This
is a factor nb improvement in both the time and space complexity of DP-BAND MF, which can be
substantial when the number of bands is small (which it often is, as we demonstrate in Section 4).
While Algorithm 3 is specialized to the class of (column-normalized) banded strategies and the Prefix
workload, the core approach is easy to generalize to other parameterized classes of strategies and
more general workloads, as we discuss in App. D.
Our L-BFGS algorithm also requires the gradient of the objective function to run efficiently. We do
not derive that here, but rather rely on Jax’s reverse-mode auto-differentiation capabilities instead
(Bradbury et al., 2018). Depending on how the gradients are computed, the gradient computation
can be more time and memory intensive than the loss calculation. We discuss this more in depth
in App. C and provide some experiments on the scalability of this approach in Section 4. Using
these ideas, we can scale DP-BAND MF up to roughly n ≈ 105 under reasonable time and memory
constraints, without sacrificing any solution quality over prior work (Choquette-Choo et al., 2024).

3.2   O PTIMIZING BANDED T OEPLITZ S TRATEGIES

We now explore another technique that is even more scalable, while only sacrificing a small amount
in terms of expected error. Our key idea is to restrict attention to the special class of banded Toeplitz
strategies. This design decision was inspired by manual inspection of the optimal dense strategies,
observing that they exhibit a near-Toeplitz structure. By exploiting the special structure of this class
of strategies, we can evaluate the objective function using only O(n ⋅ b) time and O(n) space, and
scale strategy optimization up to and beyond n ≈ 106 , as we show below:
Proposition 3.1 (Banded Toeplitz Expected Total Squared Error). Let θ ∈ Rb be Toeplitz coefficients,
such that C(θ)ij = θ i−j+1 , and let w = C(θ)−1 1. The expected total squared error is equal to:
                                                                 n
                      ∥C(θ)∥1,2 = ∥θ∥2         ∥AC(θ)−1 ∥2F = ∑(n − i + 1)wi2
                                                                i=1


Proof. The first expression states that the maximum L2 column norm of a lower triangular Toeplitz
matrix is equal to the norm of it’s first column θ. By direct inspection, the first n − b + 1 columns
of C(θ) all share the same non-zero entries of θ, and the norms of these columns are thus ∥θ∥2 .
The non-zero entries of the remaining b − 1 columns of C(θ) correspond to a subvector of θ, and
hence these columns have norm ≤ ∥θ∥2 . The second expression states that the Frobenius norm can
be calculated without explicitly materializing any matrices. Note that both A and C(θ) are lower
triangular Toeplitz matrices, and if C(θ) is invertible, then its inverse is also a lower triangular
Toeplitz matrix (Lin, 2008, Lemma 5). Second note that multiplication is commutative within this
class, and therefore AC−1 (θ) = C−1 (θ)A, and this product is itself a lower triangular Toeplitz
matrix (Lin, 2008, Lemma 5). As such, it is completely defined by its first column w. Using the
definition of matrix multiplication we can obtain w by multiplying C−1 (θ) by the first column of A,
which is 1 (Lay, 2003, Page 97). The squared Frobenius norm of a Toeplitz matrix with parameters
w can be calculated directly over this vector by observing that wi is repeated along the ith diagonal
band of the Toeplitz matrix and hence appears (n − i + 1) times, leading to the expression stated
above for the squared Frobenius norm of AC−1 (θ).

We note that this approach generalizes to any Toeplitz-structured workload, as we show in App. D.
The complexity of evaluating the objective function is determined by the cost of solving the linear
Toeplitz system w = C(θ)−1 1, which can be done with Algorithm 1 in O(n ⋅ b) time and O(b) space.
In App. I we further reduce the time complexity to O(b3 ) by observing that the sequence wi rapidly
converges to a fixed point, which allows scalability to virtually any n (as long as b is not too large).

Column Normalization In general the column norms of Toeplitz matrices are not all equal, a
property that optimal strategies are known to have in the single-participation setting (Zhang et al.,
2018; Yuan et al., 2016; McKenna et al., 2018) and a property built-in to DP-BAND MF (Choquette-
Choo et al., 2024). When the number of bands is small, the loss in solution quality from not column
normalizing is small, as the first n − b columns of a banded Toeplitz strategy already have equal norm.
Moreover, we can always normalize the columns of the banded Toeplitz matrices as a post-processing
step after strategy optimization, which we recommend in practice.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.3     D ISTRIBUTED N OISE G ENERATION

At training time, DP-BAND MF incurs a b ⋅ d memory overhead where b is the number of bands and d
is the number of model parameters. In large-scale settings d may exceed 109 , and assuming b = 256
and 4-byte floats are used, this is a very significant one terabyte cost. In this section, we will argue
that with a careful implementation, this is not a major issue in typical large-scale training regimes.
We make two key observations. First, in order to train large models with differential privacy, large
batch sizes are typically needed, which requires a combination of coordinated training across many
accelerators and virtual batching (De et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2022). For example, to train a 1
billion parameter model with DP, one might use 1024 machines and 16× virtual batching to attain
a reasonable batch size of 16384 (assuming a per core batch size of 1). Second, we can effectively
utilize multiple machines when generating noise by observing that Algorithm 1 can be translated to an
embarrassingly parallel algorithm since each coordinate of the noise vectors are treated identically.
In our implementation, each machine is in charge of producing a different                                  yi-b+1   … yi-1   yi
shard of the noise vectors yi , and they keep track of the state required to
                                                                                                               GPU 1


                                                                                          model size (d)
generate that noise locally.2 This state corresponds to the same shard of the
previous b − 1 correlated noise vectors (yi−1 , . . . , yi−b+1 ), and this sharding                            GPU 2
strategy is illustrated in the figure to the right. This benefit of this sharding                              GPU 3
strategy is that no communication is needed between machines until the
noise is added to the clipped + aggregated gradient. Using the example                                         GPU 4
above, this implementation would have a very manageable overhead of one
                                                                                                           # bands (b)
GB per machine (one TB split across 1024 machines).
In Section 4.2 we demonstrate that in practice the number of bands needed is typically far less than
256, and that the overhead incurred by our distributed correlated noise generation algorithm is small
compared to the cost of per-example gradient clipping, even when the number of bands is large.
To better understand the scalability limits of this distributed noise generation approach in different
settings, it is useful to look at a few more illustrative examples.
Example 3.1. Suppose we want to train a 4 million parameter model on a single GPU with a memory
limit of 1 GB. We can afford to store roughly 64 copies of the model assuming each parameter is
represented as a 4-byte float. This allows us to use roughly 64 bands overall.
Example 3.2. Now suppose we want to train a larger 128 million parameter model in parallel on 64
machines, which is useful/needed to get the large batch sizes usually used with large models and DP
training. By parallelizing the noise generation code across these 64 machines, we can afford to store
2 copies of the model per machine, allowing us to use roughly 128 bands overall.
Example 3.3. Now suppose we want to finetune an 8 billion parameter model on 64 machines,
and use a parameter-efficient fine-tuning method such as LoRA (Hu et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021).
Further, assume the number of learnable finetuning parameters is 4 million. Now, the cost of the
forward/backward pass completely dwarfs any overhead of noise generation. We can store 64 copies
of the model per machine, and parallelize computation across 64 machines, allowing us to run
DP-BAND MF with up to 4096 bands.


4       E MPIRICAL R ESULTS

In this section, we empirically evaluate our proposed strategy optimization algorithms in terms of
solution quality and scalability. Then, we conduct experiments and perform analysis to understand the
optimal number of bands as a function of the relevant parameters. Our analysis reveals that in many
scenarios of practical interest the optimal number of bands is small, and consequently the overhead of
DP-BAND MF at training time is small. Our experiments focus on root-mean-squared-error (RMSE),
which we compute in closed form using Proposition 2.2, dividing by n and taking the square root.
Strategy optimization is done on an NVIDIA V100 Tensor Core GPU for up to 10K iterations.

    2
     this strategy for distributing noise generation is very different from distributed differential privacy (Kairouz
et al., 2021a), where each client/machine generates an entire vector of noise with smaller variance.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                    (4 7+(


617) 7YFSTXMQEPMX] 6EXMS
                                                                  (IRWI 3TXMQM^EXMSR ?4VMSV ;SVOA
                                                                      )\TPSMX &ERHIH 7XVYGXYVI ?3YVWA                                                                8VII %KKVIKEXMSR
                                                                                                                                                                                                7XEQTMRK
                                                                      &ERHIH 8SITPMX^ ?3YVWA
                                                                  &ERHIH 7UVX ?'SRGYVVIRXA                                                                              *,9
                                                                                                                                                                                                (4 &08 1*
                                                                                                                                                                                                9REQTPMJMIH &ERH1*
                                                                                                                                                                                                %QTPMJMIH &ERH1*


                                                   <

                                                                                       8VEMRMRK -XIVEXMSRW  R
                                     )TWMPSR
                                                                                          (a) b = 16                                                               (b) n = 16384, k = 8

Figure 1: (a-b) Ratio of RMSE of each strategy to the best strategy that scales to each setting.
(a) Compares our scalable banded and banded toeplitz strategies with other banded strategies. (b)
Compares our scalable DP-BAND MF with non-banded strategies as a function of  .


4.1                                                       C OMPARISON TO P RIOR AND C ONCURRENT W ORK

We begin by evaluating the solution quality of our strategies compared to prior and concurrent work.
We provide a thorough qualitative comparison between the mechanisms considered here in App. G.
In Figure 1a, we fix b = 16 while varying n, and compare our strategies obtained through implicit
optimization to the strategies produced through explicit optimization as in prior work (Choquette-
Choo et al., 2024). We also include BANDED S QRT as an additional baseline, which was proposed
in concurrent work (Kalinin & Lampert, 2024), and avoids dense matrix representations through
the same banded Toeplitz structure we consider. We plot on the y-axis the RMSE Suboptimality
Ratio, which we define as the ratio of RMSE between a given strategy and the best available strategy
for that setting. Because all the strategies in this figure are 16-banded, they enjoy the same privacy
properties (whether they are used in an amplified or non-amplified setting), and therefore the RMSE
Suboptimality Ratio’s we report hold for all  . The highlights from this experiment are four-fold:

• The prior work that represents the strategy using dense matrices scaled up to n < 104 , while our
  implicitly optimized banded strategies scaled up to n > 105 , and our banded Toeplitz strategies
  scaled well beyond n > 107 . We provide more detailed scalability results in Figure 4 of App. F.
• Our implicit strategy optimization algorithm for general banded matrices converges to the same
  solution as prior work (Choquette-Choo et al., 2024) for all settings tested (where the latter
  successfully ran). This is encouraging in light of the fact that we directly optimize C (rather than
  X = C⊺ C) and Problem 2.1 is not convex with respect to C.
• The BANDED S QRT baseline approach (Kalinin & Lampert, 2024) achieves worse expected error
  across all settings than both of our approaches. The suboptimality approaches up to 25% in the
  settings we tested, with larger suboptimality for larger n.
• Our (column-normalized) Toeplitz strategies are between 0-2% suboptimal, with suboptimality
  increasing with the number of bands and decreasing with the number of iterations. For large
  n ≥ 16384 and small b ≤ 32, which is the regime of most interest, the suboptimality is ≤ 0.25%,
  indicating arbitrary banded strategies do not provide much benefit over the more restrictive class.

In Figure 1b we compare against several additional baseline mechanisms for n = 16384 iterations
and k = 8 epochs while varying  . We include results for DP-SGD (Abadi et al., 2016), Tree
Aggregation (Kairouz et al., 2021b), Stamping (Denisov et al., 2022), FHU (Fichtenberger et al.,
2023), Buffered Toeplitz, (McMahan et al., 2024a;b), and our Unamplified and Amplified scalable
DP-BAND MF approach. We omit from comparison D ENSE -DP-MF (Choquette-Choo et al., 2023b)
due to scalability limitations of that approach for n ≥ 16384.
Here, DP-SGD and Amplified DP-BAND MF benefit from privacy amplification, while the other
mechanisms do not. Our highlights from this experiment are two-fold:

• Amplified DP-BAND MF is better than all other mechanism across all settings evaluated. The
  improvement over DP-SGD grows with  , while the improvement over other mechanisms decreases
  with  . The best alternatives are either DP-SGD or Buffered Toeplitz, both of which have ≈ 2×


                                                                                                                                                              7
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


617) 7YFSTXMQEPMX] 6EXMS


                                                                                                          )TSGLW  O


                                                   <

                                                                                    &ERHW  F
                                                                         (a) Bands vs. RMSE
                                                                                                                                               (b) Optimal Number of Bands

      Figure 2: (a) RMSE Suboptimality Ratio (relative to full-batch DP-SGD) of DP-BAND MF as a
      function of b for various epochs, with fixed ( , δ) = (1, 10−8 ) and n = 16384. (b) Optimal number
      of bands (within a factor of 2) as a function of the privacy budget and the number of epochs, fixing
      n = 4096 and δ = 10−8 .


                                     worse RMSE for   = 1. Amplified DP-BAND MF still enjoy a meaningful 19% better RMSE than
                                     the best competitor for   as large as 8.
      • Unamplified DP-BAND MF is the best non-amplified mechanism that can scale to this setting, and
        enjoys ∼ 5% lower RMSE than Buffered Toeplitz strategies for all  . While our primary focus has
        been in centralized training regimes, this figure shows that DP-BAND MF is also a state-of-the-art
        approach in federated scenarios where amplification is not feasible (Kairouz et al., 2021b).

    While we focused on a single value of n and k in Figure 1b, our general findings remain unchanged
    for other settings, although the magnitude of the improvements do change. For completeness, results
    for other values of n and k are shown in Figure 7 in App. F.

       4.2                                                O PTIMAL N UMBER OF BANDS

    We now perform an ablation on DP-BAND MF to understand how to select the number of bands in
    practice, and how the performance of DP-BAND MF changes as a function of the number of epochs.
    Figure 2a plots the RMSE suboptimality ratio of DP-BAND MF relative to the full-batch DP-SGD
    baseline for different values for epochs and bands fixing at   = 1. Figure 2b plots the optimal number
    of bands for different values of epochs and  . Our findings from these experiments are three-fold:

      • With only 32 epochs, DP-SGD (b = 1) has nearly the same RMSE as full-batch DP-SGD (16384
        epochs), but the RMSE degrades rapidly with fewer epochs. Unamplified DP-BAND MF (b = n/k)
        achieves worse RMSE than DP-SGD when the number of epochs is large (and utility is the
        best), but it degrades more gracefully than DP-SGD, offering better utility in the few-epoch
        regime. Amplified DP-BAND MF (b = b∗ ) offers the best of both worlds: full-batch DP-SGD-level
        performance when the number of epochs is sufficiently large, and even more graceful degradation
        of RMSE with respect to number of epochs than Unamplified DP-BAND MF.
      • The RMSE improves predictably with increasing epochs, but there are diminishing marginal returns.
        For example, the RMSE of Amplified DP-BAND MF is < 2× worse than the RMSE of full-batch
        DP-SGD with only two epochs, and < 18% worse with only eight epochs. We note that RMSE
        only accounts for the noise added due to privacy; increasing the number of epochs under a fixed
        number of iterations increases the batch size, which also reduces the minibatch gradient variance.
      • The optimal number of bands drops predictably with increasing epochs and decreasing epsilon.
        Specifically, √the dependence appears roughly linear in both parameters, and a good rule of thumb
        is that b∗ ≈   n/k should be near-optimal. In some parameter regimes, like k = 1,   ≥ 16, b∗ may
        be too large to feasibly handle. However, Amplified DP-BAND MF with a suboptimal number of
        bands is still better than the alternative of DP-SGD.


                                                                                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 'PMTTIH +VEHMIRXW &!
                                                                                          &ERH
                                                                    'PMTTIH +VEHMIRXW &!
                                                                                               &ERHW

;EPP 'PSGO 8MQI  WIGW
                                                                    'PMTTIH +VEHMIRXW &!
                                                                                               &ERHW


                                                                                                                                             'VSWW )RXVST]
                                                                    'SVVIPEXIH 2SMWI +IRIVEXMSR                                                                                               &ERHW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       &ERHW  (4 &08 1*


                                                                                         &ERHW                                                                                          617)                                                 617)

                                                        (a) Noise Generation Time                                                                                               (b) Adaptive Optimizer             (c) Non-Adaptive Optimizer

Figure 3: (a) Wall Clock Time for correlated noise generation and per-example gradient clipping
for a 100M parameter BertBase model when run on 32 TPU v3 cores. (b-c) RMSE vs. Learning
Performance (evaluation cross entropy) with an adaptive optimizer (b) and a non-adaptive optimizer
(c). In both (b) and (c), a 4M parameter BertTiny model is trained on the StackOverflow dataset
for various noise multipliers.


The analysis above reveals what the optimal number of bands is for different settings, but not whether
it is feasible to run the mechanism for that many bands. In Figure 3a we plot the wall clock time
to generate correlated noise as a function of the number of bands in a typical distributed training
scenario with a 100M parameter BertBase model trained on 32 accelerators. Our primary finding
for this experiment is:

• Using our distributed algorithm, correlated noise generation is not the primary bottleneck, even
  when the number of bands is fairly large (up to b = 128, corresponding to 1.6 GB overhead per
  accelerator). The cost of per-example gradient clipping is one- to three- orders of magnitude more
  expensive, depending on the batch size.

4.3                                                          RMSE VS . L EARNING P ERFORMANCE

Thus far we have primarily focused on RMSE on the prefix workload, but this is just a proxy for what
we really care about: training-time learning performance. In Figure 3(b-c) we aim to understand the
relationship between RMSE and learning performance across a range of DP-MF strategies. Our goal
is not to compare different mechanisms across a different privacy budgets, as this has been done in
prior work (Choquette-Choo et al., 2024; 2023a; Denisov et al., 2022), and our mechanism is just a
more scalable instantiation of the prior work.
We consider strategies with differing numbers of bands, and for each setting we optimize the strategy
for the prefix workload. Note this is different from early work on matrix factorization where the
strategy is optimized for a workload that encodes the optimizer parameters like momentum and
learning rate cooldown (Denisov et al., 2022). Recent work on DP-BAND MF suggest it is fine to
configure the strategy for the prefix workload even when using SGD with momentum in practice
(Choquette-Choo et al., 2024, Section I).
For each strategy under consideration, we train a BertTiny model with per-example clipping and
correlated noise addition with a range of noise multiplies spanning 3 orders of magnitude. We tune
the learning rate for each setting and report results for the best value found. We each experiment, we
record the RMSE of the strategy / noise multiplier along with the evaluation set cross entropy, and
plot the results in Figures 3b and 3c. Our two main findings from this experiment are:

• For an adaptive optimizer and the same RMSE, strategies with fewer bands provide better learning
  performance, indicating that RMSE is not the best proxy for learning performance across multiple
  strategies. These results suggest that one should set bands more conservatively than suggested by
  RMSE alone to optimize learning performance if using DP-BAND MF with an adaptive optimizer.
• For a non-adaptive optimizer, the lines for 1-, 8-, 64-, and 512-banded strategies all line up,
  indicating that RMSE is a reasonable predictor of learning performance. However, there is still a
  gap between DP-BAND MF and BLT-DP-MF (5000 bands), where fewer bands achieves better
  learning performance for the same RMSE.


                                                                                                                                                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


While this experiment focused RMSE, we also tested the effectiveness of max error as a proxy for
learning performance in Figure 9 in App. F, with similar observations holding there as well.

5   R ELATED W ORK
More DP-MF Variants Koloskova et al. (2024); Choquette-Choo et al. (2023a) revisit the objec-
tive underlying DP-MF and propose new variants based on their analysis. Like us, Henzinger et al.
(2023) and Choquette-Choo et al. (2023a) use Toeplitz strategies, and bypass the O(n3 ) runtime of
strategy optimization. However, they consider “full” Toeplitz matrices and do not address the O(n ⋅ d)
training-time memory overhead of the algorithm, preventing scalability in large-scale settings.

Scalable Approaches to the Matrix Mechanism The optimization problem we studied in this
work dates back to the Matrix Mechanism (Li et al., 2010), and has been the subject of intense
research for a different problem domain: answering workloads of linear counting queries over
discrete databases (Li et al., 2010; 2015; Yuan et al., 2016; McKenna et al., 2018; 2023; Xiao et al.,
2024; Nikolov et al., 2013; Edmonds et al., 2020; McKenna et al., 2020; Li & Miklau, 2013; Xiao
et al., 2024). McKenna et al. (2023) and Xiao et al. (2024) restrict attention to special classes of
strategies that enable efficient strategy optimization. By exploiting the special structure in these
strategies, they scale well beyond n > 107 , but the specific strategies considered in those works do
not directly apply in the context of iteratively training ML models.
Concurrently with our work, McMahan et al. (2024a) proposed BLT-DP-MF, a memory-efficient
approximation of single-epoch D ENSE -DP-MF, and extended to handle multiple epochs in follow-up
work (McMahan et al., 2024b). Their method scales to an arbitrary number of training iterations, and
reduces the training-time memory complexity to O(c ⋅ d) for small and configurable c ≈ 3, while only
sacrificing 5-7.5% in RMSE compared to Unamplified DP-BAND MF.

6   L IMITATIONS
Here we discuss several limitations of this paper. First, the number of bands needed to maximize
utility may differ from the number of bands that is feasible to use under compute constraints. In
Section 4.2 we provided an argument that in the regimes of most practical interest, the number of
bands will be small. However, it is conceivable for there to be situations when the optimal number of
bands is larger than what can be supported under compute constraints.
Second DP-BAND MF relies on Poisson sampling to form minibatches, which can be tricky to
integrate into modern ML infrastructure due to variable batch sizes.
Third, this work and nearly all work on DP Matrix Factorization relies on the assumption that
expected error on the prefix sums of gradients is a good proxy for learning performance (Kairouz
et al., 2021b; Denisov et al., 2022; Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a; McMahan et al., 2024a; Kalinin
& Lampert, 2024). As demonstrated in Section 4.3, this proxy is not perfect, particularly when
combined with adaptive optimizers. More research is needed to improve the objective function
underlying DP-MF-style mechanisms, and how to configure them with adaptive optimizers.
Finally, our distributed noise generation procedure relies on the assumption that the worker machines
responsible for computing each shard of the noise are not compromised, otherwise the privacy
guarantees could be at risk. In situations where noise must be generated on a single machine, DP-
BAND MF may not be able to scale to as many bands. However, as we showed throughout Section 4,
DP-BAND MF tends to work best with a small number of bands anyway.

7   C ONCLUSION
This work is motivated by the desire to train large-scale ML models with differential privacy. Our
work is best characterized by its simplicity, scalability, and state-of-the-art performance. Our key
ideas are straightforward to understand and implement. Our algorithms for strategy optimization
scale effectively well beyond n > 107 , and our algorithm for distributed noise generation can handle
large models with little overhead. Finally, our mechanism offers better expected error than any other
DP-MF-style mechanism across a wide variety of settings.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 conference on computer and communications security, pp. 308–318, 2016.
Rohan Anil, Badih Ghazi, Vineet Gupta, Ravi Kumar, and Pasin Manurangsi. Large-scale differen-
  tially private bert. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp.
  6481–6491, 2022.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and
  Qiao Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL
  http://github.com/google/jax.
Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Krishnamurthy Dj Dvijotham, Krishna Pillutla, Arun Ganesh,
  Thomas Steinke, and Abhradeep Guha Thakurta. Correlated noise provably beats independent
  noise for differentially private learning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023a.
Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Hugh Brendan Mcmahan, J Keith Rush, and Abhradeep Guha
  Thakurta. Multi-epoch matrix factorization mechanisms for private machine learning. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5924–5963. PMLR, 2023b.
Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Arun Ganesh, Ryan McKenna, H Brendan McMahan, John Rush,
  Abhradeep Guha Thakurta, and Zheng Xu. (amplified) banded matrix factorization: A unified
  approach to private training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(240):1–113,
  2023.
Soham De, Leonard Berrada, Jamie Hayes, Samuel L Smith, and Borja Balle. Unlocking high-
  accuracy differentially private image classification through scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.13650,
  2022.
Carson Denison, Badih Ghazi, Pritish Kamath, Ravi Kumar, Pasin Manurangsi, Krishna Giri Narra,
  Amer Sinha, Avinash V Varadarajan, and Chiyuan Zhang. Private ad modeling with dp-sgd. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2211.11896, 2022.
Sergey Denisov, H Brendan McMahan, John Rush, Adam Smith, and Abhradeep Guha Thakurta.
  Improved differential privacy for sgd via optimal private linear operators on adaptive streams.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:5910–5924, 2022.
Vadym Doroshenko, Badih Ghazi, Pritish Kamath, Ravi Kumar, and Pasin Manurangsi. Connect
  the dots: Tighter discrete approximations of privacy loss distributions. Proceedings on Privacy
  Enhancing Technologies, 2022.
Cynthia Dwork. Differential privacy. In International colloquium on automata, languages, and
  programming, pp. 1–12. Springer, 2006.
Cynthia Dwork. Differential privacy: A survey of results. In International conference on theory and
  applications of models of computation, pp. 1–19. Springer, 2008.
Alexander Edmonds, Aleksandar Nikolov, and Jonathan Ullman. The power of factorization mecha-
  nisms in local and central differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT
  Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 425–438, 2020.
Hendrik Fichtenberger, Monika Henzinger, and Jalaj Upadhyay. Constant matters: Fine-grained error
  bound on differentially private continual observation. pp. 10072–10092, 2023.
Monika Henzinger, Jalaj Upadhyay, and Sarvagya Upadhyay. Almost tight error bounds on differen-
 tially private continual counting. In Proceedings of the 2023 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
 Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pp. 5003–5039. SIAM, 2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Edward J Hu, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen,
  et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.

Peter Kairouz, Ziyu Liu, and Thomas Steinke. The distributed discrete gaussian mechanism for
  federated learning with secure aggregation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5201–5212. PMLR, 2021a.

Peter Kairouz, Brendan McMahan, Shuang Song, Om Thakkar, Abhradeep Thakurta, and Zheng Xu.
  Practical and private (deep) learning without sampling or shuffling. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 5213–5225. PMLR, 2021b.

Nikita Kalinin and Christoph Lampert. Banded square root matrix factorization for differentially
  private model training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13763, 2024.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
   Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.

Anastasiia Koloskova, Ryan McKenna, Zachary Charles, John Rush, and H Brendan McMahan.
  Gradient descent with linearly correlated noise: Theory and applications to differential privacy.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

David C Lay. Linear algebra and its applications. Pearson Education India, 2003.

Chao Li and Gerome Miklau. Optimal error of query sets under the differentially-private matrix
  mechanism. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Database Theory, pp. 272–283,
  2013.

Chao Li, Michael Hay, Vibhor Rastogi, Gerome Miklau, and Andrew McGregor. Optimizing linear
  counting queries under differential privacy. In Proceedings of the twenty-ninth ACM SIGMOD-
  SIGACT-SIGART symposium on Principles of database systems, pp. 123–134, 2010.

Chao Li, Gerome Miklau, Michael Hay, Andrew McGregor, and Vibhor Rastogi. The matrix
  mechanism: optimizing linear counting queries under differential privacy. The VLDB journal, 24:
  757–781, 2015.

Fu-Rong Lin. An explicit formula for the inverse of band triangular toeplitz matrix. Linear algebra
  and its applications, 428(2-3):520–534, 2008.

Ryan McKenna, Gerome Miklau, Michael Hay, and Ashwin Machanavajjhala. Optimizing error
  of high-dimensional statistical queries under differential privacy. Proceedings of the VLDB
  Endowment, 11(10), 2018.

Ryan McKenna, Raj Kumar Maity, Arya Mazumdar, and Gerome Miklau. A workload-adaptive
  mechanism for linear queries under local differential privacy. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment,
 13(11), 2020.

Ryan McKenna, Gerome Miklau, Michael Hay, and Ashwin Machanavajjhala. Optimizing error of
  high-dimensional statistical queries under differential privacy. Journal of Privacy and Confiden-
  tiality, 13(1), 2023.

H Brendan McMahan, Krishna Pillutla, Thomas Steinke, Abhradeep Thakurta, et al. Efficient and
  near-optimal noise generation for streaming differential privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16706,
  2024a.

H Brendan McMahan, Zheng Xu, and Yanxiang Zhang. A hassle-free algorithm for private learning
  in practice: Don’t use tree aggregation, use blts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08868, 2024b.

Aleksandar Nikolov, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. The geometry of differential privacy: the sparse
  and approximate cases. In Proceedings of the forty-fifth annual ACM symposium on Theory of
  computing, pp. 351–360, 2013.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Natalia Ponomareva, Hussein Hazimeh, Alex Kurakin, Zheng Xu, Carson Denison, H Brendan
  McMahan, Sergei Vassilvitskii, Steve Chien, and Abhradeep Guha Thakurta. How to dp-fy ml:
  A practical guide to machine learning with differential privacy. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 77:1113–1201, 2023.
David Sommer, Sebastian Meiser, and Esfandiar Mohammadi. Privacy loss classes: The central limit
  theorem in differential privacy. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2018.
Yingtai Xiao, Guanlin He, Danfeng Zhang, and Daniel Kifer. An optimal and scalable matrix
  mechanism for noisy marginals under convex loss functions. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Zheng Xu, Yanxiang Zhang, Galen Andrew, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Peter Kairouz, H Bren-
  dan McMahan, Jesse Rosenstock, and Yuanbo Zhang. Federated learning of gboard language
  models with differential privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18465, 2023.
Yifan Yao, Jinhao Duan, Kaidi Xu, Yuanfang Cai, Zhibo Sun, and Yue Zhang. A survey on large
  language model (llm) security and privacy: The good, the bad, and the ugly. High-Confidence
  Computing, pp. 100211, 2024.
Da Yu, Saurabh Naik, Arturs Backurs, Sivakanth Gopi, Huseyin A Inan, Gautam Kamath, Janardhan
  Kulkarni, Yin Tat Lee, Andre Manoel, Lukas Wutschitz, et al. Differentially private fine-tuning of
  language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Ganzhao Yuan, Yin Yang, Zhenjie Zhang, and Zhifeng Hao. Convex optimization for linear query
  processing under approximate differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD
  International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 2005–2014, 2016.
Dan Zhang, Ryan McKenna, Ios Kotsogiannis, Michael Hay, Ashwin Machanavajjhala, and Gerome
  Miklau. Ektelo: A framework for defining differentially-private computations. In Proceedings of
  the 2018 International Conference on Management of Data, pp. 115–130, 2018.


A       N OTATION

                         Symbol             Domain    Meaning
                             n                N+      number of training iterations
                             d                N+      model dimensionality
                             k                N+      number of epochs
                             q               (0, 1]   minibatch sampling probability
                             b                N+      number of bands
                             σ                R+      noise multiplier
                            A                Rn×n     lower triangular ones matrix
                            Z                Rn×d     Gaussian noise, Zij ∼ N (0, σ 2 )
                            C                Rn×n     DP-BAND MF strategy matrix
                          C(θ)               Rn×n     Parameterized strategy matrix
                            ei                Rn      ith indicator vector
                         ∥ ⋅ ∥1,2             R+      maximum L2 column norm
                      σSGD ( , δ, q, n)       R+      DP-SGD noise multiplier

                                          Table 1: Table of Notation


B       E XAMPLES
B.1     O PTIMAL 3- BANDED S TRATEGY

Example B.1 (DP-BAND MF). The matrix below is the optimal 3-banded strategy matrix C config-
ured for 9 training iterations. (Informal 3 ) DP-BAND MF with minibatch sampling probability of
    3
     DP-BAND MF requires a special sampling different from the usual Poisson sampling of DP-SGD to achieve
this guarantee, see Choquette-Choo et al. (2024) for the details.


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


q ≤ 1/3 enjoys the same privacy guarantees as 3 iterations of DP-SGD with sampling probability 3q.
The vectors y1 , . . . y9 are added to the minibatch gradients during training, and can be computed
efficiently in an online fashion with O(b ⋅ d) space using Algorithm 1, exemplified below:

      ⎡0.740                                                                 0 ⎤⎥      ⎡z1 ⎤ ⎡y1 ⎤
                                                                                  −1
      ⎢          0         0     0     0     0            0          0                 ⎢ ⎥ ⎢ ⎥
      ⎢0.500   0.822       0     0     0     0            0          0       0 ⎥⎥      ⎢z2 ⎥ ⎢y2 ⎥
      ⎢                                                                                ⎢ ⎥ ⎢ ⎥
      ⎢0.450   0.492     0.876   0     0     0            0          0       0 ⎥⎥      ⎢z3 ⎥ ⎢y3 ⎥
      ⎢                                                                                ⎢ ⎥ ⎢ ⎥
      ⎢ 0      0.286     0.395 0.821   0     0            0          0       0 ⎥⎥      ⎢z4 ⎥ ⎢y4 ⎥
      ⎢                                                                                ⎢ ⎥ ⎢ ⎥
      ⎢ 0        0       0.278 0.462 0.855   0            0          0       0 ⎥⎥      ⎢z5 ⎥ = ⎢y5 ⎥
      ⎢                                                                                ⎢ ⎥ ⎢ ⎥
      ⎢ 0                                                                    0 ⎥⎥      ⎢z6 ⎥ ⎢y6 ⎥
      ⎢          0         0   0.335 0.442 0.882          0          0                 ⎢ ⎥ ⎢ ⎥
      ⎢ 0                                                                    0 ⎥⎥      ⎢z7 ⎥ ⎢y7 ⎥
      ⎢          0         0     0   0.272 0.403        0.892        0                 ⎢ ⎥ ⎢ ⎥
      ⎢ 0                                                                    0 ⎥⎥      ⎢z ⎥ ⎢y ⎥
      ⎢          0         0     0     0   0.243        0.409      0.936               ⎢ 8⎥ ⎢ 8⎥
      ⎢ 0                                                                  1.000⎥⎦     ⎢z ⎥ ⎢y ⎥
      ⎣          0         0     0     0     0          0.194      0.353               ⎣ 9⎦ ⎣ 9⎦

       • y1 = z1/0.740                                     • y4 = (z4 −0.395y3 −0.286y2 )/0.821
       • y2 = (z2 −0.500y1 )/0.822                         • ...
       • y3 = (z3 −0.492y2 −0.450y1 )/0.876                • y9 = (z9 −0.353y8 −0.194y7 )/1.000


C     C OMPUTING THE GRADIENT OF THE EXPECTED ERROR
We implemented functions to compute the expected error of banded strategies (Algorithm 5) and
banded Toeplitz strategies (Proposition 3.1) in pure JAX. This allowed us to use the jax.grad
transformation to give us a function to compute its gradients, so we didn’t have to manually derive
them. In this section, we discuss the time and memory complexity of these gradient calculations.
For both banded strategies and banded Toeplitz strategies, computing the gradient of the objective
function requires back-propagation through Algorithm 1. In the banded case, this algorithm is invoked
with a sequence of size n vectors, while in the banded Toeplitz case, it is invoked with a sequence of
scalars. To compute the objective function, the intermediate values yi can be discarded on step b + i.
However, to compute the gradient, by default jax.grad requires keeping around all values of yi in
memory at once.
Banded Strategies Both the time and memory complexity of computing the gradient with this default
implementation is O(n2 b) in the banded case. By using the jax.checkpoint transformation, we
can trade-off memory for time during the backward pass by only storing some subset of intermediates.
Specifically, given a parameter k that roughly corresponds to the number of intermediates to keep
around for the backwards, we can compute the gradient using O(n2 bk) time and O(n2 b/k) memory
by re-materializing the inputs we need when we need them. We choose k so that the total memory
consumed is less than or equal to 4GB.
Banded Toeplitz Strategies The time and memory complexity of computing the gradient with the
default implementation is O(bn) and O(n) respectively. We believe the memory complexity of he
loss function could be reduced to O(b) with a more careful implementation though. However, O(n)
memory is already small enough to scale up to all values of n we care about in practice, and no
special tricks are needed to improve the memory footprint.

C.1    T IMING E XPERIMENTS

Figure Figure 4 shows the wallclock time required to evaluate the loss function and it’s gradient on
both CPUs and GPUs, for various n at fixed b = 16. We evaluate the wall clock time for increasing n
until the total time to compute both the loss and grad exceeds 60 seconds. Our findings from this
experiment are:

• We can compute both the loss and gradient of general banded strategies up to about n ≈ 105 under
  reasonable time limits when utilizing GPUs. As n gets larger, the relative gap between the time
  to compute the loss and gradient grows, as expected due to our checkpointing strategy described
  above.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                          0SWW SR '49                                                                           0SWW SR '49
                                                                                                        +VEH SR '49                                                                         +VEH SR '49
    8MQI 4IV -XIVEXMSR  W


                                                                                                                                                 8MQI 4IV -XIVEXMSR  W
                                                                                                          0SWW SR +49                                                                           0SWW SR +49
                                                                                                        +VEH SR +49                                                                           +VEH SR +49


                                                                                         R                                                                                                                                                  R

                                                                       (a) Banded Timing                                                                                                                                (b) Toeplitz Timing

Figure 4: Wallclock time required to evaluate the total squared error objective function and it’s
gradient as a function of n for b = 16. Does not include JIT-compile time, which is amortized over
strategy optimization.



Algorithm 4 Streaming Linear Operator for Prefix
    Input: stream of vectors z1 , . . . , zn ∈ Rd , where Z is the matrix with rows zi .
    Output: Y = AZ, one row at a time.
    for i = 1, . . . , n do
        yi = yi−1 + zi
        yield yi


Figure 5: Algorithm for streaming matrix multiplication by a Prefix matrix. To simplify the
presentation, we use the convention that out-of-bounds indexing into a matrix or vector returns 0.


• We can compute both the loss and gradient of banded Toeplitz strategies beyond n > 107 under
  reasonable time limits. These computations do not benefit from GPUs, and in fact an order of
  magnitude faster on CPUs. This is due to the inherent sequential nature of Algorithm 1, which is
  not a type of computation that benefits from GPUs.



D                                                  G ENERALIZATIONS TO OTHER S TRATEGY AND W ORKLOAD C LASSES

Our presentation in Section 3.1 focused on the Prefix workload and the class of (column-normalized)
banded matrices and Toeplitz matrices. However, our core approach also applies to a broader set of
strategies in workloads, as we show in this section.

D.1                                                   S TREAMING L INEAR O PERATORS

We begin by providing a definition for a Streaming Linear Operator:
Definition D.1 (Streaming Linear Operator (SLO)). A Streaming Linear Operator is a function that
consumes a sequence of vectors z1 , . . . , zn as input one at a time, and produces a sequence of vectors
y1 , . . . , yn one at a time such that yi is a linear function of z1 , . . . , zi . We say a SLO is b-buffered if
it only requires storing a state of size at most b vectors.

We note that there is a one-to-one correspondence between SLOs and lower triangular matrices. The
Prefix matrix can be represented as a 1-buffer SLO, shown in Figure 5. Banded lower triangular
matrices and their inverses can be represented as b-buffer SLOs, as shown in Algorithm 1. The
heavyball momentum + learning rate cooldown workload studied in prior work Denison et al. (2022);
Choquette-Choo et al. (2023b) can also be represented as a 2-buffer SLO.


                                                                                                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 5 Efficiently Evaluating the Per Query Error
    Input: SLO for C(Θ)−1 , SLO for A
    Output: b⊺i bi , one entry at a time, where B = AC(Θ)−1
    b0 = 0
    for i = 1, . . . , n do
        yi = SLOC −1 (ei )
        bi = SLOA (yi )
        yield b⊺i bi



D.2    E FFICIENTLY O PTIMIZING PARAMETERIZED S TRATEGIES VIA SLO S

Recall that computing the objective function efficiently is the core requirement for performing
efficient strategy optimization over the space of strategies. As long as we can express this function
in terms of Jax primitives, we can rely on auto-differentiation tools to compute the gradients and
perform the optimization. Hence, our focus in this section is on generalizing Algorithm 3 to handle
any workload represented as a SLO, and any parameterized strategy whose inverse is a SLO, and any
differentiable aggregator of the per-query expected squared errors.
Algorithm 5 is an algorithm to calculate the per-query expected error of any workload and parame-
terized strategy represented as a pair of SLOs. The time and memory complexity of this algorithm
depends only on the complexity of the underlying SLO implementations. In general, for a b1 -
buffer SLO for C−1 and b2 -buffer SLO for A, the time and memory complexity of Algorithm 5 is
O(n2 (b1 + b2 )) and O(n(b1 + b2 )) respectively. We note that the per-query-error can be combined
with any (sub)-differentiable aggregator to get a scalar-valued loss function that can be optimized.
In this paper, our focus was on expected total squared error, which is simply a sum of the per-query
squared errors. However, the max expected error is another natural choice that has been sometimes
used in prior work McMahan et al. (2024a); Fichtenberger et al. (2023). The “best” loss function to
use, i.e., the one that best correlates with learning performance, is still an open question.

D.3    E FFICIENTLY O PTIMIZING BANDED T OEPLITZ S TRATEGIES FOR T OEPLITZ W ORKLOADS

In this section, we show that we can efficiently calculate the expected per-query squared error for
a banded Toeplitz strategy on any Toeplitz workload with a minor modification to Proposition 3.1.
These generalizations do not affect the time or memory complexity of the algorithm.
Proposition D.1 (Banded Toeplitz Expected Per-Query Squared Error). Let λ, θ ∈ Rb be Toeplitz
coefficients for A and C respectively. The expected square error (excluding sensitivity) on the ith
query can be evaluated as ∑ij=1 wj2 where w = C(θ)−1 λ

E     T HEORETICAL G UARANTEES
In this section we provide theoretical guarantees on the expected error of our mechanism. To do so, it
is useful to state the theoretical guarantees of the BANDED S QRT mechanism. We restate their main
theoretical guarantee below, specialized to the Prefix workload:
Proposition E.1 (Thm 6 Kalinin & Lampert (2024)). Let A denote the Prefix workload let C(θ)
denote the strategy matrix for the Banded Square Root factorization with b bands. Then
                                                            √
                                                                n log b
                             ∥C(θ)∥1,2 ∥AC(θ) ∥F = O(
                                                 −1
                                                                        )
                                                                   b
We will now argue that our Banded Toeplitz strategy inherits the theoretical guarantees of the BANDED
S QRT strategy.
Proposition E.2. Let C(θ 0 ) denote the strategy for BANDED S QRT and note that it is a banded
Toeplitz matrix. Now let C(θ ∗ ) denote the banded Toeplitz matrix numerically optimized for the


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


objective function specified in Proposition 3.1, using θ 0 as the initialization. Then the expected error
of C(θ ∗ ) is never worse than the expected error of C(θ 0 ), that is:

                      ∥C(θ ∗ )∥21,2 ∥AC(θ ∗ )−1 ∥2F ≤ ∥C(θ 0 )∥21,2 ∥AC(θ 0 )−1 ∥2F

Proof. First note that the objective we optimize is identical to the one shown in the proposition above,
and note that it is a product of two continuous and differentiable functions of θ, and is therefore
also continuous and differentiable. For simplicity, assume we optimize this objective with gradient
descent. In each iteration, we compute the gradient which points in the direction of steepest descent.
With sufficiently small step sizes, the sequence of iterates are guaranteed to be non-inceasing. Thus,
the objective function of the final iterate is less than or equal to the objective function at the initial
point.

Combining Proposition E.1 with Proposition E.2 shows that our banded Toeplitz strategy inherits the
theoretical guarantees of the BANDED S QRT mechanism Kalinin & Lampert (2024). For simplicity,
we presented these propositions for the Prefix workload, but Proposition E.1 can be generalized to
handle any momentum-cooldown workload Kalinin & Lampert (2024), and Proposition E.2 applies
for any workload.

F     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

F.1   A MPLIFICATION VS N OISE C ORRELATION

In Figure 6, we measure the benefit of privacy amplification and noise correlation respectively, by
comparing the RMSE of Amplified DP-BAND MF with Unamplified DP-BAND MF and DP-SGD.
Our main findings from this experiment are:

      1. Amplification is most beneficial when both   and epochs are small. However, even up
         to   = 8, there is a meaningful improvement in RMSE of ≈ 15%. Figure 6b shows that
         correlated noise is most beneficial when   is large and epochs is small, and lines up very
         nicely with Figure 2b. In the most extreme setting, the RMSE of DP-BAND MF can be
         9× lower than DP-SGD. With larger epochs or smaller  , the benefit of correlated noise
         decreases, confirming it is most useful in compute-constrained settings.
      2. When the number of epochs is large (but still well less than n), Amplified DP-SGD and
         Unamplified DP-BAND MF both achieve similar RMSE (as indicated by the dark blue
         region), despite being very different mechanisms. Moreover, the RMSE in these settings
         nearly matches the RMSE attained by full-batch DP-SGD, even with many fewer epochs
         (512 instead of 16384).


F.2   C OMPARISONS TO BASELINES

In Figure 1b of the main text, we compared our scalable amplified DP-BAND MF approach with
other strategies as a function of  . In this section, we compare against the same baselines, but vary
the number of training iterations n and the number of epochs k.
In Figure 7a, we see that the DP-BAND MF improves relative to baselines as n increases. At n = 105 ,
our mechanism enjoys 25% smaller RMSE than the next best competitor. In Figure 7b we see that
DP-BAND MF enjoys the greatest relative improvement over competitors for small k, although the
relationship is not monotonic.

F.3   BANDS VS . E POCHS VS . RMSE

In this section, we revisit Figure 2a but increase   from 1 to 8. Figure 8 shows how the number of
bands effects the RMSE under different number numbers of epochs. With larger  , more epochs
are needed for DP-SGD to get near full-batch performance (in this case, 256 epochs). The optimal
number of bands also tends to be somewhat higher in this regime, with 128 bands being optimal for


                                                   17
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                    )TSGLW                                                                                                                    )TSGLW
                                                                              (a) Amplification Benefit                                                                                                                                  (b) Correlation Benefit

      Figure 6: (a) Ratio of RMSE between Unamplified DP-BAND MF (b = n/k) and DP-BAND MF, which
      measures the benefit of amplification in different settings. (b) Ratio of RMSE between Amplified
      DP-SGD (b = 1) and DP-BAND MF, which measures the benefit of correlated noise in different
      settings. Both plots show results for n = 16384.


617) 7YFSTXMQEPMX] 6EXMS


                                                                                                                                                              617) 7YFSTXMQEPMX] 6EXMS


                                                                                                                         (4 7+(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (4 7+(
                                                                                                                         8VII %KKVIKEXMSR                                                                                                                 8VII %KKVIKEXMSR
                                                                                                                     7XEQTMRK                                                                                                                             7XEQTMRK
                                                                                                                     *,9                                                                                                                                       *,9
                                                                                                                     &YJJIVIH 8SITPMX^                                                                                                           &YJJIVIH 8SITPMX^
                                                                                                                     (IRWI 1*                                                                                                                             (IRWI 1*
                                                                                                                     %QTPMJMIH &ERH1*                                                                                                             %QTPMJMIH &ERH1*


                                                   <                                                                                                                                                         <

                                                                                  -XIVEXMSRW                                                                                                                                           )TSGLW

                                                                                    (a) k = 8,   = 4                                                                                                                                            (b) n = 8192,   = 4

      Figure 7: RMSE Suboptimality ratio of different strategies as a function of n (left) and k (right) for
        = 4.


      the 8 epoch setting. DP-BAND MF needs 16 epochs to get within a factor of 2× of the RMES of
      full-batch DP-SGD.

       F.4                                                      M AX E RROR VS . L EARNING P ERFORMANCE

       G                                                        Q UALATATIVE C OMPARISON TO P RIOR AND C ONCURRENT W ORK

    There are three primary axes we can evaluate prior matrix factorization approaches on: (1) efficiency
    of strategy selection, (2) training-time overhead, and (3) utility. Table 2
    The factorizations that are most efficient to calculate avoid numerical optimization Abadi et al. (2016);
    Kairouz et al. (2021b); Kalinin & Lampert (2024); Fichtenberger et al. (2023), but do so at the cost of
    utility. The factorizations that are most expensive to compute represent the noise correlation strategy
    using dense matrices, and are generally inefficient for large n Denisov et al. (2022); Choquette-Choo
    et al. (2023b; 2024). Our proposed approach, as well as one concurrent approach McMahan et al.
    (2024a;b) get the best of both worlds, by numerically optimizing over parameterized classes of
    strategies that avoid dense representations.
      Different factorizations have different properties that can be exploited for runtime efficiency. DP-
      SGD is the most efficient method, since it adds independent rather than correlated noise. The most
      general matrix factorizations require time linear in n to generate noise for a single iteration, which
      can be prohibitively expensive for large n (even with distributed noise generation). Indeed, these


                                                                                                                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                 )TSGLW  O



                                      617)


                                                                                                                 &ERHW  F
Figure 8: RMSE of DP-BAND MF as a function of b for various epochs, with fixed ( , δ) = (8, 10−8 )
and n = 16384. With b = 1, DP-BAND MF is equivalent to DP-SGD, and only benefits from
amplication (not correlated noise). With b = nk , DP-BAND MF only benefits from correlated noise
(not amplification) and closely resembles D ENSE -DP-MF. The best RMSE is obtained somewhere
in the middle, with the both the best RMSE and corresponding value of b decreasing with epochs. By
using DP-BAND MF instead of DP-SGD, one can run for far fewer epochs without sacrificing nearly
as much utility.


                                   (4 &ERH1* F!
                                                                                                (4 &ERH1* F!
                                       (4 &ERH1* F!
                                                                                               (4 &ERH1* F!
                                    (4 &ERH1* F!
                                                                                              (4 &ERH1* F!

'VSWW )RXVST]


                                                                                                                                    'VSWW )RXVST]


                                                                                                                                                               (4 &ERH1* F!
                                                                                                                                                                  (4 &08 1*


                                                                     1E\ )VVSV                                                                                                       1E\ )VVSV
                                                  (a) Adaptive Optimizer                                                                                                 (b) Non-Adaptive Optimizer

Figure 9: Max Per-Query Error vs. Learning Performance (evaluation cross entropy) with an adaptive
optimizer (a) and a non-adaptive optimizer (b). In both (a) and (b), a 4M parameter BertTiny
model is trained on the StackOverflow dataset for various noise multipliers.


prior works focused on settings where n ≤ 2052 Denisov et al. (2022); Choquette-Choo et al. (2023b).
Our method bypasses this limitation via Algorithm 1, and enjoys only a b× overhead.
Finally, different factorizations enjoy different utility. We say a factorization is optimal in at least one
setting of (n ≤ 220 , k ≤ n,   ≤ 16) if it achieves the lowest RMSE among all methods that scale to
that setting. While this characterization doesn’t quantify how close to optimal different methods are,
it clearly demonstrates the advantages of DP-BAND MF relative to other scalable approaches.


                                                                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             Efficient    Sub-linear       Optimal
                        Factorization                        Strategy      Training       in at least
                                                             Selection    Overhead        one setting
    Identity (DP-SGD)                                            3            3                7
    T REE AGGREGATION Kairouz et al. (2021b)                     3            3                7
    FHU Fichtenberger et al. (2023)                              3            7                7
    LTI Choquette-Choo et al. (2023a)                            3            7
    S TAMPING Denisov et al. (2022)                              7            7                7
    M ULTI - EPOCH MF Choquette-Choo et al. (2023b)              7            7                3
    BLT-DP-MF McMahan et al. (2024a)                             3            3                7
    BANDED S QRT Kalinin & Lampert (2024)                        3            3                7
    DP-BAND MF [Ours]                                            3            3                3

     Table 2: Summary of existing matrix factorizations and their performance characteristics.


H     I MPROVING FRAGILITY TO MIN SEPARATION FOR F EDERATED T RAINING
      S CENARIOS

The primary focus of this paper has been on centralized training regimes, where DP-BAND MF
benefits from privacy amplification by sampling. As observed in prior work (Choquette-Choo et al.,
2024; McMahan et al., 2024b) and in Figure 1b Unamplified DP-BAND MF is still a state-of-the-art
mechanism in federated training regimes. There, a (k, b)-min-separation participation pattern is used
where each user contributes at most k times during training, and each contribution is separated by at
least b iterations. In centralized scenarios we know what these parameters are in advance based on
properties of the dataset and training setup. In federated scenarios, it is more difficult to control, and
therefore the strategy is typically optimized based on estimates of these quantities, while the privacy
budget consumed during training is computed post-hoc (Xu et al., 2023). If the min separation is
correctly estimated, DP-BAND MF is the best known mechanism currently available. However, if the
true min separation differs from the one the strategy was optimized for significantly (e.g., more than
a factor of 2×), BLT-DP-MF can outperform DP-BAND MF.
Fundamentally, this phenomenon is due to the fact that the Toeplitz coefficients in the BLT strategies
decay more quickly than the ones in banded Toeplitz strategies. A simple heuristic can improve the
robustness of banded Toeplitz strategies to miscalibration of min-separation, at the cost of increased
expected error when the min-separation is correctly calibrated.

       • Let b0 and b denote the lower and upper bound on min separation we want to tailor the
         mechanism for.
       • Optimize θ ∈ Rb for expected error as in Proposition 3.1.
       • Set θi = b−b
                   b−i
                     0
                       θi for all i ≥ b0 .

We take the setting considered in McMahan et al. (2024b), where n = 2000, k = 5, and min-sep is
between b0 = 200 and b = 400. In Figure 10a we plot the Toeplitz coefficients of three strategies: BLT,
BandToep optimized for b = 400, and BandToep + Heuristic described above. In Figure 10b we plot
the RMSE of each strategy as a function of the minimum separation. With our heuristic, we achieve
lower RMSE than BLT strategies across all min separations considered, but sacrifice some RMSE
over the baseline banded Toeplitz strategy when the minimum separation is very close to 400. Note
the relative differences between all three mechanisms are pretty small in this setting. Finally, we will
note that the heuristic can likely be replaced with something more principled, by e.g., optimizing for
the expected error averaged over different min-separations. We leave this exploration for future work.

I    S CALING B EYOND n > 107

Beyond n > 107 , numerically optimizing banded Toeplitz strategies becomes expensive using the
techniques we described in the main body. With a small observation, we can derive an approximate
loss function whose time complexity is significantly reduced. Recall from Proposition 3.1 that to


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        100                                                                 9.2
                                                   BLT                                                                      BLT
                                                   BandToep                                 9.0                             BandToep
Toeplitz Coefficient                               BandToep + Heuristic                     8.8                             BandToep + Heuristic
                       10 1
                                                                                            8.6


                                                                                    RMSE
                                                                                            8.4
                       10 2                                                                 8.2
                                                                                            8.0

                       10 3                                                                 7.8
                              0   100      200           300        400       500                 200   225    250   275   300   325   350   375   400
                                                 Index                                                               Min Separation
                                  (a) Toeplitz Coefficients                                                   (b) Min Sep Fragility

Figure 10: Comparison between Buffered Toeplitz strategies and Banded Toeplitz strategies when the
min-separation is not known in advance (i.e., federated training scenarios).


compute the expected error of a Toeplitz strategy we need to compute y = C(θ)−1 1 (if we are
optimizing for the Prefix workload). Note that yi is defined by a simple linear recurrence of order b
shown in Algorithm 1. Rewriting that recurrence here, we have:

                                                                               b
                                                                   yi = (1 − ∑ θj yi−j+1 )/θ1
                                                                              j=2


Now consider the setting where n ≫ b. Now suppose for a moment the sequence yi converges to some
fixed point x, that is limi→∞ yi = x. We can solve for this fixed point by substituting yi = yi−j+1 = x,
and solving for x. Doing so, we obtain:

                                                                                        1
                                                                          x=     b
                                                                                ∑j=1 θj

It is natural to question whether the sequence yi converges. Since divergence would generally imply
high expected error, we believe any reasonable iterative optimization procedure should produce
well-behaved strategy parameters θ. To compute an approximate expected error, we can simply
compute yi exactly up to some fixed index m, and then approximate yi ≈ ∑ 1θj for i > m. Using this
                                                                           j
idea, we can easily approximate the expected mean squared error as:


                                                     1 n 2 1 m 2            1 2 n
                                                       ∑ iyi ≈ [ ∑ iyi + (      ) ∑ i]
                                                     n i=1    n i=1        ∑j θj i=m+1

We can evaluate this expression in O(m) time using the closed form expression for ∑ni=m+1 i. We
can similarly easily approximate the expected max squared error as:

                                                          n          m
                                                                                    1 2
                                                         ∑ yi ≈ ∑ yi + (                  ) (n − m + 1)
                                                               2          2
                                                         i=1        i=1            ∑j θ j

Empirically, the sequence converges quite quickly and we recommend setting m = b2 (assuming
n > b2 ), which gives an overall time complexity of O(b3 ) for evaluating the loss function. As a
concrete data point, optimizing the expected max squared error for n = 216 and b = 64 using m = b,
m = b2 yields suboptimality ratios are 1.032 and 1.0 respectively. That is, setting m = b2 gives no
loss in solution quality.


                                                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         8VEMRMRK -XIVEXMSRW  R


                                                                                   &ERHW  F
Figure 11: RMSE Suboptimaltiy Ratio of the optimal parameterized banded Toeplitz strategy of the
form θi = 1/i + c , and the optimal unconstrained banded Toeplitz strategy, for various choices of n
and b.


J   N EAR - OPTIMAL BANDED T OEPLITZ STRATEGIES WITHOUT GRADIENTS
Through inspection of the optimal Toeplitz coefficients in Figure 10a, one can attempt to fit a
functional form to the parameters. The expression θi = 1/i + c provides an excellent fit for the optimal
banded Toeplitz coefficients when c is chosen appropriately. To find the best value of c given the n
and b, one can do a simple sweep over a range of possible values, picking the best one. This avoids
the need to compute gradients, and the evaluation of the loss function at different values of c can be
easily vectorized / parallelized. This provides an excellent approximation of the optimal Toeplitz
coefficients, particularly when n >> b, as demonstrated in Figure 11.
While we do not work out the details here, we believe that it may be possible to identify an efficient
single-shot algorithm to find the optimal value of c by deriving and analyzing the gradient, and
identifying where it is 0.

K    O PTIMIZING C OLUMN -N ORMALIZED BANDED T OEPLITZ S TRATEGIES
In Section 3.2, we discuss the importance of column normalization, and propose a simple heuristic
of normalizing the columns of the optimized banded Toeplitz matrix. This heuristic improves the
expected error over the corresponding un-normalized strategy, but is not in general optimal among the
class of all column-normalized banded Toeplitz strategies, (since it was optimized without accounting
for column normalization). In this section, we describe two approaches to optimize over the space
of column normalized banded Toeplitz strategies. In general, we can optimize over the space of
column-normalized Toeplitz strategies, but we would have to forfeit the efficiency advantages that
come along with the Toeplitz structure, and instead use the techniques we described for general
banded matrices in Section 3.1. Alternatively, we can use the gradient-free approach described
in App. J, which can be helpful because the gradient computation is the primary bottleneck for
general banded optimization as explained in App. C. However, the latter approach would only give
an approximate minimum (although in practice the sub-optimality is likely too small to matter).


                                                                                          22
