Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B ENIGN OVERFITTING IN O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION
G ENERALIZATION OF L INEAR M ODELS
 Shange TangвҲ—вҖ                  Jiayun WuвҲ—вҖЎ                Jianqing FanвҖ                 Chi JinВ§



                                              A BSTRACT

          Benign overfitting refers to the phenomenon where an over-parameterized model
          fits the training data perfectly, including noise in the data, but still generalizes well
          to the unseen test data. While prior work provides some theoretical understanding
          of this phenomenon under the in-distribution setup, modern machine learning of-
          ten operates in a more challenging Out-of-Distribution (OOD) regime, where the
          target (test) distribution can be rather different from the source (training) distribu-
          tion. In this work, we take an initial step towards understanding benign overfitting
          in the OOD regime by focusing on the basic setup of over-parameterized linear
          models under covariate shift. We provide non-asymptotic guarantees proving that
          benign overfitting occurs in standard ridge regression, even under the OOD regime
          when the target covariance satisfies certain structural conditions. We identify sev-
          eral vital quantities relating to source and target covariance, which govern the
          performance of OOD generalization. Our result is sharp, which provably recov-
          ers prior in-distribution benign overfitting guarantee (Tsigler & Bartlett, 2023), as
          well as under-parameterized OOD guarantee (Ge et al., 2024) when specializing
          to each setup. Moreover, we also present theoretical results for a more general
          family of target covariance matrix,
                                           вҲҡ where standard ridge regression only achieves
          a slow statistical rate of O(1/ n) for the excess risk, while Principal Component
          Regression (PCR) is guaranteed to achieve the fast rate O(1/n), where n is the
          number of samples.


1       I NTRODUCTION
In modern machine learning, distribution shift has become a ubiquitous challenge where models
trained on a source data distribution are tested on a different target distribution (Zou et al., 2018;
Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019; Guan & Liu, 2021; Koh et al., 2021). Generalization under distribu-
tion shift, known as Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generalization, remains a fundamental issue in the
practical application of machine learning (Recht et al., 2019; Hendrycks et al., 2021; Miller et al.,
2021; Wenzel et al., 2022). While there has been extensive work on the theoretical understanding
of OOD generalization, most of it has focused on under-parameterized models (Shimodaira, 2000;
Lei et al., 2021; Ge et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2022). However, over-parameterized models, such as
deep neural networks and large language models (LLMs) in the fine-tuning stage, which have more
parameters than training samples, are widely used in modern machine learning. Surprisingly, despite
the classic bias-variance tradeoff for under-parameterized models, over-parameterized models tend
to overfit the data while still achieving strong in-distribution generalization, a phenomenon known
as benign overfitting (Hastie et al., 2022; Shamir, 2023) or harmless interpolation (Muthukumar
et al., 2020). Therefore, it is crucial to theoretically understand how benign overfitting shapes OOD
generalization in over-parameterized models.
It is established in over-parameterized models that вҖңbenign overfittingвҖқ occurs when the data essen-
tially resides on a low-dimensional manifold. The manifold assumption (Belkin & Niyogi, 2003) is
widely applicable across image, speech, and language data, where although features are embedded
    вҲ—
     They contributed equally and are listed in alphabetical order.
    вҖ 
     Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University;
{shangetang, jqfan}@princeton.edu
   вҖЎ
     Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University; jiayun.wu.work@gmail.com
   В§
     Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University; chij@princeton.edu


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in a high-dimensional ambient space, their generation is governed by a few degrees of freedom im-
posed by physical constraints (Niyogi, 2013). Specifically, the covariance matrix of the data should
be characterized by several major directions corresponding to large eigenvalues, while the remaining
directions are high-dimensional but associated with small eigenvalues. In this setting, even though
the estimator may overfit the noise in the low-variance directions, it can still capture the signal along
the major directions while the noise is dampened in the minor directions. Recent non-asymptotic
analyses have provided upper bounds on the excess risk for the minimum-norm interpolant and over-
parameterized ridge estimator under this framework (Bartlett et al., 2020; Hastie et al., 2022; Tsigler
& Bartlett, 2023).
However, a theoretical understanding of OOD generalization in over-parameterized models remains
elusive. In this paper, we take an initial step towards characterizing OOD generalization in over-
parameterized models under general covariate shift, a standard assumption in the OOD regime (Ben-
David et al., 2006), where the conditional distribution of the outcome given the covariates remains
invariant. We derive the first vanishing, non-asymptotic excess risk bound for ridge regression and
minimum-norm interpolation, assuming that the source covariance is dominated by a few major
eigenvalues, which satisfies the in-distribution benign overfitting condition. Notably, we allow the
target covariance to be arbitrary. This result stands in contrast to recent work that either addresses
only a restrictive type of target covariance matrices (Hao et al., 2024; Mallinar et al., 2024) or
provides excess risk bounds that are non-vanishing (Tripuraneni et al., 2021a; Hao et al., 2024).
In summary, our excess risk bound identifies several key quantities that relate to the source and
target covariance. We show that вҖңbenign overfittingвҖқ occurs in case 1 where the target distribution
data lies on the low-dimensional manifold of the source distribution, so that these key quantities are
well controlled. In the opposite case 2, where the target distribution data falls outside of the low-
dimensional manifold of the source,
                                 вҲҡ ridge regression may incur large excess risk, lower bounded by
the slow statistical rate of O(1/ n). In contrast, we show that Principal Component Regression
(PCR) achieves the fast rate of O(1/n) in case 2. The non-asymptotic rates of both ridge regression
and PCR are validated through simulation experiments on multivariate Gaussian data in Appendix A.
Our contributions.

1. We provide a sharp, instance-dependent excess risk bound for over-parameterized ridge regres-
   sion under covariate shift (Theorem 2). Our result applies to any target distribution, requiring
   only that the source covariance be dominated by a few major eigenvectors and that the minor
   components are high-dimensional. Our results shows that when certain key quantities relating to
   the source and target distributions are bounded (case 1), ridge regression exhibits вҖңbenign over-
   fittingвҖқ, achieving excess risk comparable to the in-distribution case. Importantly, this condition
   requires that the overall magnitude of the target covariance along the minor directions scales
   similarly to, or smaller than, that of the source, but it does not depend on the spectral structure of
   the target covariance on the minor directions. Our results recover the in-distribution bound from
   Tsigler & Bartlett (2023) when the source and target match and also recover the sharp bound
   from Ge et al. (2024) for under-parameterized linear regression under covariate shift when the
   minor components vanish.
2. For case 2 where the вҖңbenign-overfittingвҖқ of ridge regression is not guaranteed (when target
   distribution exhibits significant variance in the minor directions), we further show that ridge
   regression incurs a higher error
                                 вҲҡ rate compared to the in-distribution case, lower bounded by the
   slow statistical rate of O(1/ n) in certain instances (Theorem 4). However, we demonstrate
   that Principal Component Regression ensures a fast rate of O(1/n) in these cases, provided that
   the true signal primarily lies in the major directions of the source (Theorem 5). Additionally,
   PCR does not rely on the minor directions of the source distribution being high-dimensional,
   highlighting its advantage over ridge regression in such settings.

1.1   R ELATED WORK

Over-parameterization. The success of over-parameterized models in machine learning has
sparked significant research on their theoretical foundations. Harmless interpolation (Muthukumar
et al., 2020) or benign overfitting (Shamir, 2023) describes cases where linear models interpolate
noise yet still generalize well. Double descent in prediction error is also observed as the ambient
dimension surpasses the number of training samples (Nakkiran, 2019; Xu & Hsu, 2019).


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Research in this field can be divided into two categories based on assumptions about the spectral
structure of the sample covariance. The first category assumes an almost isotropic sample covari-
ance matrix with a bounded condition number or an isotropic prior distribution of parameters (Belkin
et al., 2020), allowing for asymptotic risk bounds (Dobriban & Wager, 2018; Richards et al., 2021).
However, ridgeless regression is sub-optimal in this setting unless the signal-to-noise ratio is in-
finite (Wu & Xu, 2020), and non-asymptotic error bounds are lacking. Our work falls into the
second category, focusing on the covariance model where a small number of eigenvalues dominate
the sample covariance, and the signal is concentrated in the subspace spanned by the leading eigen-
vectors (Bibas et al., 2019; Chinot & Lerasle, 2022; Hastie et al., 2022; Silin & Fan, 2022). Linear
regression can be optimal without regularization under this covariance structure (Kobak et al., 2020),
which is of practical interest because ridgeless regression is equivalent as gradient descent from zero
initialization (Zhou et al., 2020). Sharp non-asymptotic bounds for variance and bias in ridge and
ridgeless regression have been derived (Bartlett et al., 2020; Tsigler & Bartlett, 2023).
Extending the analysis of ridgeless estimators (i.e., minimum norm interpolants), uniform conver-
gence bounds for generalization error have been studied for all interpolants with arbitrary norms.
However, uniformly bounding the difference between population and empirical errors generally
fails to ensure a consistent predictor (Zhou et al., 2020), necessitating strong assumptions on dis-
tributions (Koehler et al., 2021) or hypothesis classes (Negrea et al., 2020). Over-parameterization
theory for linear models has also been applied to two-layer neural networks approximated via kernel
ridge regression (Liang et al., 2020; Ghorbani et al., 2020; 2021; Bartlett et al., 2021; Mei & Monta-
nari, 2022; Mei et al., 2022; Montanari & Zhong, 2022; Simon et al., 2023), though this lies beyond
the scope of the present work.
Out-of-Distribution generalization. Out-of-distribution generalization is well studied for under-
parameterized models, especially under the setup of covariate shift. Shimodaira (2000) pointed
out that vanilla MLE (Empirical Risk Minimization, ERM) is asymptotically optimal among all the
weighted likelihood estimators when the model is well-specified. For non-asymptotic results, Cortes
et al. (2010); Agapiou et al. (2017), provide risk bounds for importance weighting. Another line of
work provides non-asymptotic analyses for covariate shift, focusing on linear regression or a few
specific models such as one-hidden layer neural network (Mousavi Kalan et al., 2020; Lei et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2022). Most recently Ge et al. (2024) provides tight non-asymptotic analysis
for general well-specified parametric models, showing that even without target data, vanilla MLE
(Empirical Risk Minimization, ERM) is minimax optimal with a sharp 1/n excess risk bound based
on Fisher information.
Research on over-parameterized models under distribution shift has largely focused on covariate
shifts in linear regression. Importance weighting for over-parameterized models (Chen et al., 2024)
and general sample reweighting offer no advantage over ERM since both converge to the same esti-
mator via gradient descent (Zhai et al., 2022). Consequently, much literature focuses on minimum-
norm interpolation as the natural ERM solution. For isotropic covariance structure, Tripuraneni et al.
(2021a) derive an asymptotic generalization bound decreasing with d/n where d represents the data
dimension. Most related to our work, a line of work also consider the covariance model dominated
by several major eigenvectors, however, they only address a restrictive form of covariate shift or
obtaining a non-vanishing bound: Kausik et al. (2024) study a linear model with additive noise on
covariates when data strictly lies in a low-dimensional subspace, showing a non-vanishing bound.
Hao et al. (2024) give a non-vanishing bound for the case where features are translated by a con-
stant and the covariance matrix is preserved. Mallinar et al. (2024) investigate the special case with
independent covariates and simultaneously diagonal source and target covariance matrices, under
which the in-distribution analysis of Bartlett et al. (2020); Tsigler & Bartlett (2023) can be directly
extended. Still, their estimation bias bound is looser than ours, as it exhibits a gap compared to
Tsigler & Bartlett (2023)вҖҷs sharp bound even when the source and target distributions are aligned.
In contrast, our work achieves the first vanishing non-asymptotic error bound for general covariate
shift, assuming only finite second moments for the target covariance matrix.
Another line of research considers non-parametric models under covariate shift (Kpotufe & Mar-
tinet, 2018; Hanneke & Kpotufe, 2019; Pathak et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2023), presenting minimax
results governed by a transfer-exponent that measures the similarity between source and target dis-
tributions. However, this falls outside the scope of our work.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Principal Component Regression. Principal Component Regression (PCR) has been designed to
treat multicollinearity in high-dimensional linear regression, where the covariates possess a latent,
low-dimensional representation (Massy, 1965; Jeffers, 1967; Jolliffe, 1982; Jeffers, 1981). PCR has
been widely used in statistics (Liu et al., 2003; Fan et al., 2021; Fan & Gu, 2023), econometrics
(Stock & Watson, 2002; Bai & Ng, 2002; Fan et al., 2020), chemometrics (NГҰs & Martens, 1988;
Sun, 1995; Vigneau et al., 1997; Depczynski et al., 2000; Keithley et al., 2009), construction man-
agement (Chan & Park, 2005), environmental science (Kumar & Goyal, 2011; Hidalgo et al., 2000),
signal processing (Huang & Yang, 2012) and etc.
Regarding the theory of PCR, Hadi & Ling (1998) identify conditions under which PCR will fail.
Bair et al. (2006) suggest selecting principal components based on their association with the outcome
and provide corresponding asymptotic consistency results. Xu & Hsu (2019) establish asymptotic
risk bounds for PCR with varying numbers of selected components k. They show that the вҖңdouble
descentвҖқ behavior also happens in PCR as k/d increases. Most relevant to our work, Agarwal
et al. (2019)
         вҲҡ derive non-asymptotic error bounds for PCR, and show that the error decays at a rate
of O(1/ n) (n is the sample size), assuming all singular values of the data matrix are of similar
magnitude. Agarwal et al. (2020) further improves this rate to O(1/n). However, both results
consider a fixed design with strict low-rank assumptions, making them inapplicable to our setting of
OOD generalization.

2     C OVARIATE SHIFT SETUP UNDER OVER - PARAMETERIZATION

2.1   DATA WITH COVARIATE SHIFT

We address the out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization of over-parameterized models under co-
variate shift, where the covariates, denoted by a random vector x вҲҲ Rd , follow different distribu-
tions during training and evaluation. Specifically, we assume that the training data is sampled from
a source distribution PS , and the learned model is subsequently applied to data from an unknown
target distribution PT . Let the covariates
                                               be zero-mean on the source distribution, and define the
covariance matrix as ОЈS := ExвҲјPS xxT . Since we can always choose an orthonormal basis such
that ОЈS becomes diagonal, we express ОЈS = diag(О»1 , В· В· В· , О»d ) without loss of generality, where
the eigenvalues are arranged in non-increasing order: О»1 вүҘ В· В· В· вүҘ О»d вүҘ 0. Moreover, we assume
                                                   вҲ’1/2
sub-gaussianity of the source covariates, i.e., ОЈS x is Пғ-sub-gaussian where the precise definition
of the sub-Gaussian norm is given in section B. We consider a general covariate distribution
                                                                                             for the
target, assuming only that it has a finite second moment, denoted by ОЈT := ExвҲјPT xxT , which is
not necessarily diagonal.
We consider a linear response model that remains consistent across the source and target distribu-
tions. The outcome follows y = xT ОІ вҲ— + Пө, where ОІ вҲ— вҲҲ Rd represents the true parameter, and Пө is
an independent noise with zero-mean and variance v 2 .

2.2   L EARNING PROCEDURE AND EVALUATION

The learning procedure involves training a linear model with n i.i.d. samples {(xi , yi )}ni=1 drawn
from the source distribution. Define X := (x1 , ..., xn )T вҲҲ RnГ—d , Y := (y1 , ..., yn )T and Пө :=
(Пө1 , ..., Пөn )T . We focus on models ОІ(Y
                                      b ) that are linear in Y , allowing us to write ОІ(Y
                                                                                      b ) = ОІ(XОІ
                                                                                            b    вӢҶ
                                                                                                   )+
ОІ(Пө). We consider ridge regression and Principal Component Regression to be two examples of such
b
algorithms. With a regularization coefficient О» вүҘ 0, the ridge estimator is defined as
                                  b ) = X T (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Y.
                                  ОІ(Y

The estimator is assessed on the target distribution by its excess risk relative to the true model,
expressed as the following equation:
             b ) := E(x,y)вҲјP y вҲ’ xT ОІ(Y      b ) 2 вҲ’ y вҲ’ xT ОІ вҲ— 2 = ОІ(Y   b ) вҲ’ ОІвҲ— 2 ,

         R ОІ(Y                   T                                                     ОЈT
                          вҲҡ
where we define вҲҘxвҲҘA := xT Ax for any positive semi-definite matrix A. The metric of interest is

the expected excess risk with respect to the noise, given by EПө R ОІ(Y
                                                                  b ) . Following from the lin-


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


earity of the model, the expected excess risk can be decomposed into bias and variance components:
                                                    2           вӢҶ         2
                                                                  ) вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ ОЈ ,

                       EПө R ОІ(Y
                              b ) = EПө ОІ(Пө)   b
                                                    ОЈ
                                                       + ОІ(XОІ
                                                          b
                                                        T                      T

                                                   2                            вӢҶ         2
where we define the variance as V := EПө ОІ(Пө)
                                          b
                                                   ОЈT
                                                      and the bias as B :=ОІ(XОІ
                                                                          b       ) вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ ОЈ . Here,
                                                                                            T
we assume the shifts only in the distribution of covariates; the regression coefficients remain the
same.

2.3   T HE STRUCTURE OF COVARIANCE IN BENIGN OVERFITTING

Throughout this paper, we follow the convention of Tsigler & Bartlett (2023) and consider the
source covariance matrix ОЈS as characterized by a few numbers of high-variance directions and a
large number of low-variance directions of similar magnitude. We refer to the high-variance direc-
tions as вҖңmajor directionsвҖқ and the low-variance directions as вҖңminor directionsвҖқ. We denote the
number of major directions as k. For the remaining d вҲ’ k minor directions, we use the following
notions of effective rank to approximate the number of directions with a similar scale. For the ridge
regularization coefficient О» вүҘ 0, we define:
                                    P                         P          2
                                О» + j>k О»j                О» + j>k О»j
                          rk :=               , Rk :=       P        2     .
                                    О»k+1                       j>k О»j

We have 1 вүӨ rk вүӨ Rk . When О» = 0, it further holds that Rk вүӨ d вҲ’ k. We denote the first k
columns of X as Xk and the remaining d вҲ’ k columns as XвҲ’k . Correspondingly, we partion ОІ вӢҶ into
ОІkвӢҶ and ОІвҲ’k
          вӢҶ
            . The covariance matrix blocks along the diagonals are denoted by ОЈS,k , ОЈS,вҲ’k , ОЈT,k
and ОЈT,вҲ’k . We define the following quantities to facilitate our presentation, which are crucial in our
analysis.
                             вҲ’1         вҲ’1
                      T = ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 ,   U = ОЈS,вҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k ,      V = ОЈ2S,вҲ’k .                    (1)

3     OVER - PARAMETERIZED RIDGE REGRESSION
In the context of in-distribution generalization, where ОЈS = ОЈT , for over-parameterized linear
models, Bartlett et al. (2020) and Tsigler & Bartlett (2023) demonstrate that the ridge estimator
(with the minimum-norm interpolant as a special case) can effectively learn the signal from the
subspace of data spanned by the major eigenvectors, while benignly overfitting the noise in the
minor directions under certain scenarios. They argue that benign overfitting occurs when the true
signal predominantly lies in the major directions, and the minor directions have a small scale but
highly effective rank. This section explores whether this mechanism still holds under covariate
shift. We derive upper bounds (Theorem 2) for the excess risk of the over-parameterized ridge
estimator in the context of OOD generalization, demonstrating that вҖңbenign overfittingвҖқ also happens
under covariate shift, given that the target distributionвҖҷs covariance remains dominated by the first
k dimensions. Specifically, we show that T characterizes the shift in the major directions, while
the overall magnitude of ОЈT,вҲ’k , which captures the shift in the minor directions, is crucial for
benign overfitting. When the overall magnitude of ОЈT,вҲ’k scales similarly to or smaller than those
of the source, ridge regression achieves the same non-asymptotic error rate under covariate shift as
in the in-distribution setting. Surprisingly, although a high effective rank in the minor directions
of the source is essential for benign overfitting, only the overall magnitude matters for the target
distribution.

3.1   WARM - UP : IN - DISTRIBUTION BENIGN OVERFITTING

As a warm-up, we introduce Tsigler & Bartlett (2023)вҖҷs in-distribution result on benign overfitting
in ridge regression. When the data dimension d exceeds the sample size n, the ridgeless estimator
interpolates the training data, fitting the noise. In this case, the estimator ОІb lies within the subspace
spanned by the covariates of the n samples. If d is much larger than n, a new test point is highly
likely to be orthogonal to this subspace, ameliorating noise from affecting the prediction. Therefore,
the minor components of the covariance matrix actually provide implicit regularization. Tsigler
& Bartlett (2023) assume that the data lies in a space with k major directions and d вҲ’ k weak


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


but essentially high-dimensional minor directions, allowing for benign overfitting. This intuition is
formalized through an assumption that controls the condition number of the Gram matrix for the
remaining d вҲ’ k dimensions.
Assumption 1 (CondNum(k, Оҙ, L) (Tsigler & Bartlett, 2023)). Define a matrix Ak = О»In +
       T
XвҲ’k XвҲ’k   . With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, Ak is positive definite and has a condition number no
greater than L, i.e.,
                                             Вө1 (Ak )
                                             Вөn (Ak ) вүӨ L,
where the i-th largest eigenvalue of a matrix is denoted by Вөi (В·).
Remark 1. This assumption essentially posits that the minor directions of the source covariance
have an effective rank significantly greater than n. As evidence, Tsigler & Bartlett (2023) prove that
if CondNum holds, the effective rank rk is lower bounded by n/L, up to a constant. Conversely, a
lower bound on the effective rank rk also implies an upper bound of the condition number of Ak .
For more details, refer to Tsigler & Bartlett (2023, Lemma 3).
Assuming CondNum, Tsigler & Bartlett (2023) obtain sharp upper bounds for both the variance and
bias of the ridge estimator, with matching lower bounds (see their Theorem 2). To facilitate the
                        e := О» + P
presentation, we define О»            j>k О»j to represent the combined regularization term from both
ridge and implicit regularization.
Theorem 1 (Tsigler & Bartlett (2023)). There exists a constant c that only depends on Пғ, L, such
that for any n > ck, if the assumption condNum(k, Оҙ, L) (Assumption 1) is satisfied, then it holds
that n < crk , and with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ вҲ’ ceвҲ’n/c ,
                                                                  2
                  V     k    n         B                вӢҶ 2     О»        вӢҶ   2
                      вүӨ   +     ,         вүӨ  B    := вҲҘОІ  вҲҘ          + ОІвҲ’k          ,
                                                                e
                                               ID           вҲ’1
                 cv 2   n    Rk         c               k ОЈ  S,kn            ОЈ  S,вҲ’k

where v denotes the standard deviation of the noise Пө.
The first variance term arises from estimating the k major signal dimensions, corresponding to the
classic variance in k-dimensional ordinary least squares. The second variance term, n/Rk , vanishes
when the minor directions are sufficiently high-dimensional, i.e., when Rk вү« n. However, the
                                    вӢҶ   2
signal in the minor directions, ОІвҲ’k     ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                              , is nearly lost when projected from the high-dimensional
ambient space onto the low-dimensional sample space, contributing to the second bias term. Finally,
the first bias term relates to the signal estimation in the first k dimensions and is introduced by the
overall regularization from both ridge and implicit regularization imposed by the minor components.

3.2   O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION BENIGN OVERFITTING

We now investigate the out-of-distribution performance of the ridge estimator. Intuitively, when the
minor components vanish for both the source and target distributions, over-parameterized ridge re-
gression essentially reduces to under-parameterized ridge regression in the major directions, achiev-
ing a rate of O(tr[T
               e      ]/n), as demonstrated by Ge et al. (2024). When the minor components do
not vanish, a high effective rank of the minor components in the source distribution is essential for
вҖңbenign overfittingвҖқ, as shown by Tsigler & Bartlett (2023). However, we argue that for the target
distribution, only the overall magnitude of the minor components is critical for benign overfitting.
This is because when the sourceвҖҷs minor directions have an effective rank much larger than n, the
n-dimensional subspace spanned by the training samples is already almost orthogonal to any test
point with high probability. As a result, the spectral structure of the target becomes irrelevantвҖ“only
a small overall magnitude of the targetвҖҷs minor components is required.
We formalize those intuitive claims by deriving upper bounds for both the variance and bias of ridge
regression under covariate shift, assuming a source distribution similar to the in-distribution case.
Our upper bound is sharp and can be applied to any target distributions, reducing to Tsigler & Bartlett
(2023)вҖҷs bound (Theorem 1) when the target and source distributions are aligned. Additionally, we
recover Ge et al. (2024)вҖҷs sharp bound for under-parameterized linear regression under a covariate
shift when the high-dimensional minor components vanish.
Theorem 2. There exists a constant c > 2 depending only on Пғ, L, such that for any cN < n < rk ,
if the assumption condNum(k, Оҙ, L) (Assumption 1) is satisfied, then with probability at least 1вҲ’3Оҙ,
                                 V     k tr[T ]      n tr[U]
                                   2
                                     вүӨ В·         +      В·        .
                                cv     n     k      Rk tr[V]

                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  B                n вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ
                                    вүӨ BID В· вҲҘT вҲҘ +              .
                                  c                rk вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ

where T , U, V are defined in Equation (1), N = Poly(k + ln(1/Оҙ), О»1 О»вҲ’1      e вҲ’1
                                                                      k , 1 + О»О»k ), and Poly(В·)
denotes a polynomial function.

Recall that BID is the bias upper bound from Theorem 1. Theorem 2 establishes an upper bound
for the excess risk of ridge regression under general covariate shift, expressed in a multiplicative
form based on Theorem 1. This formulation enables a straightforward comparison of the impact
of covariate shifts on the bias and variance of ridge estimators relative to the in-distribution case.
The first conclusion is that Theorem 2 well reduces to the corresponding result in Theorem 1 when
no distribution shift occursвҖ“i.e., ОЈS = ОЈT . This connection follows directly from the condition
n < rk .
The second conclusion is that covariate shift in the first k dimensions and last d вҲ’ k dimensions
                                                              вҲ’1 вҲҘОЈT ,вҲ’k вҲҘ
introduce multiplicative factors of tr[T ]           tr[U ]
                                       k , вҲҘT вҲҘ and tr[V] , nrk вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ , respectively, on the excess
risk. Therefore, as long as these factors are bounded by constants, over-parameterized ridge regres-
sion achieves the same non-asymptotic rate of excess risk under covariate shift as the in-distribution
setting. This scenario, well addressed by ridge regression, occurs when the target distributionвҖҷs co-
variance structure remains dominated by the first k dimensions. In the following, we analyze the
impact of the factors introduced by covariate shifts on both the major and minor directions.

1. T characterizes the shift in the major directions. Under covariate shift within the first k di-
   mensions, we obtain the same non-asymptotic error rate as in Theorem 1, only if вҲҘT вҲҘ is bounded
   by a constant, as tr[T ]/k вүӨ вҲҘT вҲҘ. The matrix T plays a central role in Theorem 2 to quan-
   tify covariate shift within the first k dimensions, matching our intuition. This echoes with Ge
   et al. (2024)вҖҷs finding that tr[T ] captures the difficulty of covariate shift for under-parameterized
   ridgeless regression (MLE). They establish a sharp upper bound on excess risk using Fisher in-
   formation (see their Theorem 3.1), which simplifies to a rate of O(tr[T e       ]/n) for linear models.
   Theorem 2 recovers this result when applied to a k-dimensional under-parameterized setting
   where all high-dimensional minor components vanish, specifically when ОЈS,вҲ’k = ОЈT,вҲ’k = 0.
   Under the same condition as Theorem 2, for a constant c depending only on Пғ, L, with high
   probability, the variance and bias terms are bounded by:
                                 V      tr[T ]    B                  О»  2
                                                            вӢҶ 2
                                     вүӨ         ,     вүӨ   вҲҘОІ  вҲҘ  вҲ’1
                                                            k ОЈS,k        вҲҘT вҲҘ.
                                cv 2      n       c                  n
   The variance bound aligns with Ge et al. (2024)вҖҷs result while the bias vanishes as О» вҶ’ 0.
2. The overall magnitude of ОЈT,вҲ’k is crucial for benign overfitting. Under covariate shift within
                                                      вҲ’1 вҲҘОЈT ,вҲ’k вҲҘ
   the last d вҲ’ k dimensions, when both tr[U ]
                                         tr[V] and nrk вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ are bounded by constants, we
                                                                                           вҲҘОЈ     вҲҘ
   achieve the same non-asymptotic error rate as in Theorem 1. Note that tr[U       ]      T ,вҲ’k F
                                                                                tr[V] вүӨ вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘF . In
   other words, matching our intuition, if the overall magnitude of the minor components of tar-
   get covariance scales similarly to or smaller than those of the source, in terms of the covariance
   norms, вҖңbenign overfittingвҖқ also happens under covariate shift. Importantly, this condition does
   not impose constraints on the internal spectral structure of the minor components of the target
   covariance. For example, we do not force each eigenvalue of ОЈT,вҲ’k to scale with its correspond-
   ing eigenvalue of ОЈS,вҲ’k in decreasing order, as assumed in prior work (Mallinar et al., 2024).
   Surprisingly, for benign overfitting to happen, the source distribution must have a high effective
   rank in the minor directions. However, for the target distribution, only the overall magnitude of
   the minor components is relevant.
                                                                 вҲҘОЈ     вҲҘ
   Another observation is that the bias scales with nrkвҲ’1 вҲҘОЈTS,вҲ’k
                                                              ,вҲ’k
                                                                  вҲҘ , meaning that we only re-
          вҲҘОЈ     вҲҘ
   quire вҲҘОЈTS,вҲ’k
             ,вҲ’k
                 вҲҘ = O(rk /n), which is a less restrictive condition for larger rk . Thus, over-
   parameterization improves the robustness of the estimation bias against covariate shift in the
   minor direction.
Remark 2 (Sample complexity). We have assumed n > cN in Theorem 2. The explicit formula for
N is deferred to Theorem 25 and Remark 8. Here we summarize the sample complexity required
for the bound to hold. The dependence on k varies between в„Ұ(k) and в„Ұ(k 3 ), depending on the


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


degree of covariate shift. The optimal case, aligning with the sample complexity of classic linear
regression, occurs when ОЈS,k вүҲ ОЈT,k . The worst case arises when there is a significant covariate
shift in the first k dimensions, such as when the test data lies predominantly in the subspace of
the first dimension. This variation in sample complexity under covariate shift parallels the analysis
of Ge et al. (2024)P  (see their Theorem 4.2) for the under-parameterized setting. Additionally, we
require n вү« О» + j>k О»j , ensuring that the regularization is not too strong to introduce a bias
exceeding a constant (as reflected in the first term of BID ). On the other hand, we assume n < rk in
the theorem, consistent with the over-parameterized regime and Assumption 1, where the last d вҲ’ k
components are considered to be essentially high-dimensional.
Remark 3 (Dependence on L). Theorem 2 does not explicitly show how the excess risk depends
on the condition number L of Ak . However, we demonstrate in Theorem 25 that the upper bounds
scale at most as L2 . Notably, we maintain the same order of dependence on L in each term of the
upper bounds as in the analysis by Tsigler & Bartlett (2023) (see their Theorem 5).

Finally, Theorem 2 suggests an O(1/n) vanishing error under several conditions that naturally fol-
low from the previous discussions, which we now state rigorously. First, the covariate space decom-
poses into subspaces spanned by low-dimensional major directions and high-dimensional minor
directions, with k = O(1) and Rk = в„Ұ(n2 ). Second, the low-rank covariance structure is preserved
                                                  вҲ’1 вҲҘОЈT ,вҲ’k вҲҘ
after covariate shift, such that вҲҘT вҲҘ, tr[U ]
                                       tr[V] , nrk вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ = O(1). Third, the signal lies predomi-
                                                                                   вҲҡ
nantly in the major directions, with вҲҘОІkвӢҶ вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 = O(1) and ОІвҲ’k    вӢҶ
                                                                     ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                            = O(1/ n). Lastly, the
                                               S,k
                                                                               e = О»+P
regularization is not excessively strong to introduce a significant bias, with О»
   вҲҡ                                                                                       j>k О»j =
O( n).

4     L ARGE SHIFT IN MINOR DIRECTIONS
In the previous section, we established an upper bound for over-parameterized ridge regression under
covariate shift. We showed that when the shift in the minor directions is controlledвҖ”specifically,
when the overall magnitude of ОЈT,вҲ’k is smallвҖ”вҖңbenign overfittingвҖқ also occurs under covariate
shift. However, when the shift in minor directions is significant, meaning the target covariance ma-
trix has many large eigenvalues with corresponding eigenvectors outside the major directions, the
excess risk for ridge regression deteriorates. In this section, we further illustrate the limitations of
ridge regression in such cases by providing a lower bound for its performance for large distribu-
tion shifts in the minor directions. We show
                                           вҲҡ that, in certain instances, ridge regression can only
achieve the slow statistical rate of O(1/ n) for the excess risk. On the other hand, it is natural
to consider alternative algorithms to ridge regression. We demonstrate that even with a large shift
in the minor directions, Principal Component Regression (PCR) is guaranteed to achieve the fast
statistical rate O(1/n) in the same instances, provided that the signal ОІ вӢҶ lies primarily within the
subspace spanned by the major directions. Moreover, PCR does not require the minor directions to
have a high effective rank in the source distribution, highlighting its advantage over ridge regres-
sion in such cases. Throughout this section, we maintain the setup and source covariance structure
described in Section 2. However, Assumption 1 is no longer required.

4.1   S LOW RATE FOR RIDGE REGRESSION

In this subsection, we demonstrate the limitations of ridge regression when the overall magnitude of
ОЈT,вҲ’k is large. Consider an instance where ОЈS has its first k components as Оҳ(1), while the minor
directions have eigenvalues of o(1). If we set ОЈT = Id , in contrast to the вҖңbenign overfittingвҖқ regime
described in Theorem 2, ridge regression will have a large excess risk for this instance. Although
the signal from the major directions is effectively captured, the signal in the minor directions is
nearly lost. Unlike the case in Section 3, here, the estimation error in the minor directions is crucial
because the target distribution has significant components in these directions. We formalize this
intuitive example through the following theorems:
Corollary 3. For some absolute constants C1 , C2 , consider the following instance of ОЈS :
                                                         C1
      О»1 = В· В· В· = О»k = 1,    О»k+1 = В· В· В· = О»k+вҢҠ вҲҡn вҢӢ = вҲҡ ,       О»k+вҢҠ вҲҡn вҢӢ+1 = В· В· В· = О»d = 0.
                                                  C2      n             C2


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        вӢҶ
                                                                вҲҡ
Assume ОЈT,вҲ’k = 0, ОЈT,k = Ik , and ОІвҲ’k      = 0. By choosing О» = n, under the same conditions of
Theorem 2, we can bound the excess risk of the ridge estimator with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 3Оҙ:
                                                     2       вӢҶ 2
                                       b ) вүӨ O v k + вҲҘОІ вҲҘ .

                                EПө R ОІ(Y
                                                          n
Remark 4. Corollary 3 is a direct application of Theorem 2.
                                                                                               вҲҡ
Theorem 4. Consider the same instance of ОЈS as in Corollary 3. Assume ОЈT = Id and О» = n.
There exists an absolute constant C > 0, such that for some 0 < Оҙ < 1, N2 > 0 and for any
n > N2 , with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have V вүҘ Cv 2 .
For any О» > 0, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the excess risk of the ridge estimator satisfies:
                                                           вӢҶ 2   2
                                           b ) вүҘ C вҲҘОІ вҲҡвҲҘ вҲ§v .

                                   EПө R ОІ(Y                   n

From Theorem 4, we observe that when ОЈT = Id , the вҲҡ    performance of ridge regression deteriorates
compared to the case where ОЈT,вҲ’k = 0. If we set О» = n as in Corollary 3, ridge regression incurs
a constant excess risk under covariate shift while achieving an in-distribution error rate of O(1/n).
Furthermore, Theorem 4 shows no matter how we choose the regularization
                                                                 вҲҡ            parameter О», the excess
risk is always lower bounded by the slow statistical rate O(1/ n), which is worse than the fast
rate of O(1/n). However, as we will prove in the next subsection, Principal Component Regression
(PCR) can achieve an excess risk of O(1/n) under this instance, even with ОЈT = Id .

4.2   FAST RATE FOR P RINCIPAL C OMPONENT R EGRESSION

Ridge regression faces significant limitations when there is a large shift in the minor directions. In
                                                                    вӢҶ
Section 3.1, it was shown that the signal in the minor directions, ОІвҲ’k , is nearly lost when projected
from the high-dimensional ambient space onto the low-dimensional sample space. In other words,
learning the true signal from the minor directions is essentially impossible. Therefore, in this sub-
section, we continue to focus on the scenario where the true signal ОІ вӢҶ primarily resides in the major
directions. In this case, Principal Component Regression (PCR) emerges as a natural algorithm that
estimates the space spanned by the major directions and performs regression on that subspace.
Principal Component Regression (PCR).

вҖў Step 1: Obtain an estimator U       b of the top-k subspace of ОЈS . For simplicity, we assume a sample
  size of 2n and use the first half of the data to compute U  b by principal component analysis (PCA)
                                                 1   T
  on the sample covariance matrix ОЈS := n X X. Specifically, U
                                          b                            b = (b u1 , В· В· В· , u
                                                                                           bk ) where u
                                                                                                      bi is the
  i-th eigenvector of ОЈ    bS.
вҖў Step 2: Use the data projected on U           b to conduct linear regression. With a little abuse of
  notation, we use X вҲҲ RnГ—d to denote the data matrix (xn+1 , В· В· В· , x2n )T , and Y вҲҲ Rn to denote
  (yn+1 , В· В· В· , y2n )T . If we let Z := X Ub вҲҲ RnГ—k be the projected data matrix, the estimator ОІb we
  obtained is given by
                                   b (Z T Z)вҲ’1 Z T Y = U
                              ОІb = U                      bT XT XU
                                                       b (U        b )вҲ’1 Ub T X T Y.

Consider the scenario where the last d вҲ’ k components of the true signal ОІ вҲ— is exactly zero, i.e.,
  вӢҶ
ОІвҲ’k  = 0. In this case, if the subspace represented by Ub perfectly matches the subspace represented

           I
by U = k вҲҲ RdГ—k , corresponding to the first k components, then PCR performs linear regres-
           0
sion using only the first k components of the covariates. As a result, the excess risk would just be the
usual variance of linear regression in the major directions. In this scenario, regardless of the norm
вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ, the PCR estimator assigns coefficients of zero to the last d вҲ’ k components, thus avoiding
any large excess risk. Furthermore, if the distance between U b and U is nonzero, an additional term
in the excess risk will arise due to the estimation error of U . We formalize this intuition with the
                                                             b
following upper bound for the excess risk of PCR. To facilitate the presentation, we introduce a
measure of the estimation accuracy of U   b . We define вҲҶ = dist(U b , U ) := вҲҘU U T вҲ’ U bUb T вҲҘ, which
represents the distance between the subspaces spanned by the columns of U    b and U . Then we present
the following theorem.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        вӢҶ
Theorem 5. Assume ОІвҲ’k       = 0. If вҲҶ вүӨ Оҳ, for any 0 < Оҙ < 1 and any n вүҘ N1 , we can bound the
excess risk of PCR estimator ОІb with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ:
                                                               2
                           b ) вүӨ O v 2 tr(T ) + вҲҘОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2 О»1 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘвҲҶ2 ,

                   EПө R ОІ(Y
                                                n             О»k
         вҲ’1              вҲ’1         вҲ’1          вҲ’1
where Оҳ = Poly(О»1 О»k , вҲҘОЈT вҲҘО»k , k tr(T ) ) and
N1 = Poly(Пғ, О»1 О»вҲ’1           вҲ’1
                  k , вҲҘОЈT вҲҘО»k , k ln(1/Оҙ), k tr(T )
                                                      вҲ’1
                                                         ).
Remark 5. Theorem 5 is a special case of Lemma 31. For explicit formulas of Оҳ and N1 , as well
                                     вӢҶ
as an upper bound for cases where ОІвҲ’k   Мё= 0, refer to Lemma 31 for details.
The excess risk upper bound provided by Theorem 5 consists of two terms. The variance term
tr(T )/n is incurred by the nature of linear regression on the major directions and remains unavoid-
able even when the subspace estimation is exact (i.e., вҲҶ = 0). This term also appears as the first vari-
ance term in Theorem 2, and exactly matches the sharp rate tr[ОЈвҲ’1   S ОЈT ]/n for under-parameterized
linear regression under covariate shift (Ge et al., 2024). The second term вҲҘОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2 ( О»О»k1 )2 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘвҲҶ2
represents the bias induced by the subspace estimation error in Step 1, which exhibits a quadratic
dependence on вҲҶ. By combining Theorem 5 with a bound on вҲҶ, we can derive an end-to-end excess
risk upper bound of PCR. We present the following lemma to control вҲҶ.
Lemma 6. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, if n вүҘ r + ln(1/Оҙ), we have
                                                        q
                                              4   О»1       r+ln Оҙ1
                                  вҲҶ вүӨ O Пғ О»k вҲ’О»k+1           n       ,
               Pd
where r = О»вҲ’11    i=1 О»i is the effective rank of the entire covariance matrix ОЈS .
Remark 6. Lemma 6 shows that вҲҶ depends on several quantities: the eigenvalue gap between the
major and minor directions, i.e., О»k вҲ’ О»k+1 , and the effective rank r. We observe that вҲҶ will be
small if the major and minor directions are well separated, meaning О»k вҲ’ О»k+1 is large, and the
minor directions are relatively small compared to О»1 .
Combining Theorem 5 with Lemma 6, an end-to-end error bound for PCR directly follows (see The-
orem 29 for a detailed statement), suggesting that PCR will achieve a small excess risk as long as the
major and minor directions are well separated, and the effective rank of the entire source covariance
matrix is small. In contrast to ridge regression, PCR does not rely on the minor components having a
high effective rank. This highlights the superiority of PCR over ridge regression in certain scenarios.
As an example, consider the instance in Theorem 4, where k, вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ, О»1 , О»k are all Оҳ(1). In this
case, the variance term scalesвҲҡas 1/n, and the bias term scales as O(вҲҶ2 ). Since r = Оҳ(1) in this
instance, we have вҲҶ вүӨ O(1/ n). Consequently, PCR achieves a O(1/n) rate in this instance,    вҲҡ even
when ОЈT = Id . Compared with the excess risk for ridge regression, which is at least 1/ n, PCR
shows its superiority against ridge regression when there is a large shift in the minor directions.

5   C ONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In conclusion, we provide an instance-dependent upper bound on the excess risk for ridge regression
under general covariate shift. Our findings demonstrate that вҖңbenign overfittingвҖқ also occurs in OOD
generalization when the shift in the minor directions is well controlled. We also investigate the
regime with a large shift in the minor directions, where ridge regression may incur a large excess
risk, whereas Principal Component Regression (PCR) exhibits superior performance.
Our work opens several directions for future research. First, while we have established a lower bound
for ridge regression in certain instances, a key challenge remains in deriving a general lower bound
that matches our upper bounds, offering a more precise characterization of the excess risk under
covariate shift. Second, our analysis has focused on linear models as an initial step in understand-
ing over-parameterized OOD problems. Extending this investigation to more complex, non-linear
models would be a intriguing direction for future exploration.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is partially supported by the National Science Foundation CAREER grant NSF-IIS-
2239297 and NSF grants DMS-2210833 and DMS-2412029.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Sergios Agapiou, Omiros Papaspiliopoulos, Daniel Sanz-Alonso, and Andrew M Stuart. Importance
  sampling: Intrinsic dimension and computational cost. Statistical Science, pp. 405вҖ“431, 2017.
Anish Agarwal, Devavrat Shah, Dennis Shen, and Dogyoon Song. On robustness of principal com-
  ponent regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Anish Agarwal, Devavrat Shah, and Dennis Shen. On model identification and out-of-sample pre-
  diction of principal component regression: Applications to synthetic controls. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.14449, 2020.
Jushan Bai and Serena Ng. Determining the number of factors in approximate factor models. Econo-
  metrica, 70(1):191вҖ“221, 2002.
Eric Bair, Trevor Hastie, Debashis Paul, and Robert Tibshirani. Prediction by supervised principal
  components. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 101(473):119вҖ“137, 2006.
Peter L Bartlett, Philip M Long, GaМҒbor Lugosi, and Alexander Tsigler. Benign overfitting in linear
  regression. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30063вҖ“30070, 2020.
Peter L Bartlett, Andrea Montanari, and Alexander Rakhlin. Deep learning: a statistical viewpoint.
  Acta numerica, 30:87вҖ“201, 2021.
Mikhail Belkin and Partha Niyogi. Laplacian eigenmaps for dimensionality reduction and data
 representation. Neural computation, 15(6):1373вҖ“1396, 2003.
Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, and Ji Xu. Two models of double descent for weak features. SIAM
 Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 2(4):1167вҖ“1180, 2020.
Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, and Fernando Pereira. Analysis of representations
  for domain adaptation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 19, 2006.
Koby Bibas, Yaniv Fogel, and Meir Feder. A new look at an old problem: A universal learning
  approach to linear regression. In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
  (ISIT), pp. 2304вҖ“2308. IEEE, 2019.
Swee Lean Chan and Moonseo Park. Project cost estimation using principal component regression.
  Construction Management and Economics, 23(3):295вҖ“304, 2005.
Yihang Chen, Fanghui Liu, Taiji Suzuki, and Volkan Cevher. High-dimensional kernel methods
  under covariate shift: Data-dependent implicit regularization. In Forty-first International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024. OpenReview.net,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=bBzlapzeR1.
Yuxin Chen, Yuejie Chi, Jianqing Fan, Cong Ma, et al. Spectral methods for data science: A
  statistical perspective. Foundations and TrendsВ® in Machine Learning, 14(5):566вҖ“806, 2021.
Geoffrey Chinot and Matthieu Lerasle. On the robustness of the minimim l2 interpolator. Bernoulli,
  2022.
Corinna Cortes, Yishay Mansour, and Mehryar Mohri. Learning bounds for importance weighting.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 23, 2010.
Uwe Depczynski, VJ Frost, and K Molt. Genetic algorithms applied to the selection of factors in
 principal component regression. Analytica Chimica Acta, 420(2):217вҖ“227, 2000.
Edgar Dobriban and Stefan Wager. High-dimensional asymptotics of prediction: Ridge regression
  and classification. The Annals of Statistics, 46(1):247вҖ“279, 2018.
Jianqing Fan and Yihong Gu. Factor augmented sparse throughput deep relu neural networks for
   high dimensional regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association, pp. 1вҖ“15, 2023.
Jianqing Fan, Yuan Ke, and Kaizheng Wang. Factor-adjusted regularized model selection. Journal
   of Econometrics, 216(1):71вҖ“85, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jianqing Fan, Kaizheng Wang, Yiqiao Zhong, and Ziwei Zhu. Robust high dimensional factor
   models with applications to statistical machine learning. Statistical science: a review journal of
   the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 36(2):303, 2021.

Jiawei Ge, Shange Tang, Jianqing Fan, and Chi Jin. On the provable advantage of unsupervised
   pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01566, 2023.

Jiawei Ge, Shange Tang, Jianqing Fan, Cong Ma, and Chi Jin. Maximum likelihood estimation is all
   you need for well-specified covariate shift. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
   Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL
   https://openreview.net/forum?id=eoTCKKOgIs.

Behrooz Ghorbani, Song Mei, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Andrea Montanari. When do neural
  networks outperform kernel methods? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  14820вҖ“14830, 2020.

Behrooz Ghorbani, Song Mei, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Andrea Montanari. Linearized two-layers
  neural networks in high dimension. The Annals of Statistics, 49(2), 2021.

Hao Guan and Mingxia Liu. Domain adaptation for medical image analysis: a survey. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Biomedical Engineering, 69(3):1173вҖ“1185, 2021.

Ali S Hadi and Robert F Ling. Some cautionary notes on the use of principal components regression.
  The American Statistician, 52(1):15вҖ“19, 1998.

Steve Hanneke and Samory Kpotufe. On the value of target data in transfer learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Yifan Hao, Yong Lin, Difan Zou, and Tong Zhang. On the benefits of over-parameterization for out-
  of-distribution generalization. CoRR, abs/2403.17592, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2403.17592.
  URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.17592.

Trevor Hastie, Andrea Montanari, Saharon Rosset, and Ryan J Tibshirani. Surprises in high-
  dimensional ridgeless least squares interpolation. Annals of statistics, 50(2):949, 2022.

Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common cor-
  ruptions and perturbations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.12261, 2019.

Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, et al. The many faces of robustness: A criti-
  cal analysis of out-of-distribution generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 8340вҖ“8349, 2021.

Hugo G Hidalgo, Thomas C Piechota, and John A Dracup. Alternative principal components re-
  gression procedures for dendrohydrologic reconstructions. Water Resources Research, 36(11):
  3241вҖ“3249, 2000.

Shih-Ming Huang and Jar-Ferr Yang. Improved principal component regression for face recognition
  under illumination variations. IEEE signal processing letters, 19(4):179вҖ“182, 2012.

JNR Jeffers. Investigation of alternative regressions: Some practical examples. Journal of the Royal
  Statistical Society. Series D (The Statistician), 30(2):79вҖ“88, 1981.

John NR Jeffers. Two case studies in the application of principal component analysis. Journal of
  the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics), 16(3):225вҖ“236, 1967.

Ian T Jolliffe. A note on the use of principal components in regression. Journal of the Royal
  Statistical Society Series C: Applied Statistics, 31(3):300вҖ“303, 1982.

Chinmaya Kausik, Kashvi Srivastava, and Rishi Sonthalia. Double descent and overfitting under
  noisy inputs and distribution shift for linear denoisers. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2024, 2024.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HxfqTdLIRF.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Richard B Keithley, R Mark Wightman, and Michael L Heien. Multivariate concentration determi-
  nation using principal component regression with residual analysis. TrAC Trends in Analytical
  Chemistry, 28(9):1127вҖ“1136, 2009.
Dmitry Kobak, Jonathan Lomond, and Benoit Sanchez. The optimal ridge penalty for real-world
 high-dimensional data can be zero or negative due to the implicit ridge regularization. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 21(169):1вҖ“16, 2020.
Frederic Koehler, Lijia Zhou, Danica J Sutherland, and Nathan Srebro. Uniform convergence of
  interpolators: Gaussian width, norm bounds and benign overfitting. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 34:20657вҖ“20668, 2021.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 5637вҖ“5664. PMLR, 2021.
Samory Kpotufe and Guillaume Martinet. Marginal singularity, and the benefits of labels in
  covariate-shift. In Conference On Learning Theory, pp. 1882вҖ“1886. PMLR, 2018.
Anikender Kumar and Pramila Goyal. Forecasting of air quality in delhi using principal component
  regression technique. Atmospheric Pollution Research, 2(4):436вҖ“444, 2011.
Qi Lei, Wei Hu, and Jason Lee. Near-optimal linear regression under distribution shift. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6164вҖ“6174. PMLR, 2021.
Tengyuan Liang, Alexander Rakhlin, and Xiyu Zhai. On the multiple descent of minimum-norm
  interpolants and restricted lower isometry of kernels. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
  2683вҖ“2711. PMLR, 2020.
RX Liu, J Kuang, Qiong Gong, and XL Hou. Principal component regression analysis with spss.
 Computer methods and programs in biomedicine, 71(2):141вҖ“147, 2003.
Cong Ma, Reese Pathak, and Martin J Wainwright. Optimally tackling covariate shift in rkhs-based
  nonparametric regression. The Annals of Statistics, 51(2):738вҖ“761, 2023.
Neil Mallinar, Austin Zane, Spencer Frei, and Bin Yu. Minimum-norm interpolation under covariate
  shift. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria,
  July 21-27, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  Zw7TcnTmHj.
William F Massy. Principal components regression in exploratory statistical research. Journal of
 the American Statistical Association, 60(309):234вҖ“256, 1965.
Song Mei and Andrea Montanari. The generalization error of random features regression: Precise
  asymptotics and the double descent curve. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics,
  75(4):667вҖ“766, 2022.
Song Mei, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Andrea Montanari. Generalization error of random feature
  and kernel methods: hypercontractivity and kernel matrix concentration. Applied and Computa-
  tional Harmonic Analysis, 59:3вҖ“84, 2022.
John P Miller, Rohan Taori, Aditi Raghunathan, Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Vaishaal Shankar,
  Percy Liang, Yair Carmon, and Ludwig Schmidt. Accuracy on the line: on the strong correlation
  between out-of-distribution and in-distribution generalization. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 7721вҖ“7735. PMLR, 2021.
Andrea Montanari and Yiqiao Zhong. The interpolation phase transition in neural networks: Memo-
  rization and generalization under lazy training. The Annals of Statistics, 50(5):2816вҖ“2847, 2022.
Mohammadreza Mousavi Kalan, Zalan Fabian, Salman Avestimehr, and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi. Min-
 imax lower bounds for transfer learning with linear and one-hidden layer neural networks. Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1959вҖ“1969, 2020.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Vidya Muthukumar, Kailas Vodrahalli, Vignesh Subramanian, and Anant Sahai. Harmless interpo-
  lation of noisy data in regression. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information Theory, 1(1):
  67вҖ“83, 2020.
Tormod NГҰs and Harald Martens. Principal component regression in nir analysis: viewpoints,
  background details and selection of components. Journal of chemometrics, 2(2):155вҖ“167, 1988.
Preetum Nakkiran. More data can hurt for linear regression: Sample-wise double descent. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1912.07242, 2019.
Jeffrey Negrea, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, and Daniel Roy. In defense of uniform convergence:
   Generalization via derandomization with an application to interpolating predictors. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7263вҖ“7272. PMLR, 2020.
Partha Niyogi. Manifold regularization and semi-supervised learning: Some theoretical analyses.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14(5), 2013.
Reese Pathak, Cong Ma, and Martin Wainwright. A new similarity measure for covariate shift with
  applications to nonparametric regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  17517вҖ“17530. PMLR, 2022.
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do imagenet classifiers
  generalize to imagenet? In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5389вҖ“5400. PMLR,
  2019.
Dominic Richards, Jaouad Mourtada, and Lorenzo Rosasco. Asymptotics of ridge (less) regres-
  sion under general source condition. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 3889вҖ“3897. PMLR, 2021.
Ohad Shamir. The implicit bias of benign overfitting. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24
  (113):1вҖ“40, 2023.
Hidetoshi Shimodaira. Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the log-
  likelihood function. Journal of statistical planning and inference, 90(2):227вҖ“244, 2000.
Igor Silin and Jianqing Fan. Canonical thresholding for non-sparse high-dimensional linear regres-
  sion. Annals of statistics, 50(1):460, 2022.
James B Simon, Dhruva Karkada, Nikhil Ghosh, and Mikhail Belkin. More is better in modern
  machine learning: when infinite overparameterization is optimal and overfitting is obligatory.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.14646, 2023.
James H Stock and Mark W Watson. Forecasting using principal components from a large number
  of predictors. Journal of the American statistical association, 97(460):1167вҖ“1179, 2002.
Jianguo Sun. A correlation principal component regression analysis of nir data. Journal of Chemo-
   metrics, 9(1):21вҖ“29, 1995.
Nilesh Tripuraneni, Ben Adlam, and Jeffrey Pennington. Overparameterization improves ro-
  bustness to covariate shift in high dimensions. In MarcвҖҷAurelio Ranzato, Alina Beygelz-
  imer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual, pp. 13883вҖ“
  13897, 2021a.      URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
  73fed7fd472e502d8908794430511f4d-Abstract.html.
Nilesh Tripuraneni, Chi Jin, and Michael Jordan. Provable meta-learning of linear representations.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10434вҖ“10443. PMLR, 2021b.
Alexander Tsigler and Peter L. Bartlett. Benign overfitting in ridge regression. J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
  24:123:1вҖ“123:76, 2023. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v24/22-1398.html.
J Leo van Hemmen and Tsuneya Ando. An inequality for trace ideals. Communications in Mathe-
   matical Physics, 76:143вҖ“148, 1980.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Roman Vershynin. Introduction to the non-asymptotic analysis of random matrices.           CoRR,
  abs/1011.3027, 2010. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1011.3027.
Roman Vershynin. High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science,
  volume 47. Cambridge university press, 2018.
Evelyne Vigneau, MF Devaux, EM Qannari, and P Robert. Principal component regression, ridge re-
  gression and ridge principal component regression in spectroscopy calibration. Journal of Chemo-
  metrics: A Journal of the Chemometrics Society, 11(3):239вҖ“249, 1997.
Per-Ake Wedin. Perturbation theory for pseudo-inverses. BIT Numerical Mathematics, 13:217вҖ“232,
  1973.
Florian Wenzel, Andrea Dittadi, Peter Gehler, Carl-Johann Simon-Gabriel, Max Horn, Dominik
  Zietlow, David Kernert, Chris Russell, Thomas Brox, Bernt Schiele, et al. Assaying out-of-
  distribution generalization in transfer learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 35:7181вҖ“7198, 2022.
Denny Wu and Ji Xu. On the optimal weighted l2 regularization in overparameterized linear regres-
  sion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:10112вҖ“10123, 2020.
Ji Xu and Daniel J Hsu. On the number of variables to use in principal component regression.
   Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Runtian Zhai, Chen Dan, Zico Kolter, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Understanding why generalized
  reweighting does not improve over erm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12293, 2022.
Xuhui Zhang, Jose Blanchet, Soumyadip Ghosh, and Mark S Squillante. A class of geometric
  structures in transfer learning: Minimax bounds and optimality. In International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3794вҖ“3820. PMLR, 2022.
Lijia Zhou, Danica J Sutherland, and Nati Srebro. On uniform convergence and low-norm interpo-
  lation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6867вҖ“6877, 2020.
Yang Zou, Zhiding Yu, BVK Kumar, and Jinsong Wang. Unsupervised domain adaptation for se-
  mantic segmentation via class-balanced self-training. In Proceedings of the European conference
  on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 289вҖ“305, 2018.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A         S IMULATION

                                        tr[U] / tr[V] = 5                                                =5                                       Ridgeless
                                        tr[U] / tr[V] = 25                                               = 25                                     Ridge, = n 0.5
                        0               tr[U] / tr[V] = 100                     2
                                                                                                         = 100                                    Ridge, = n 0.75
                                                                                                                                    0             Ridge, = n
                                                                                                                                                  PCR

                                                                                0
                        2                                                                                                                                   -0.03
                                                                                                                                    2
      Log Excess Risk


                                                              Log Excess Risk


                                                                                                                  Log Excess Risk
                                                                                                                                                            -0.00

                                                                                2
                        4                                                                                 -1.10                                             -0.13
                                                      -0.98                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                            -0.48
                                                      -1.03                     4                         -1.17
                        6
                                                                                                                                    6
                                                      -1.12
                                                                                                          -0.95
                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                            -0.99
                        8
                                                                                                                                    8
                                3    4          5      6                                3    4       5    6                             5   6           7   8
                                        Log n                                                Log n                                              Log n

                                    (a)                                                     (b)                                             (c)

Figure 1: Simulation results for excess risks across varying training sample sizes. The shaded
regions represent standard errors of 10 runs, using different samples of training and test sets. The
slope of the fitted OLS model is marked along each curve. (a)(b) Minimum norm interpolation under
distinct target covariance matrices with small shifts in minor directions. The source covariance
matrix remains constant. (a) Various magnitudes of shifts in minor directions, with вҲҘT вҲҘ = 1. (b)
Various magnitudes of shifts in major directions, with tr[U] / tr[V] = 1. (c) Ridge and PCR under
large shifts in minor directions, following the setting of Theorem 4.


A.1               B ENIGN - OVERFITTING : SMALL SHIFT IN MINOR DIRECTIONS

We simulate the covariate shift discussed in section 3, where the overall magnitude of the target
covariance matrixвҖҷs minor directions is comparable to that of the source. Theorem 2 establishes an
O(1/n) excess risk rate for ridge regression under certain benign-overfitting conditions. Specifi-
cally, for the training data, we assume k = O(1), Rk = в„Ұ(n2 ), вҲҘОІkвӢҶ вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 = O(1), ОІвҲ’k    вӢҶ
                                                                                          ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                                                 =
                                                                         S,k
      вҲҡ                  вҲҡ                                      tr[U ]     вҲ’1 вҲҘОЈT ,вҲ’k вҲҘ
O(1/ n), and О»    e = O( n). For the test data, we assume вҲҘT вҲҘ,
                                                                tr[V] , nrk вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ = O(1). In the
experiment, data is generated according to these conditions.
                                                                                    y = xT ОІ вӢҶ + Пө,
                                    2
where ОІ вӢҶ вҲҲ Rk+n , with ОІkвӢҶ = ( вҲҡ1k , ..., вҲҡ1k )T , ОІвҲ’k
                                                     вӢҶ
                                                        = 0 and k = 10. The noise Пө follows a centered
gaussian distribution with variance 0.1, and x is drawn from a multivariate normal distribution with
zero mean and a source covariance matrix ОЈS = diag(Ik , nвҲ’1.5 In2 ). The target covariance matrix
is ОЈT = diag(ОЈT,k , ОЈT,вҲ’k ) where ОЈT,k and ОЈT,вҲ’k are randomly generated and scaled to achieve
specific values for вҲҘT вҲҘ and tr[U  ]
                               tr[V] , respectively. At the same time, we do not explicitly control
            вҲҘОЈ              вҲҘ                                 вҲҘОЈ                    вҲҘ
nrkвҲ’1 вҲҘОЈTS,вҲ’k
          ,вҲ’k                       1   T ,вҲ’k
              вҲҘ , because it equals n вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ in this setting and is typically bounded for a randomly
generated ОЈT,вҲ’k . We run minimum norm interpolation (ridgeless regression) with О» = 0.
The source covariance matrix ОЈS is fixed for all experiments while we vary the target covariance
matrices. To study covariate shifts in major directions, we vary вҲҘT вҲҘ among 5, 25, 100 and keep
tr[U ]                                                            tr[U ]
tr[V] = 1. To study covariate shifts in minor directions, we vary tr[V] = 1 among 5, 25, 100 and
keep вҲҘT вҲҘ = 1. For each pair of вҲҘT вҲҘ and tr[U ]
                                         tr[V] , we generate training samples of various sizes n and


                                                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1000 test samples. For each n, a target covariance matrix ОЈT is randomly generated to satisfy the
specified вҲҘT вҲҘ and tr[U ]
                   tr[V] . We run 10 experiments for each set of (ОЈS , ОЈT , n), using independently
sampled training sets and test sets, and the mean and standard error of the excess risks are reported.
The results are shown in Figure 1a, 1b. The fast rate O(1) of minimum norm interpolation is
confirmed, as the log-log plot of excess risk versus n has a slope near -1 across all combinations
of вҲҘT вҲҘ and tr[U ]                                          tr[U ]
             tr[V] . The excess risk increases with larger tr[V] , indicating a greater shift in minor
directions. Similarly, the excess risk increases with larger вҲҘT вҲҘ, indicating a greater shift in major
directions.

A.2   R IDGE V. S . PCR: LARGE SHIFT IN MINOR DIRECTIONS

Theorem 4 identifies a setting where largeвҲҡcovariate shifts occur in minor directions of the covariance
matrix, leading to a lower bound of O(1/ n) on the excess risk for ridge regression, while Principal
Component Regression (PCR) achieves the fast rate of O(1). We design a simulation experiment
under the same instance of the source and target covariance matrices. Specifically, data is generated
as:
                                           y = xT ОІ вӢҶ + Пө,
                   вҲҡ
where ОІ вӢҶ вҲҲ Rk+вҢҠ nвҢӢ , with ОІkвӢҶ = ( вҲҡ1k , ..., вҲҡ1k )T , ОІвҲ’k
                                                        вӢҶ
                                                           = 0, and k = 10. The noise Пө is drawn
from a centered gaussian distribution with variance 0.1, and x follows a multivariate normal distri-
bution with zero mean. The source covariance matrix is ОЈS = diag(Ik , nвҲ’0.5 IвҢҠвҲҡnвҢӢ ), and the target
covariance matrix is ОЈT = Ik+вҢҠвҲҡnвҢӢ .
We evaluate ridge regression with various regularization strengths: О» = 10вҲ’8 , n0.5 , n0.75 , n. Here,
we use О» = 10вҲ’8 to approximate ridgeless regression, which has a singular solution under this setup.
We compare PCR to ridge regression for different training sample sizes n. The test set contains 1000
samples. For each n, 10 experiments are conducted with independently sampled training and test
sets. We report the mean and standard error of the excess risks.
Figure 1c present the results. As expected, PCR nearly achieves the fast rate of O(1/n), with the
log-log slope of excess risk versus n being -0.99. In contrast, the optimal rate of ridge
                                                                                     вҲҡ regression
is O(nвҲ’0.48 ), achieved with О» = n0.75 . This aligns with the lower bound of O(1/ n) from The-
orem 4, and its proof also suggests О» = n0.75 as the optimal regularization strength. Additionally,
ridge regression exhibits excess risks above a constant for certain choices of О».

B     R IDGE REGRESSION
Let X = (x1 , ..., xn )T вҲҲ RnГ—d , Y = (y1 , ..., yn )T вҲҲ Rn and Пө = (Пө1 , ..., Пөn )T вҲҲ Rn . We denote
the first k columns of X as Xk and the remaining d вҲ’ k columns as XвҲ’k . Similarly, ОІkвӢҶ and ОІвҲ’k    вӢҶ
                                                вӢҶ
represent the corresponding components of ОІ . ОЈS,k , ОЈS,вҲ’k are the corresponding blocks on the
                                                                                          вҲ’1/2
diagonal of ОЈS . The i-th eigenvalue of a matrix is denoted by Вөi (В·). Define Z = XОЈS , where
the rows of Z are i.i.d. centered isotropic random vectors. Additionally, we assume the rows of Z
are Пғ-sub-gaussian, where the sub-gaussian norm is defined as follows.
For a random variable s, the sub-gaussian norm вҲҘsвҲҘПҲ2 is given by:
                                                          s2

                             вҲҘsвҲҘПҲ2 = inf t > 0 : E exp 2 вүӨ 2 .
                                                          t

For a random vector S, the sub-gaussian norm вҲҘSвҲҘПҲ2 is given by:
                                                     вҲҘвҹЁS, vвҹ©вҲҘПҲ2
                                     вҲҘSвҲҘПҲ2 = sup                .
                                                vМё=0    вҲҘvвҲҘ

For О» вүҘ 0, consider the ridge estimator:
                   b ) = X T (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Y
                   ОІ(Y


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         = X T (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XОІ вӢҶ + X T (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Пө
                                 вӢҶ
                         = ОІ(XОІ
                           b       ) + ОІ(Пө),
                                       b

where we define ОІ(XОІ
                  b   вӢҶ
                        ) = X T (XX T +О»In )вҲ’1 XОІ вӢҶ and ОІ(Пө)
                                                           b = X T (XX T +О»In )вҲ’1 Пө. Addition-
ally, we define ОЈS = ОЈS + n Id . The effective rank of ОЈS,k is defined as rk = О»вҲ’1
                           О»
                                                                                         P
                                                                                k+1 (О» +  j>k О»j ).
                e                                      e
                                                                             T
Assumption 2 (CondNum(k, Оҙ, L)). Define a matrix Ak = О»In + XвҲ’k XвҲ’k             . With probability at
least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, Ak is positive definite and has a condition number no greater than L, i.e.,
                                                    Вө1 (Ak )
                                                             вүӨ L.
                                                    Вөn (Ak )

B.1   C ONCENTRATION INEQUALITIES

Denote the element of a matrix X in the i-th row and the j-th column as X[i, j], and the i-th row of
the matrix X as X[i, вҲ—].
Lemma 7 (Lemma 20 of Tsigler & Bartlett (2023)). Let z be a sub-gaussian vector in Rp with
вҲҘzвҲҘПҲ2 вүӨ Пғ, and consider ОЈ = diag(О»1 , . . . , О»p ) where the sequence {О»j }pj=1 is positive and non-
increasing. Then there exists some absolute constant c, for any t > 0, with probability at least
1 вҲ’ 2eвҲ’t/c :
                                                  пЈ«              пЈ¶
                                                          Xp
                               вҲҘОЈ1/2 zвҲҘ2 вүӨ cПғ 2 пЈӯtО»1 +        О»j пЈё .
                                                                     j=1

                                                                                   T
Lemma 8 (Lemma 23 of Tsigler & Bartlett (2023)). Let AМҠk represent the matrix XвҲ’k XвҲ’k with its
diagonal elements set to zero:
                                                                T
                                  AМҠk [i, j] = (1 вҲ’ Оҙi,j )(XвҲ’k XвҲ’k )[i, j].
Then there exists some absolute constant c, for any t > 0, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 4eвҲ’t/c :
                                      v         пЈ«                        пЈ¶
                                      u
                                      u                           X
                        вҲҘAМҠk вҲҘ вүӨ cПғ 2 t(t + n) пЈӯО»2k+1 (t + n) +      О»2j пЈё.
                                      u
                                                                               j>k

Lemma 9 (Lemma 21 of Tsigler & Bartlett (2023)). Suppose {zi }ni=1 is a sequence of independent
isotropic sub-gaussian random vectors, where вҲҘzi вҲҘПҲ2 вүӨ Пғ. Let ОЈ = diag(О»1 , . . . , О»p ) represent a
diagonal matrix with a positive, non-increasing sequence {О»i }pi=1 . Then there exists some absolute
constant c, for any t вҲҲ (0, n), with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2eвҲ’ct :
                                       p            n                                        p
                         вҲҡ             X            X                          вҲҡ             X
                  (n вҲ’       ntПғ 2 )         О»j вүӨ         вҲҘОЈ1/2 zi вҲҘ2 вүӨ (n +       ntПғ 2 )         О»j .
                                       j=1          i=1                                      j=1

Lemma           exists a constant cx , depending only on Пғ, such that for any n satisfying nО»k+1 вүӨ
     P 10. There
 О» + j>k О»j , under the assumption CondNum(k, Оҙ, L) (Assumption 2), with probability at least
1 вҲ’ Оҙ вҲ’ cx eвҲ’n/cx :
                      пЈ«           пЈ¶                              пЈ«             пЈ¶
                   1 пЈӯ     X                                            X
                       О»+      О»j пЈё вүӨ Вөn (Ak ) вүӨ Вө1 (Ak ) вүӨ cx пЈӯО» +         О»j пЈё .
                 cx L
                           j>k                                          j>k
                                   пЈ«                   пЈ¶
                                                X
                          T
                Вө1 (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k ) вүӨ cx пЈӯnО»k+1 +         О»j пЈё .
                                                             j>k


Proof. This result follows from the proof of Lemma 3 in Tsigler & Bartlett (2023), which estab-
lishes both upper and lower bounds of Вө1 (Ak ). By combining the lower bound with the assumption
CondNum, we derive a lower bound of Вөn (Ak ). For completeness, we restate the entire proof here.
According to lemma 7 and lemma 8, there exists an absolute constant c, such that for any t > 0:

                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      1. for all 1 вүӨ i вүӨ n, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2eвҲ’t/c :
                                                        пЈ«                            пЈ¶
                                                                             X
                                   вҲҘXвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]вҲҘ2 вүӨ cПғ 2 пЈӯtО»k+1 +                   О»j пЈё .
                                                                             j>k


      2. with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 4eвҲ’t/c :
                                            v        пЈ«                      пЈ¶
                                            u
                                            u                         X
                              вҲҘAМҠk вҲҘ вүӨ cПғ 2 t(t + n) пЈӯО»2k+1 (t + n) +   О»2j пЈё.
                                            u
                                                                                   j>k


Since Вө1 (Ak ) вүӨ О» + вҲҘAМҠk вҲҘ + maxi вҲҘXвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]вҲҘ2 , by setting t = n, we have with probability at least
1 вҲ’ (2n + 4)eвҲ’n/c :
                                 пЈ«                                                 пЈ¶
                                            X          s                   X
             Вө1 (Ak ) вүӨ О» + cПғ 2 пЈӯnО»k+1 +        О»j + (2nО»k+1 )2 + 2n          О»2j пЈё
                                               j>k                                       j>k
                                  пЈ«                                       пЈ¶
                                               X                  s X
                      вүӨ О» + cПғ 2 пЈӯnО»k+1 +            О»j + 2nО»k+1 + 2n О»2j пЈё
                                               j>k                                  j>k
                                  пЈ«                                            пЈ¶
                                               X                  s       X
                      вүӨ О» + cПғ 2 пЈӯnО»k+1 +            О»j + 2nО»k+1 + 2nО»k+1   О»j пЈё
                                               j>k                                          j>k
                                  пЈ«                                                                     пЈ¶
                                               X                                            1X
                      вүӨ О» + cПғ 2 пЈӯnО»k+1 +            О»j + 2nО»k+1 + nО»k+1 +                            О»j пЈё
                                                                                            2
                                               j>k                                              j>k
                                   пЈ«                         пЈ¶
                                                   X
                      вүӨ О» + 4cПғ 2 пЈӯnО»k+1 +               О»j пЈё
                                                   j>k
                                          пЈ«                              пЈ¶
                                                   X
                      вүӨ max 1, 4cПғ 2 пЈӯО» +

                                                         О»j + nО»k+1 пЈё
                                                   j>k
                                       пЈ«         пЈ¶
                                            X
                      вүӨ 2 max 1, 4cПғ 2 пЈӯО» +

                                              О»j пЈё .                                                         (2)
                                                    j>k
                                                     P
The last inequality follows from nО»k+1 вүӨ О» +              j>k О»j
                                                        . Similarly,
                                                         пЈ«        пЈ¶
                                                            X
                                     T
                            Вө1 (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k ) вүӨ 4cПғ 2 пЈӯnО»k+1 +     О»j пЈё .                                        (3)
                                                                         j>k

On the other hand, by applying Lemma        t = 4Пғn4 , there exists an absolute constant cвҖІ , such
                                   n 9 with o  вҖІ
                                            c
that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2 exp вҲ’ 4Пғ 4n :


                                   n
                                   X                         1 X
                                         вҲҘXвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]вҲҘ2 вүҘ       n О»j .
                                   i=1
                                                             2
                                                                   j>k

On this event,
                                               1         T
                                  Вө1 (Ak ) вүҘ О» + tr(XвҲ’k XвҲ’k   )
                                               n
                                                  n
                                               1X
                                           =О»+       вҲҘXвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]вҲҘ2
                                               n i=1


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 1X
                                        вүҘО»+         О»j
                                                 2
                                                      j>k
                                             пЈ«       пЈ¶
                                          1пЈӯ    X
                                        вүҘ    О»+   О»j пЈё .
                                          2
                                                        j>k
                                                                           n       o
                                                                               cвҖІ
By the assumption CondNum(k, Оҙ, L), with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ вҲ’ 2 exp вҲ’ 4Пғ 4n :

                                                     пЈ«              пЈ¶
                                    1            1 пЈӯ        X
                        Вөn (Ak ) вүҘ Вө1 (Ak ) вүҘ          О»+        О»j пЈё .                         (4)
                                   L            2L
                                                                  j>k

Combining Equation 2, 3 and 4, there exists a constant cx depending only on Пғ, such that with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ вҲ’ cx eвҲ’n/cx :
                        пЈ«            пЈ¶                            пЈ«           пЈ¶
                    1 пЈӯ       X                                        X
                          О»+      О»j пЈё вүӨ Вөn (Ak ) вүӨ Вө1 (Ak ) вүӨ cx пЈӯО» +     О»j пЈё .
                  cx L
                              j>k                                      j>k
                                       пЈ«                пЈ¶
                                                  X
                             T
                  Вө1 (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k   ) вүӨ cx пЈӯnО»k+1 +      О»j пЈё .
                                                     j>k


Lemma 11. There exists a constant cx depending only on Пғ, such that with probability at least 1вҲ’Оҙ,
if n > k + ln(1/Оҙ),
                                                       s
                            1 T                           k + ln 1Оҙ
                              Xk Xk вҲ’ ОЈS,k вүӨ cx О»1                  .
                            n                                n

Proof. This follows directly from Theorem 5.39 and Remark 5.40 of Vershynin (2010), which shows
there exists a constant cвҖІx depending only on Пғ, such that for any t вүҘ 0, with probability at least
1 вҲ’ 2 exp{вҲ’t2 /cвҖІx }:
                                             пЈұ r                   r          !2 пЈј
                1 T                          пЈІ      k      t         k     t     пЈҪ
                  Xk Xk вҲ’ ОЈS,k вүӨ О»1 max cвҖІx           + вҲҡ , cвҖІx        +вҲҡ          .
                n                            пЈі      n       n        n      n пЈҫ
             p
Taking t =    cвҖІx ln(2/Оҙ) completes the proof.
Corollary 12. Under the same conditions as in Lemma 11, and on the same event, the following
holds:
                                                  r
                          T
                                 12 вҲҡ 21                   1     вҲ’1
                         Xk Xk вҲ’ nОЈS,k вүӨ cx k + ln О»1 О»k 2 .
                                                           Оҙ

Proof. According to Proposition 3.2 of van Hemmen & Ando (1980), for any positive semi-definite
matrix A, B вҲҲ Rk , we have
                                       1            1       1      1
                      вҲҘA вҲ’ BвҲҘ вүҘ Вөk A 2 + Вөk B 2           A2 вҲ’ B 2 .

Therefore,
                             1 вҲҡ 21                   1
                     XkT Xk 2 вҲ’ nОЈS,k вүӨ              вҲҡ 1   XkT Xk вҲ’ nОЈS,k
                                                 Вөk   nОЈS,k
                                                        2



                                                 вҲҡ     вҲ’1     1 T
                                            =        nО»k 2     X Xk вҲ’ ОЈS,k .
                                                              n k
By applying Lemma 11, the proof is complete.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 13. There exists a constant cx depending only on Пғ, such that for any n > cx k, with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2eвҲ’n/cx :
                   1          1
                                вҲ’          вҲ’1
                                                      1
                                                      вҲ’            вҲ’1

                      n вүӨ Вөk ОЈS,k2 XkT Xk ОЈS,k2 вүӨ Вө1 ОЈS,k2 XkT Xk ОЈS,k2 вүӨ cx n.
                  cx

Proof. According to Theorem 5.39 of Vershynin (2010), there exists a constant cвҖІx depending only
on Пғ, such that for any t вүҘ 0, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2 exp{вҲ’t2 /cвҖІx }:
                                1
                                 вҲ’            вҲ’1
                                                    вҲҡ            вҲҡ       2
                          Вөk ОЈS,k2 XkT Xk ОЈS,k2 вүҘ         n вҲ’ cвҖІx k вҲ’ t .
                                1
                                 вҲ’            вҲ’1
                                                    вҲҡ            вҲҡ       2
                          Вө1 ОЈS,k2 XkT Xk ОЈS,k2 вүӨ         n + cвҖІx k + t .
          вҲҡ
Let t = 21 n. For n > 16(cвҖІx )2 k, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2 exp {вҲ’n/(4cвҖІx )}:
                                               вҲҡ                       2
                         1
                           вҲ’2   T      вҲ’ 12              1вҲҡ      1вҲҡ             1
                    Вөk ОЈS,k Xk Xk ОЈS,k вүҘ            nвҲ’       nвҲ’      n =          n.
                                                         4       2             16
                                               вҲҡ                       2
                         1
                           вҲ’           вҲ’1                1вҲҡ      1вҲҡ            49
                    Вө1 ОЈS,k2 XkT Xk ОЈS,k2 вүӨ         n+       n+      n =          n.
                                                         4       2             16
By taking cx = max 16(cвҖІx )2 , 4cвҖІx , 16 , the proof is complete.


Remark 7. On the same event, the following inequalities also hold:
                                                     вҲ’1        вҲ’1
                    Вө1 (XkT Xk ) вүӨ вҲҘОЈS,k вҲҘ ОЈS,k2 XkT Xk ОЈS,k2 вүӨ cx О»1 n.
                                                 1
                                                  вҲ’           вҲ’1
                                                                       1
                    Вөk (XkT Xk ) вүҘ Вөk (ОЈS,k )Вөk ОЈS,k2 XkT Xk ОЈS,k2 вүҘ О»k n.
                                                                      cx
Lemma 14. There exists a constant cx depending only on Пғ, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2eвҲ’n/cx :
                                                    1             1

                                     T

                   tr XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k      вүӨ cx n tr ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                     2
                                                          ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                  2
                                                                         .

Proof. According to Hanson-Wright Inequality (Vershynin, 2018), there exists an absolute constant
c, such that for any 1 вүӨ i вүӨ n,
                        1            1                                    1        1
            ZвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]ОЈS,вҲ’k
                       2
                            ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                   2
                                        ZвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]T           вүӨ cПғ 2 ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                       2
                                                                           ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                                  2

                                                           ПҲ1                          F
                                                                        1            1

                                                                   2
                                                              вүӨ cПғ tr ОЈS,вҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k .
                                                                         2           2



By Bernstein Inequality (Proposition 5.16 of Vershynin (2010)), there exists an absolute constant cвҖІ ,
for any t вүҘ 0,
          (    n
                                                                                             )
            1 Xh              1            1
                                                          T
                                                                  1              1
                                                                                      i
       P          ZвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]ОЈS,вҲ’k
                              2
                                    ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                           2
                                                ZвҲ’k [i, вҲ—] вҲ’ tr ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                   2
                                                                        ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                                 2
                                                                                          вүҘt
            n i=1
                            2
                            t     t
      вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’cвҖІ n min         ,       ,
                            K2 K
                               1                 1
where K = maxi ZвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]ОЈS,вҲ’k
                          2
                               ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                      2
                                           ZвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]T                .
                                                                 ПҲ1
                 1           1
                                                                              вҖІ
Let t = cПғ 2 tr ОЈS,вҲ’k
                 2
                      ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                             2
                                    . Then, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2eвҲ’c n :
                                    n
                                   X             1           1
                              T
                tr XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k  =   ZвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                 2
                                                      ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                             2
                                                                  ZвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]T
                                           i=1
                                                            1           1

                                         вүӨ (1 + cПғ 2 )n tr ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                            2
                                                                 ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                        2
                                                                               .

By taking cx = max 1 + cПғ 2 , c1вҖІ , the proof is complete.



                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 15. There exists a constant cx depending only on Пғ, with probablity at least 1 вҲ’ 2eвҲ’n/cx :
                            вӢҶ T   T       вӢҶ          вӢҶ T         вӢҶ
                          (ОІвҲ’k ) XвҲ’k XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k вүӨ cx n(ОІвҲ’k ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k .

Proof. The result follows from the proof of Lemma 3 in Tsigler & Bartlett (2023), which we restate
                                                        вӢҶ T             вӢҶ
                                                                            вҲ’1/2       вӢҶ
here for completeness. Consider the isotropic vector (ОІвҲ’k   ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k           XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k . For the
i-th component,
      вӢҶ T           вӢҶ
                        вҲ’ 12            вӢҶ
                                                 вӢҶ T           вӢҶ
                                                                   вҲ’ 21              1
                                                                                           вӢҶ
     (ОІвҲ’k ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k        XвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]ОІвҲ’k   = (ОІвҲ’k  ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k          ZвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                                     2
                                                                                          ОІвҲ’k
                                            ПҲ2                                                           ПҲ2
                                                    вӢҶ T          вӢҶ
                                                                     вҲ’ 12    1
                                                                                   вӢҶ
                                                 вүӨ (ОІвҲ’k ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k       Пғ ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                             2
                                                                                  ОІвҲ’k
                                                 = Пғ.
                                          n                        вҲ’1/2                   on
                                                 вӢҶ T         вӢҶ                       вӢҶ
By applying Lemma 9 for the sequence           (ОІвҲ’k ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k           XвҲ’k [i, вҲ—]ОІвҲ’k          , there exists
                                                                                           i=1
                                                                              вҲ’ct
an absolute constant c, for any t вҲҲ (0, n), with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2e        :
                                  вӢҶ T
                                (ОІвҲ’k     T
                                     ) XвҲ’k       вӢҶ
                                           XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k      вҲҡ
                                   вӢҶ   T       вӢҶ   вүӨ n + ntПғ 2 .
                                 (ОІвҲ’k ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
Let t = n/4, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2eвҲ’cn/4 :
                     вӢҶ T     T          вӢҶ           1
                  (ОІвҲ’k ) XвҲ’k      XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k   вүӨ (1 + Пғ 2 )n В· (ОІвҲ’k
                                                              вӢҶ T         вӢҶ
                                                                 ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k .
                                                    2
By taking cx = max 1 + 21 Пғ 2 , 4c , the proof is complete.



                                    T
B.2    B LOCK DECOMPOSITION OF XвҲ’k XвҲ’k

Let Xk = U M  f 21 V , where U вҲҲ RnГ—n and V вҲҲ RdГ—d are orthogonal matrices representing the left
                                                     f 21 is defined as:
and right singular vectors, respectively. The matrix M
                                         пЈ« 1              пЈ¶
                                           m12
                                         пЈ¬      ..        пЈ·
                                M =пЈ¬
                                 f  1
                                    2
                                         пЈ¬
                                         пЈ¬         .      пЈ· вҲҲ RnГ—k .
                                                          пЈ·
                                                         1пЈ·
                                         пЈӯ           mk  2пЈё


                                             0(nвҲ’k)Г—k
Therefore, we have Xk XkT = U M U T , where M = diag(m1 , ..., mk , 0, ..., 0) вҲҲ RnГ—n . Similarly,
XkT Xk = V T Mk V , where Mk = diag(m1 , ..., mk ) вҲҲ RkГ—k .
Let вҲҶ = U T XвҲ’k XвҲ’k
                 T
                    U , and write вҲҶ in block matrix form as:

                                            вҲҶ11 вҲҶ12
                                     вҲҶ=                  ,
                                            вҲҶT12 вҲҶ22
where вҲҶ11 вҲҲ RkГ—k , вҲҶ12 вҲҲ RkГ—(nвҲ’k) , and вҲҶ22 вҲҲ R(nвҲ’k)Г—(nвҲ’k) .
We will repeatedly use the first k rows of (M + О»In + вҲҶ)вҲ’1 , which we compute here. Because
M + О»In + вҲҶ and О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 are invertible when Ak is positive definite, by block matrix inverse,
       (M + О»In + вҲҶ)вҲ’1 [k, вҲ—]
                                                           вҲ’1                                              (5)
      = Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12                Ik , вҲ’вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 .


Corollary 16 (CorollaryP  of Lemma   10). There exists a constant depending only on Пғ, such that
for any n < О»вҲ’1k+1 О» +     j>k О»j , if the assumption condNum(k, Оҙ, L) is satisfied, the following
inequalities hold with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ вҲ’ cx eвҲ’n/cx , on the same event as in Lemma 10.
                                                  пЈ«              пЈ¶
                                                         X
                    вҲҘвҲҶ11 вҲҘ, вҲҘвҲҶ12 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘвҲҶвҲҘ вүӨ cx пЈӯО» +           О»j пЈё .
                                                         j>k



                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                            пЈ«               пЈ¶вҲ’1
                                                                    X
                   вҲҘ(О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘвҲҶвҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ cx L пЈӯО» +               О»j пЈё      .
                                                                    j>k

                     вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’2 вҲҶT12 вүӨ c4x L2 .
                                                      пЈ«                   пЈ¶
                                                                 X
                     вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 вүӨ c3x L пЈӯО» +            О»j пЈё .
                                                                 j>k
                                                                пЈ«                   пЈ¶
                                                                          X
                     вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 вүӨ cx пЈӯО» +                  О»j пЈё .
                                                                          j>k


Proof.       1. The first inequality.
                                                                            пЈ«                   пЈ¶
                                                                                        X
                                                T
                   вҲҘвҲҶ11 вҲҘ, вҲҘвҲҶ12 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘвҲҶвҲҘ = вҲҘXвҲ’k XвҲ’k вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAk вҲҘ вүӨ cx пЈӯО» +                        О»j пЈё .
                                                                                        j>k


     2. The second inequality.
                                                                                пЈ«                 пЈ¶вҲ’1
                                                                                         X
               вҲҘ(О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘ(О»In + вҲҶ)вҲ’1 вҲҘ = вҲҘAвҲ’1
                                                        k вҲҘ вүӨ cx L О» +
                                                                  пЈӯ                            О»j пЈё      ,
                                                                                         j>k

         where the first inequality holds because О»In + вҲҶ is positive definite.
     3. The third inequality.
                   вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’2 вҲҶT12 вүӨ вҲҘвҲҶ12 вҲҘ2 вҲҘ(О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вүӨ c4x L2 .

     4. The fourth inequality.
                                                                                         пЈ«                   пЈ¶
                                                                                                  X
            вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 вүӨ вҲҘвҲҶ12 вҲҘ2 вҲҘ(О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ c3x L пЈӯО» +                        О»j пЈё .
                                                                                                  j>k


     5. The last inequality.
                                  вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12
                               = вҲҶ11 + О»Ik вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 вҲ’ О»
                               вүӨ вҲҘвҲҶ11 + О»Ik вҲҘ вҲ’ О»
                               = вҲҘвҲҶ11 вҲҘ
                                    пЈ«           пЈ¶
                                         X
                               вүӨ cx пЈӯО» +     О»j пЈё .
                                          j>k

         The first inequality holds because вҲҶ11 + О»Ik вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 is the Schur
         complement of the block вҲҶ11 + О»Ik of the matrix вҲҶ + О»In , which is positive definite.
         Therefore, we have
                          вҲҶ11 + О»Ik вүҪ вҲҶ11 + О»Ik вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 .



Lemma 17. There exists a constant cx > 2 depending only on Пғ, such that for any N1 < n <
N2 , if the assumption condNum(k, Оҙ, L) is satisfied, the following holds with probability at least
1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ вҲ’ cx eвҲ’n/cx , on both events from Lemma 10 and Lemma 11,
                                                                       вҲ’1               вҲ’1
             Xk Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
              T
                                                                           вҲ’ nОЈ  e S,k


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                    q
             c2x        n(k + ln 1Оҙ )О»1 + c2x L О» + j>k О»j
                                                   P
         вүӨ                                                        .
                                  (О» + nО»k )2
where                             пЈұ                                      пЈ«              пЈ¶пЈј
                                  пЈІ                О»2                   X        пЈҪ
                        N1 = max 4c4x (k + ln(1/Оҙ)) 21 , 2c4x LО»вҲ’1
                                                                k
                                                                   пЈӯО» +     О» j
                                                                                пЈё  .
                                пЈі                  О»k                            пЈҫ
                                                                        j>k
                                   пЈ«                 пЈ¶
                                1 пЈӯ       X
                        N2 =        О»+           О»j пЈё .
                               О»k+1
                                          j>k


Proof.
                                                                   вҲ’1          вҲ’1
               Xk Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
                T
                                                                     вҲ’ nОЈ
                                                                        e S,k
                                                                   вҲ’1
               Xk Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
                T
         вүӨ

             В· XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V вҲ’ nОЈ

                                                                       e S,k
                        вҲ’1
             В· nОЈe S,k

              1                                                               вҲ’1
                       Xk Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
                        T
         =
           О» + nО»k
          В· XkT Xk вҲ’ nОЈS,k + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V .


                                                            cx > 2  depending only on Пғ, such
According to Lemma 11, Corollary 16, there exists a constantP
that for any k + ln(1/Оҙ) < N1 < n < N2 = О»вҲ’1       k+1 О»  +   j>k О»j , with probability at least
1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ вҲ’ cx eвҲ’n/cx , on both events in Lemma 10 and Lemma 11,
                                                          s
                                  1 T                       k + ln 1Оҙ
                                    Xk Xk вҲ’ ОЈS,k вүӨ cx О»1              .
                                  n                            n
                                                          пЈ«             пЈ¶
                                                               X
                        вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 вүӨ c3x L пЈӯО» +      О»j пЈё .
                                                                              j>k


             XkT Xk вҲ’ nОЈS,k + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V .

     1.
                              XkT Xk вҲ’ nОЈS,k + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V


                           вүӨ XkT Xk вҲ’ nОЈS,k + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12


                               r                     пЈ«           пЈ¶
                                         1                X
                           вүӨ cx n(k + ln )О»1 + c3x L пЈӯО» +     О»j пЈё .
                                         Оҙ
                                                                 j>k

                                                                  вҲ’1
              Xk Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
               T
     2.
                         1
                               XkT Xk вҲ’ nОЈS,k + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V

                      О» + nО»k
                               пЈ« r                      пЈ«           пЈ¶пЈ¶
                          1                  1
                               пЈӯcx n(k + ln )О»1 + c3x L пЈӯО» +
                                                             X
                    вүӨ                                            О»j пЈёпЈё .
                       О» + nО»k               Оҙ
                                                                         j>k

                                           О»21
          Since n > 4c4x (k + ln(1/Оҙ))     О»2k
                                                 ,
                                                                         q
                                                                    cx       n(k + ln 1Оҙ )О»1
                                               r
                                     1                       1
                                          cx         n(k + ln )О»1 вүӨ
                                  О» + nО»k                    Оҙ                 nО»k

                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                     q
                                                                cx       (k + ln 1Оҙ )О»1
                                                            =             вҲҡ
                                                                            nО»k
                                                                 1
                                                            <       .
                                                                2cx
        Since n > 2c4x LО»вҲ’1
                                  P
                         k  О»+       j>k О»j       ,
                                       пЈ«          пЈ¶
                                                      c3x L О» + j>k О»j
                                                               P
                              1              X
                                  c3 L пЈӯ О» +   О»j пЈё вүӨ
                           О» + nО»k x                          nО»k
                                                      j>k
                                                                 1
                                                            <       .
                                                                2cx
        Therefore, we have
                 1                                                                             1
                      XkT Xk вҲ’ nОЈS,k + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V

                                                                                          <      .
              О» + nО»k                                                                         cx
        Now we derive the upper bound for our target.
                                                                   вҲ’1
               Xk Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
                T

              h                                                                iвҲ’1
           = nОЈ  e S,k + XkT Xk вҲ’ nОЈS,k + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
                        вҲ’1                   вҲ’1
           вүӨ nОЈS,k
                 e           1 вҲ’ nОЈ   e S,k

                                                                      вҲ’1 iвҲ’1
                  Xk Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
                   T
               В·
                                 вҲ’1
                   1          1
             вүӨ            1вҲ’
               О» + nО»k       cx
                  cx
             вүӨ         .
               О» + nО»k
                                                                                           вҲ’1
        The first inequality follows from the result вҲҘ(A + T )вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAвҲ’1 вҲҘ 1 вҲ’ вҲҘAвҲ’1 вҲҘвҲҘT вҲҘ    ,
        provided that both A and A + T are invertible and вҲҘAвҲ’1 вҲҘвҲҘT вҲҘ < 1 (see Lemma 3.1 in
        Wedin (1973)).

Combining the above two inequalities,
                                                                   вҲ’1            вҲ’1
            Xk Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
            T
                                                                       вҲ’ nОЈ
                                                                          e S,k
                             пЈ« r                        пЈ«           пЈ¶пЈ¶
              1      cx      пЈӯcx n(k + ln 1 )О»1 + c3x L пЈӯО» +
                                                             X
       вүӨ                                                         О»j пЈёпЈё
         О» + nО»k О» + nО»k                   Оҙ
                                                             j>k
              q
         c2x    n(k + ln 1Оҙ )О»1 + c2x L О» + j>k О»j
                                           P
       =                                               .
                            (О» + nО»k )2



B.3   B IAS VARIANCE DECOMPOSITION

                                                                   вӢҶ
We consider the expection of the excess risk R ОІ(Yb ) = R ОІ(XОІ
                                                             b       ) + ОІ(Пө)
                                                                         b      with respect to the
distribution of the noise Пө.
           h            i                      T
                                            вӢҶ                 вӢҶ
        EПө R ОІ(Y ) = EПө ОІ(Y ) вҲ’ ОІ
                  b               b              ОЈT ОІ(Y ) вҲ’ ОІ
                                                      b


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                             h            i                 T
                               b T ОЈT ОІ(Пө)
                         = EПө ОІ(Пө)    b    + ОІ(XОІ
                                              b   вӢҶ
                                                    ) вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ ОЈT ОІ(XОІ
                                                                b   вӢҶ
                                                                      ) вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ .

We decompose the expected excess risk into variance and bias terms.
                         h                   i
                V = EПө ОІ(Пө)b T ОЈT ОІ(Пө)  b
                           h                     i        h                     i
                   вүӨ 2EПө ОІ(Пө)b T ОЈT,k ОІ(Пө) b k + 2EПө ОІ(Пө)   b T ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІ(Пө) b вҲ’k .
                                   k                             вҲ’k
                                           T
                               вӢҶ
                B = ОІ(XОІ
                       b         ) вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ ОЈT ОІ(XОІ   b     вӢҶ
                                                           ) вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ
                                              T
                                  вӢҶ
                   вүӨ 2 ОІ(XОІ
                         b          )k вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶ ОЈT,k ОІ(XОІ b      вӢҶ
                                                                )k вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶ
                                                   T
                                     вӢҶ         вӢҶ                     вӢҶ        вӢҶ
                     + 2 ОІ(XОІb         )вҲ’k вҲ’ ОІвҲ’k     ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІ(XОІb       )вҲ’k вҲ’ ОІвҲ’k   .

The inequalities follow from the result for a positive definite block quadratic form:

                                  A B      x1
                   (xT1 , xT2 )                 = xT1 Ax1 + 2xT1 Bx2 + xT1 Dx1 ,
                                 BT D      x2
where the positive definiteness implies xT1 Ax1 + xT1 Dx1 вүҘ 2xT1 Bx2 .
Lemma 18. There exists a constant cx > 2 depending only on Пғ, such that for any N1 < n <
N2 , if the assumption condNum(k, Оҙ, L) (Assumption 2) is satisfied, then with probability at least
1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ вҲ’ cx eвҲ’n/cx , the following inequalities hold simultaneously:
                                                             пЈ«            пЈ¶
                                                          1 пЈӯ      X
                                             Вөn (Ak ) вүҘ        О»+      О»j пЈё .
                                                        cx L
                                                                   j>k
                                                           пЈ«            пЈ¶
                                                                X
                                             Вө1 (Ak ) вүӨ cx пЈӯО» +      О»j пЈё .
                                                                  j>k
                                                           пЈ«                      пЈ¶
                                                                        X
                                               T
                                      Вө1 (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k ) вүӨ cx пЈӯnО»k+1 +               О»j пЈё .
                                                                          j>k
                                                              s
                                 1 T                    k + ln 1Оҙ
                                   Xk Xk вҲ’ ОЈS,k вүӨ cx О»1           .
                                 n                         n
                                                      r
                               T
                                      12 вҲҡ 21               1       вҲ’1
                             Xk Xk вҲ’ nОЈS,k вүӨ cx k + ln О»1 О»k 2 .
                                                            Оҙ
                                 1
                                   вҲ’2    T  вҲ’ 21
                                                    1
                             Вөk ОЈS,k Xk Xk ОЈS,k вүҘ n.
                                                   cx
                                 1
                                            вҲ’ 21

                                   вҲ’2    T
                             Вө1 ОЈS,k Xk Xk ОЈS,k вүӨ cx n.
                                      Вө1 (XkT Xk ) вүӨ cx О»1 n.
                                                      1
                                      Вөk (XkT Xk ) вүҘ О»k n.
                                                     cx
                                                              1        1

                                              T

                               tr XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k вүӨ cx n tr ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                              2
                                                                ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                       2
                                                                              .
                                вӢҶ T     T       вӢҶ          вӢҶ T          вӢҶ
                              (ОІвҲ’k ) XвҲ’k  XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k  вүӨ cx n(ОІвҲ’k ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k .
                                                        пЈ«           пЈ¶
                                                              X
                               вҲҘвҲҶ11 вҲҘ, вҲҘвҲҶ12 , вҲҘвҲҶвҲҘвҲҘ вүӨ cx пЈӯО» +     О»j пЈё .
                                                                  j>k
                                                             пЈ«              пЈ¶вҲ’1
                                                                    X
                      вҲҘ(О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҘ, вҲҘвҲҶвҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ cx L пЈӯО» +             О»j пЈё      .
                                                                    j>k



                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’2 вҲҶT12 вүӨ c4x L2 .
                                                         пЈ«               пЈ¶
                                                                 X
                        вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 вүӨ c3x L пЈӯО» +         О»j пЈё .
                                                                 j>k
                                                          пЈ«            пЈ¶
                                                               X
                 вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 вүӨ cx пЈӯО» +           О»j пЈё .
                                                               j>k

And,
                                                                  вҲ’1          вҲ’1
              Xk Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
              T
                                                                    вҲ’ nОЈ
                                                                       e S,k
                q
           c2x    n(k + ln 1Оҙ )О»1 + c2x L О» + j>k О»j
                                             P
         вүӨ                                              .
                              (О» + nО»k )2
N1 and N2 are defined as follows:
                            пЈұ                              пЈ«           пЈ¶пЈј
                                             2
                            пЈІ              О»                    X       пЈҪ
                N1 = max 4c4x (k + ln(1/Оҙ)) 21 , 2c4x LО»вҲ’1
                                                        k
                                                           пЈӯО» +     О»j пЈё .
                            пЈі              О»k                           пЈҫ
                                                                j>k
                             пЈ«         пЈ¶
                         1 пЈӯ      X
                N2 =           О»+   О»j пЈё .
                       О»k+1
                                        j>k


Proof. The lemma is a direct corollary from Lemma 10, Lemma 11, Corollary 12, Lemma 13,
Lemma 14, Lemma 15, Corollary 16, Lemma 17.

B.3.1    VARIANCE IN THE FIRST k DIMENSIONS
Lemma 19. Under the same conditions as in Lemma 18, and on the same event, for any N1 < n <
N2 ,
                              b k вүӨ 16v 2 (1 + c4 L2 ) 1 tr ОЈвҲ’ 2 ОЈT,k ОЈвҲ’ 2 ,
                h                  i                       h 1           1
                                                                           i
                  b T ОЈT,k ОІ(Пө)
             EПө ОІ(Пө)   k                           x         S,k       S,k
                                                       n
where
                  (
                                 1
                       4
       N1 = max 4cx k + ln           О»41 О»вҲ’4
                                          k ,
                                 Оҙ
                                 пЈ«             пЈ¶
                                        X
                    2c4x LО»1 О»вҲ’2
                              k
                                 пЈӯО» +       О»j пЈё ,
                                               j>k

                                   1
                                                          h 1                i вҲ’2
                                                             вҲ’          вҲ’1
                        4c4x k + ln   О»61 О»вҲ’8       2 2
                                           k вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ k   tr ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2       ,
                                   Оҙ
                                   пЈ«           пЈ¶                                      )
                                                            h 1                  i вҲ’1
                                                                 вҲ’2         вҲ’ 21
                                         X
                          4   2 вҲ’4 пЈӯ
                        2cx LО»1 О»k   О»+      О»j вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘk tr ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k
                                               пЈё                                       ,
                                               j>k
                        пЈ«               пЈ¶
                   1            X
          N2 =          пЈӯО» +          О»j пЈё .
                 О»k+1
                                j>k


Proof.
     h               i
       b T ОЈT,k ОІ(Пө)
  EПө ОІ(Пө)       b k
          k

 = EПө tr ПөПө (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОЈT,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1
          T


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 = v 2 tr (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОЈT,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1

          h
 = v 2 tr (U M U T + U вҲҶU T + О»In )вҲ’1 U M      f 21 V ОЈT,k
            1  T
   В·V T M   f2      U T (U M U T + U вҲҶU T + О»In )вҲ’1
                                                      1  T
 = v 2 tr U (M + вҲҶ + О»In )вҲ’1 M     f 21 V ОЈT,k V T M  f2   (M + вҲҶ + О»In )вҲ’1 U T
                    T
 = v 2 tr M   f 21     (M + вҲҶ + О»In )вҲ’1 (M + вҲҶ + О»In )вҲ’1 M    f 21 V ОЈT,k V T
          h 1                                                        вҲ’1
 = v 2 tr Mk2 Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12                 Ik , вҲ’вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1


                                     T                                                    вҲ’1 12
   В· Ik , вҲ’вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1           Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12        Mk
               T

   В·V ОЈT,k V
          h 1                                                        вҲ’1
 = v 2 tr Mk2 Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12
                                                                                            вҲ’1 12
   В· Ik + вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’2 вҲҶT12 Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12

                                                                                              Mk
               T

   В·V ОЈT,k V
          h                                                                                      вҲ’1
 = v 2 tr Ik + вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’2 вҲҶT12 Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12


        1                 1                                                    вҲ’1 i
   В·Mk2 V ОЈT,k V T Mk2 Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12
                                                h                                                 вҲ’1
 вүӨ v 2 Ik + вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’2 вҲҶT12 tr Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12
        1                 1                                                    вҲ’1 i
   В·Mk2 V ОЈT,k V T Mk2 Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12
                        h                                                  вҲ’1
 вүӨ v 2 (1 + c4x L2 ) tr Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12
        1                 1                                                    вҲ’1 i
   В·Mk2 V ОЈT,k V T Mk2 Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12
                        h                                                          вҲ’1
 = v 2 (1 + c4x L2 ) tr V T Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
            1                   1                                                             вҲ’1 i
   В·V T Mk2 V В· ОЈT,k В· V T Mk2 V В· V T Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
                        h                                                              вҲ’1
 = v 2 (1 + c4x L2 ) tr XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
               1                  1
   В· XkT Xk 2 ОЈT,k XkT Xk 2
                                                                     вҲ’1 i
   В· XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V                  .

The sixth equation follows from Equation 5. The first inequality follows from the result tr[AB] вүӨ
вҲҘAвҲҘ tr[B] where the matrix B is positive semi-definite.
We define two quantities that represent concentration error terms:
                                                                 вҲ’1          вҲ’1
             Xk Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
              T
    E1 =                                                           вҲ’ nОЈ
                                                                      e S,k     .
                1            1
    E2 = XkT Xk 2 вҲ’ (nОЈS,k ) 2 .
                                             h 1                i вҲ’2
                                                вҲ’          вҲ’1
Since n > 4c4x k + ln 1Оҙ О»61 О»вҲ’8
                                       2 2
                              k вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ k   tr ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2      ,
                                                h     1
                                                     вҲ’2         вҲ’21
                                                                    i  вҲ’1
and n > 2c4x L О» + j>k О»j О»21 О»вҲ’4
                   P
                                  k вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘk tr ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k            ,
                                          вҲ’1             1                 1
                                                                                             вҲ’1
           вҲҘE1 вҲҘ nОЈ
                  e S,k         nОЈ
                                 e S,k         (nОЈS,k ) 2 вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ (nОЈS,k ) 2       nОЈ
                                                                                    e S,k


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                    q
             c2x     n(k + ln 1Оҙ )О»1 + c2x L О» + j>k О»j
                                                P
                                                                                  nО»1
         вүӨ                                                       (О» + nО»1 )              вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ
                                (О» + nО»k )2                                  (О» + nО»k )2
                q
           c2x      n(k + ln 1Оҙ )О»1 + c2x L О» + j>k О»j
                                                    P
                                                                 О»21
        вүӨ                                                            вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ
                                      n2                         О»4k
               q
           c2x (k + ln 1Оҙ ) О»3                c4x L О» + j>k О»j О»2
                                                          P
                               1                                        1
        =           вҲҡ            вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ +                                вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ
                  n n       О»4k                          n2           О»4k
             1      h 1
                       вҲ’          вҲ’1
                                        i    1       h 1
                                                        вҲ’        вҲ’1
                                                                      i
        <        tr ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 +            tr ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2
           2nk                              2nk
            1      h 1
                      вҲ’2         вҲ’ 12
                                      i
        =       tr ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k .
           nk

Since n > 4c4x k + ln 1Оҙ О»41 О»вҲ’4                                            вҲ’2
                                                  4
                                                            P
                                k    and  n >  2c x L  О»  +   j>k j О»1 О»k ,
                                                                  О»

                    вҲҘE1 вҲҘ nОЈ   e S,k
                           q
                      c2x    n(k + ln 1Оҙ )О»1 + c2x L О» + j>k О»j
                                                             P
                  вүӨ                                                          (О» + nО»1 )
                                           (О» + nО»k )2
                           q
                      c2x    n(k + ln 1Оҙ )О»1 + c2x L О» + j>k О»j
                                                             P
                                                                             О»1
                  вүӨ                                                                                           (6)
                                                n                            О»2k
                          q
                      c2x (k + ln 1Оҙ ) О»2       c4x L О» + j>k О»j О»
                                                            P
                                           1                              1
                  =         вҲҡ                 +
                               n         О»2k               n            О»2k
                      1 1
                  < +
                      2 2
                  = 1.
                                                 h 1                 i вҲ’2
                                                       вҲ’2       вҲ’ 21
Since n > c2x k + ln 1Оҙ О»41 О»вҲ’6
                                          2 2
                             k   вҲҘОЈ  T,k вҲҘ  k   tr   ОЈ    ОЈ   ОЈ
                                                       S,k T,k S,k         ,
                                 вҲ’ 12                 вҲ’1           1                   1
                                                                                                         вҲ’1
        вҲҘE2 вҲҘ          nОЈ
                        e S,k               nОЈ
                                             e S,k         (nОЈS,k ) 2 вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ (nОЈS,k ) 2       nОЈ
                                                                                                e S,k
          r
                     1     вҲ’1       вҲ’1      nО»1
      вүӨ cx    k + ln О»1 О»k 2 (nО»k ) 2               вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ
                     Оҙ                  (О» + nО»k )2
           q
        cx k + ln 1Оҙ О»2
                         1
      вүӨ        вҲҡ           вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ
              n n      О»3k
         1     h 1
                  вҲ’         вҲ’1
                                i
      вүӨ      tr ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 .
        nk
Since n > c2x k + ln 1Оҙ О»21 О»вҲ’2

                             k ,
                                                   вҲ’ 1
                                   вҲҘE2 вҲҘ nОЈ  e S,k 2
                                       r
                                                1    вҲ’1     вҲ’1
                                  вүӨ cx k + ln О»1 О»k 2 (nО»k ) 2
                                                Оҙ                                                             (7)
                                       q
                                    cx k + ln 1Оҙ О»1
                                  =      вҲҡ
                                           n      О»k
                                  < 1.
Combing the above four inequalities, we have
                h                                                     вҲ’1
              tr XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V


                                                             29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 1             1
                        В· XkT Xk 2 ОЈT,k XkT Xk 2
                                                                               вҲ’1 i
                     В· XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
                                 вҲ’1                                    вҲ’1
                                             1               1
                 = tr nОЈS,k
                          e          (nОЈS,k ) ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) nОЈS,k
                                             2               2   e
                                                                  вҲ’1
                                        1              1
                   + 2 tr E1 (nОЈS,k ) ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) nОЈS,k
                                        2              2     e
                                     вҲ’1                            вҲ’1
                                                         1
                   + 2 tr nОЈS,ke         E2 ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) nОЈS,k
                                                         2     e
                        h             1              1
                                                           i
                   + tr E1 (nОЈS,k ) 2 ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) 2 E1
                                    вҲ’1                     вҲ’1
                   + tr nОЈ   e S,k     E2 ОЈT,k E2 nОЈe S,k
                                                           вҲ’1
                                      1
                   + 2 tr E1 (nОЈS,k ) 2 ОЈT,k E2 nОЈ  e S,k
                                                          вҲ’1
                                              1
                   + 2 tr E1 E2 ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) 2 nОЈ e S,k
                         h                    1
                                                   i
                   + 2 tr E1 E2 ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) 2 E1
                                                 вҲ’1
                   + 2 tr E1 E2 ОЈT,k E2 nОЈS,k
                                           e

                   + tr [E1 E2 ОЈT,k E2 E1 ] .
In particular,
                                                  вҲ’1                                       вҲ’1
                                                                1               1
                              tr        nОЈ
                                         e S,k         (nОЈS,k ) 2 ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) 2 nОЈe S,k

                           1 h e вҲ’1 12           1
                                                    e вҲ’1
                                                          i
                          =  tr ОЈS,k ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k
                                                 2
                                                    ОЈ S,k
                           n
                           1 h вҲ’1 12             1
                                                          i
                          вүӨ tr ОЈS,k ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k
                                                 2
                                                    ОЈвҲ’1
                                                      S,k
                           n
                           1 h вҲ’ 12        вҲ’ 1
                                               i
                          = tr ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 .
                           n
                                                                             1    1             1       1
The inequality follows from the fact that tr[BAB] = tr[A 2 BA 2 ] вүӨ tr[A 2 CA 2 ] = tr[CAC],
                                                                                    1   1
where A, B, C are positive semi-definite matrices, and C вүҪ B, which implies that A 2 CA 2 вүҪ
  1    1
A 2 BA 2 .
      tr [E1 E2 ОЈT,k E2 E1 ]
                               вҲ’1            вҲ’ 1         1
     = tr E1 nОЈe S,k nОЈ e S,k          e S,k 2 nОЈ
                                  E 2 nОЈ           e S,k 2
                        вҲ’ 1         1                    вҲ’1
                 e S,k 2 nОЈ
       В·ОЈT,k E2 nОЈ            e S,k 2 E1 nОЈe S,k nОЈ
                                                  e S,k
                         2                  вҲ’ 1
     вүӨ k вҲҘE1 вҲҘ nОЈe S,k       вҲҘE2 вҲҘ nОЈ e S,k 2
                                 вҲ’ 21                    вҲ’1            1                    1
                                                                                                                  вҲ’1
         В· вҲҘE2 вҲҘ       nОЈ
                        e S,k                  nОЈ
                                                e S,k         (nОЈS,k ) 2 вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ (nОЈS,k ) 2             nОЈ
                                                                                                         e S,k

        1 h вҲ’ 21         вҲ’1
                            i
     вүӨ    tr ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 .
        n
The other terms can be similarly bounded. Therefore,
                  h                                                     вҲ’1
                tr XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V


                                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           1             1
                  В· XkT Xk 2 ОЈT,k XkT Xk 2
                                                                         вҲ’1 i
                  В· XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
                16 h вҲ’ 12        вҲ’1
                                     i
              вүӨ    tr ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 .
                n
The proof is complete by combing all the inequalities above.

B.3.2    VARIANCE IN THE LAST d вҲ’ k DIMENSIONS
Lemma 20. Under the same conditions as in Lemma 18, and on the same event, for any N1 < n <
N2 ,
                                           пЈ«            пЈ¶вҲ’2
        h                    i                  X              h 1             1
                                                                                   i
          b T ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІ(Пө)
     EПө ОІ(Пө)          b вҲ’k вүӨ v 2 c3 L2 n пЈӯО» +        О»j пЈё tr ОЈS,вҲ’k2
                                                                      ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                               2
                                                                                     .
             вҲ’k                      x
                                                          j>k

where N1 , N2 are defined as in Lemma 18.

Proof.
                     h                     i
                       b T ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІ(Пө)
                 EПө ОІ(Пө)            b вҲ’k
                             вҲ’k

                = EПө tr ПөПөT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k T
                                                              (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1


                = v 2 tr (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                                    T
                                                       (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1


                вүӨ v 2 (XX T + О»In )вҲ’2 tr XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k  T


                вүӨ v 2 (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k  T
                                  + О»In )вҲ’2 tr XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k T

                      пЈ«       пЈ«          пЈ¶пЈ¶вҲ’2
                           1       X                h 1              1
                                                                          i
                вүӨ v2 пЈӯ        пЈӯО» +    О»j пЈёпЈё cx n tr ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                        2
                                                              ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                     2

                        cx L
                                      j>k
                              пЈ«               пЈ¶вҲ’2
                                      X               h 1           1
                                                                         i
                = v 2 c3x L2 n пЈӯО» +         О»j пЈё    tr ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                        2
                                                             ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                    2
                                                                           .
                                      j>k

The first inequality follows from the result tr[ABA] = tr[A2 B] вүӨ вҲҘA2 вҲҘ tr[B] where the matrix B
is positive semi-definite. The second inequality follows from XX T + О»In вүҪ XвҲ’k XвҲ’kT
                                                                                      + О»In .

B.3.3    B IAS IN THE FIRST k DIMENSIONS
The bias in the first k dimensions can be decomposed into two terms.
                               T
                    вӢҶ
             ОІ(XОІ
             b        )k вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶ ОЈT,k ОІ(XОІ
                                       b     вӢҶ
                                               )k вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶ
                                              T
        = XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XОІ вӢҶ вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶ ОЈT,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XОІ вӢҶ вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶ

                                                  T
        вүӨ 2 XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОІkвӢҶ вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶ ОЈT,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОІkвӢҶ вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶ

                                                 T
           + 2 XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k   вӢҶ
                                                    ОЈT,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                                                                  вӢҶ

                                                                                       .
The inequality follows from the result xT1 Ax1 + xT2 Ax2 вүҘ 2xT1 Ax2 where A is positive semi-
definite.
Lemma 21. Under the same conditions as in Lemma 18, and on the same event, for any N1 < n <
N2 ,
                                                T
            XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОІkвӢҶ вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶ ОЈT,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОІkвӢҶ вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶ

                  пЈ«           пЈ¶2
                4
            16c         X                          вҲ’ 12      вҲ’ 21
          вүӨ 2x пЈӯО» +        О»j пЈё (ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1     вӢҶ
                                           S,k ОІk ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k .
             n
                        j>k



                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where                                       (
                                                             X
                                N1 = max 2c3x (О» +                 О»j )О»1 О»вҲ’2
                                                                           k ,
                                                             j>k

                                                 4c4x (k + ln(1/Оҙ))О»21 О»вҲ’2
                                                                        k ,
                                                             пЈ«                     пЈ¶)
                                                                            X
                                                 2c4x LО»вҲ’1
                                                        k
                                                           пЈӯО» +                   О»j пЈё ,
                                                                            j>k
                                                 пЈ«                 пЈ¶
                                        1               X
                                N2 =             пЈӯО» +         О»j пЈё .
                                       О»k+1
                                                        j>k


Proof.
                                                    T
               XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОІkвӢҶ вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶОЈT,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОІkвӢҶ вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶ

                                                 T
         = (ОІkвӢҶ )T XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk вҲ’ Ik ОЈT,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk вҲ’ Ik ОІkвӢҶ

                                                                 T
                    вҲ’1
                          1                           1
                                                                   вҲ’1
         = (ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈS,k2 ОЈS,k
                          2
                              XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОЈS,k
                                                      2
                                                          вҲ’ ОЈS,k ОЈS,k2
                                                                 T
                    вҲ’1
                          1                           1
                                                                   вҲ’1
           В· ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 ОЈS,k
                          2
                             XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОЈS,k
                                                      2
                                                          вҲ’ ОЈS,k ОЈS,k2 ОІkвӢҶ
                                вҲ’1          вҲ’1
         вүӨ (ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1   вӢҶ
                    S,k ОІk В· ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k
                                2         2


                  1                                1                2
            В· ОЈS,k
               2
                   XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОЈS,k
                                           2
                                               вҲ’ ОЈS,k                   .

Subsequently,
           1                                1
     ОЈS,k
      2
          XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОЈS,k
                                  2
                                      вҲ’ ОЈS,k
       1
                 1  T                                      1
   = ОЈS,k
       2
          VT M  f2                                f 12 V ОЈ 2 вҲ’ ОЈS,k
                      U T U (M + О»In + вҲҶ)вҲ’1 U T U M       S,k
      1         1                                             вҲ’1 12    1
   = ОЈS,k
      2
          V T Mk2 Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12     Mk V ОЈS,k
                                                                       2
                                                                           вҲ’ ОЈS,k
      1

                  вҲ’1                                              вҲ’1     вҲ’1   1
   = ОЈS,k
      2
            V T Mk 2 Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V      ОЈS,k
                                                                              2



    вҲ’ОЈS,k вҲҘ
      1

                      вҲ’1                                         вҲ’ 1  вҲ’1 12
   = ОЈS,k
      2
            Ik + V T Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V  ОЈS,k

    вҲ’ОЈS,k вҲҘ
                                                                  вҲ’ 1  вҲ’1

      1
                       вҲ’1
   = ОЈS,k
      2
             Ik + V T Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V   вҲ’ Ik
           1
         В·ОЈS,k
           2


       1
               вҲ’1                                         вҲ’1
   = ОЈS,k
       2
          V T Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V

                 вҲ’1                                        вҲ’ 1  вҲ’1 12
    В· Ik + V T Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V  ОЈS,k
       1
                 вҲ’1                                         вҲ’1      1
   вүӨ ОЈS,k
       2
          V T Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V ОЈS,k2


         1
                  вҲ’1                                          вҲ’1
    + ОЈS,k
         2
            V T Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V
                                                               вҲ’ 12  вҲ’1

               T    вҲ’ 21                               вҲ’1 T
                                                                              1
    В· I k + V Mk         О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 ) вҲҶ12 Mk V        вҲ’ Ik ОЈS,k
                                                                              2
                                                                                  .


                                                        32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The second equation follows from Equation 5.
We will derive upper bounds for both terms in the last equation above.

     1. The first term.
                       1
                                вҲ’1                                         вҲ’1     1
                      ОЈS,k
                       2
                           V T Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V ОЈS,k
                                                                                  2


                                                                    1              1
                 вүӨ О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12          ОЈS,k
                                                                   2
                                                                       V T MkвҲ’1 V ОЈS,k
                                                                                   2


                                                                    1
                                                                     вҲ’            вҲ’1 вҲ’ 12  вҲ’1
                 = О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12           ОЈS,k2 XkT Xk      ОЈS,k
                   пЈ«       пЈ«           пЈ¶пЈ¶
                                X         cx
                 вүӨ пЈӯО» + cx пЈӯО» +     О»j пЈёпЈё
                                          n
                                j>k
                       пЈ«          пЈ¶
                   2c2      X
                 вүӨ x пЈӯО» +      О»j пЈё .
                    n
                                j>k

        The inequality follows from cx > 2.
     2. The second term.
                                              вҲ’1
        Since n > 2c3x (О» +
                                P
                                     j>k О»j )О»k ,

                               вҲ’1                                         вҲ’1
                              Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2
                          вүӨ MkвҲ’1          О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12
                                           пЈ«           пЈ¶
                               cx               X
                          вүӨ          В· 2cx пЈӯО» +     О»j пЈё
                              nО»k
                                                j>k
                               1
                          <      .
                              cx
        Therefore,

                           вҲ’1                                         вҲ’ 1  вҲ’1
                 Ik + V T Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V   вҲ’ Ik

                                вҲ’1                                         вҲ’ 1  вҲ’1
             вүӨ        Ik + V T Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V
                         вҲ’1                                         вҲ’1
              В· V T Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V
                          вҲ’1
                       1             вҲ’1                                         вҲ’1
            вүӨ 1вҲ’               V T Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V
                      cx
                               пЈ«            пЈ¶
                     cx              X
            вүӨ cx В·       В· 2cx пЈӯО» +      О»j пЈё
                    nО»k
                                     j>k
                         P
                  3 О»+
               2c           j>k О»j
            = x                    .
                n         О»k
                                                                                 вҲ’1
        The second inequality follows from вҲҘ(A + T )вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘAвҲ’1 вҲҘ 1 вҲ’ вҲҘAвҲ’1 вҲҘвҲҘT вҲҘ    , where
        both A and A + T are invertible and вҲҘAвҲ’1 вҲҘвҲҘT вҲҘ < 1. Note that cx > 2.
        Since n > 2c3x (О» + j>k О»j )О»1 О»вҲ’2
                             P
                                           k ,
              1
                       вҲ’1                                         вҲ’1
             ОЈS,k
              2
                  V T Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V


                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                                                     вҲ’1
                                T    вҲ’1                                                   вҲ’1               вҲ’1                      1
                                                                                               вҲҶT12

             В·        Ik + V        Mk 2    О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )                                Mk 2 V          вҲ’ Ik ОЈS,k
                                                                                                                                2


         вүӨ вҲҘОЈS,k вҲҘ MkвҲ’1 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12

                          вҲ’1                                      вҲ’ 1  вҲ’1
           В· Ik + V T Mk 2 О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 Mk 2 V   вҲ’ Ik
                          пЈ«         пЈ¶           P
                                           3 О»+
                 cx                     2c       j>k О»j
                               X
                                           x
         вүӨ О»1 В·     В· 2cx пЈӯО» +   О»j пЈё В·
                nО»k                      n      О»k
                                                j>k
                                      пЈ¶2
                                      пЈ«
          1 4c5x               X
         = В·     О»1 О»вҲ’2
                     k
                        пЈӯО» +       О»j пЈё
          n n
                               j>k
              пЈ«            пЈ¶
          2c2       X
         < x пЈӯО» +       О»j пЈё .
           n
                                j>k


Combining both terms above, we have
                                                                                           пЈ«                      пЈ¶
                          1                                         1                4c2x пЈӯ               X
                      ОЈS,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОЈS,k вҲ’ ОЈS,k вүӨ
                          2                                         2
                                                                                               О»+               О»j пЈё .
                                                                                      n
                                                                                                          j>k

Therefore,
                                                                 T
                 XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОІkвӢҶ вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶ                       ОЈT,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОІkвӢҶ вҲ’ ОІkвӢҶ


                                           вҲ’1            вҲ’1
         вүӨ (ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1   вӢҶ
                    S,k ОІk В· ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k
                                2         2


                      1                                         1               2
          В· ОЈS,k
               2
                  XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОЈS,k
                                            2
                                                вҲ’ ОЈS,k
                 пЈ«           пЈ¶2
           16c4        X                          вҲ’ 12    вҲ’ 21
         вүӨ 2x пЈӯО» +        О»j пЈё (ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1    вӢҶ
                                        S,k ОІk ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k .
            n
                                    j>k



Lemma 22. Under the same conditions as in Lemma 18, and on the same event, for any N1 < n <
N2 ,
                                           T
            XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k вӢҶ
                                             ОЈT,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k вӢҶ


                                                вҲ’1             вҲ’1
             вүӨ 16cx (1 + c4x L2 ) ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 (ОІвҲ’k
                                                     вӢҶ T         вӢҶ
                                                        ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k .
where                            (
                                       1
                 N1 = max 4c4x k + ln      О»41 О»вҲ’4
                                                k ,
                                       Оҙ
                                       пЈ«             пЈ¶
                                              X
                          2c4x LО»1 О»вҲ’2 пЈӯО» +      kО»j пЈё ,
                                                               j>k

                                                                                вҲ’ 1 вҲ’2

                                                1                    вҲ’1
                                       4
                                     4cx k + ln     О»61 О»вҲ’8
                                                         k вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ
                                                                  2
                                                                    ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2      ,
                                                Оҙ
                                          пЈ«            пЈ¶                                     )
                                                                          вҲ’ 21       вҲ’ 12 вҲ’1
                                                X
                                       4 пЈӯ                 2 вҲ’4
                                     2cx L О» +     О»j пЈё О»1 О»k вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k          ,
                                                       j>k
                                     пЈ«                  пЈ¶
                               1                X
                 N2 =              пЈӯО» +               О»j пЈё .
                              О»k+1
                                                j>k



                                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof.
                                                   T
                    XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                             вӢҶ
                                                       ОЈT,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                                                                     вӢҶ


                  вүӨ (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОЈT,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 В· (ОІвҲ’k
                                                                    вӢҶ T   T
                                                                       ) XвҲ’k      вӢҶ
                                                                             XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k .
From Lemma 18,
                                вӢҶ T   T       вӢҶ          вӢҶ T         вӢҶ
                              (ОІвҲ’k ) XвҲ’k XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k вүӨ cx n(ОІвҲ’k ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k .
In the following, we derive an upper bound for the other term.
      (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОЈT,k XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1
                                        1  T
    = (M + О»In + вҲҶ)вҲ’1 Mf 21 V ОЈT,k V T M
                                       f2      (M + О»In + вҲҶ)вҲ’1
       1
               1  T                          1
    = ОЈT,k
       2
           VT M
              f2                    f 12 V ОЈ 2
                    (M + О»In + вҲҶ)вҲ’2 M       T,k
        1        1                                             вҲ’1
    = ОЈT,k
        2
           V T Mk2 Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12
                                                                                  вҲ’1
     В· Ik + вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’2 вҲҶT12 Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12

              1         1
         В·Mk2 V ОЈT,k
                 2



    вүӨ Ik + вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’2 вҲҶT12
                                                                вҲ’1   1
         В·    Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12
                                                       Mk2 V ОЈT,k
              1                                            вҲ’1
      В·V T Mk2 Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12
                                                                вҲ’1 12
    вүӨ (1 + c4x L2 ) Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12    Mk V ОЈT,k
              1                                            вҲ’1
      В·V T Mk2 Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12
                                                                     вҲ’1
    = (1 + c4x L2 ) V T Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
                    1            1
         В·V T Mk2 V ОЈT,k V T Mk2 V
                                                            вҲ’1
         В· V T Mk + О»Ik + вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V
                                                                                   вҲ’1
    = (1 + c4x L2 ) XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T (вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 )V
                 1             1
      В· XkT Xk 2 ОЈT,k XkT Xk 2
                                                                вҲ’1
      В· XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T (вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 )V     .
The third equation follows from Equation 5.
We define two quantities that represent concentration error terms:
                                                                      вҲ’1          вҲ’1
    E1 = XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 V

                                                                        вҲ’ nОЈ
                                                                           e S,k     .
                   1             1
    E2 = XkT Xk 2 вҲ’ (nОЈS,k ) 2 .
                                           вҲ’1         вҲ’ 1 вҲ’2
Since n > 4c4x k + ln 1Оҙ О»61 О»вҲ’8
                                        2
                              k вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ   ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2   ,
                                                  1         1 вҲ’1

                                                 вҲ’2        вҲ’2
and n > 2c4x L О» + j>k О»j О»21 О»вҲ’4
                   P
                                   k вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k      ,
                                         вҲ’1             1                  1
                                                                                        вҲ’1
              вҲҘE1 вҲҘ nОЈe S,k     nОЈe S,k        (nОЈS,k ) 2 вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ (nОЈS,k ) 2    nОЈ
                                                                                 e S,k
                    q
               c2x   n(k + ln 1Оҙ )О»1 + c2x L О» + j>k О»j
                                                  P
                                                                             nО»1
             вүӨ                              2
                                                              (О» + nО»1 )             вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ
                                 (О» + nО»k )                              (О» + nО»k )2

                                                       35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                    q
             c2x     n(k + ln 1Оҙ )О»1 + c2x L О» + j>k О»j
                                                P
                                                           О»2  1
         вүӨ                                                       вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ
                                               n2            О»4k
               q
            c2x (k + ln 1Оҙ ) О»3            c4x L О» + j>k О»j О»2
                                                       P
                               1                                    1
         =        вҲҡ              вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ +                            вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ
                 n n         О»4k                     n2           О»4k
             1    вҲ’1         вҲ’1        1     вҲ’1         вҲ’1
         <       ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 +        ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2
            2n                        2n
            1    вҲ’ 12       вҲ’ 12
         =      ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k .
            n

Similar to Equation 6, since n > 4c4x k + ln 1Оҙ О»41 О»вҲ’4                                   вҲ’2
                                                                      4
                                                                              P
                                                       k and n > 2cx L О» +     j>k О»j О»1 О»k ,


                                                      вҲҘE1 вҲҘ nОЈ
                                                             e S,k < 1.

                                         вҲ’1         вҲ’ 1 вҲ’2
Since n > c2x k + ln 1Оҙ О»41 О»вҲ’6
                                      2
                             k вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ  ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2   ,
                                 вҲ’ 12                  вҲ’1               1                   1
                                                                                                              вҲ’1
       вҲҘE2 вҲҘ           nОЈ
                        e S,k                nОЈ
                                              e S,k             (nОЈS,k ) 2 вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ (nОЈS,k ) 2       nОЈ
                                                                                                     e S,k
         r
                     1      вҲ’1      вҲ’1     nО»1
      вүӨ cx    k + ln О»1 О»k 2 (nО»k ) 2                 вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ
                     Оҙ                  (О» + nО»k )2
            q
         cx k + ln 1Оҙ О»2
                          1
      вүӨ        вҲҡ            вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ
             n n        О»3k
          1    вҲ’1        вҲ’1
      вүӨ      ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 .
         n
Similar to Equation 7, since n > c2x k + ln 1Оҙ О»21 О»вҲ’2

                                                     k ,
                                                      вҲ’ 1
                                     вҲҘE2 вҲҘ nОЈ   e S,k 2 < 1.

Combining the four inequalities above,
                                                                                                 вҲ’1
                          XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T (вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 )V
                                 1              1
                        В· XkT Xk 2 ОЈT,k XkT Xk 2
                                                                                                 вҲ’1
                    В· XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T (вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 )V
                               вҲ’1          1               1
                                                                      вҲ’1
                   вүӨ nОЈ e S,k     (nОЈS,k ) 2 ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) 2 nОЈe S,k

                                        1               1
                                                                   вҲ’1
                        + 2 E1 (nОЈS,k ) 2 ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) 2 nОЈe S,k
                                              вҲ’1                    1
                                                                               вҲ’1
                        +2          nОЈ
                                     e S,k         E2 ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) 2 nОЈe S,k
                                              1                    1
                        + E1 (nОЈS,k ) 2 ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) 2 E1
                                    вҲ’1                      вҲ’1
                        + nОЈ e S,k     E2 ОЈT,k E2 nОЈ e S,k

                                        1
                                                          вҲ’1
                        + 2 E1 (nОЈS,k ) 2 ОЈT,k E2 nОЈ
                                                   e S,k

                                                1
                                                           вҲ’1
                        + 2 E1 E2 ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) 2 nОЈe S,k
                                                            1
                        + 2 E1 E2 ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) 2 E1


                                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 вҲ’1
                       + 2 E1 E2 ОЈT,k E2 nОЈ
                                          e S,k

                       + вҲҘE1 E2 ОЈT,k E2 E1 вҲҘ .
In particular,
                                                вҲ’1            1               1
                                                                                         вҲ’1
                                      nОЈ
                                       e S,k         (nОЈS,k ) 2 ОЈT,k (nОЈS,k ) 2 nОЈe S,k

                             1                   1
                                        e вҲ’1 ОЈ 2 ОЈT,k ОЈ 2 ОЈ
                                                          e вҲ’1
                                                              1
                           =            ОЈ S,k S,k      S,k S,k
                             n
                             1                   1            1
                           вүӨ            ОЈвҲ’1                  вҲ’1
                                         S,k ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k ОЈS,k
                                              2         2

                             n
                             1           вҲ’1             вҲ’1
                           =            ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 .
                             n
                                                                              1   1      1    1
The inequality follows from the fact that вҲҘBABвҲҘ = вҲҘA 2 BA 2 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘA 2 CA 2 вҲҘ = вҲҘCACвҲҘ, where
                                                                             1    1     1    1
A, B, C are positive semi-definite matrices, and C вүҪ B, which implies that A 2 CA 2 вүҪ A 2 BA 2 .
      вҲҘE1 E2 ОЈT,k E2 E1 вҲҘ
                           вҲ’1            вҲ’ 1         1
     = E1 nОЈ
           e S,k nОЈ e S,k          e S,k 2 nОЈ
                              E 2 nОЈ           e S,k 2
                        вҲ’ 1         1                   вҲ’1
      В·ОЈT,k E2 nОЈ e S,k 2 nОЈ  e S,k 2 E1 nОЈ
                                          e S,k nОЈ
                                                 e S,k
                        2                 вҲ’ 1
     вүӨ вҲҘE1 вҲҘ nОЈ e S,k      вҲҘE2 вҲҘ nОЈ e S,k 2
                                 вҲ’ 12                    вҲ’1               1                   1
                                                                                                                 вҲ’1
         В· вҲҘE2 вҲҘ       nОЈ
                        e S,k                  nОЈ
                                                e S,k             (nОЈS,k ) 2 вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ (nОЈS,k ) 2        nОЈ
                                                                                                        e S,k

        1    вҲ’1         вҲ’1
     вүӨ      ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 .
        n
The other terms can be similarly bounded. Therefore,
                                                                                                   вҲ’1
                         XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T (вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 )V
                                1              1
                       В· XkT Xk 2 ОЈT,k XkT Xk 2
                                                                                                   вҲ’1
                       В· XkT Xk + О»Ik + V T (вҲҶ11 вҲ’ вҲҶ12 (О»InвҲ’k + вҲҶ22 )вҲ’1 вҲҶT12 )V
                       16  вҲ’1         вҲ’1
                   вүӨ      ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 .
                       n



B.3.4    B IAS IN THE LAST d вҲ’ k DIMENSIONS
The upper bound for the bias in the last dвҲ’k dimensions is extended from Tsigler & Bartlett (2023)вҖҷs
Lemma 28. The bias can be decomposed into three terms.
                                  T
                   вӢҶ          вӢҶ                   вӢҶ          вӢҶ
              ОІ(XОІ
              b      )вҲ’k вҲ’ ОІвҲ’k       ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІ(XОІ
                                              b     )вҲ’k вҲ’ ОІвҲ’k
                вӢҶ T         вӢҶ
           вүӨ 3(ОІвҲ’k ) ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                   вӢҶ T
              + 3(ОІвҲ’k    T
                      ) XвҲ’k (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                                       T
                                                          (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                                                               вӢҶ

              + 3(ОІkвӢҶ )T XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                                        T
                                                           (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОІkвӢҶ .
Lemma 23. Under the same conditions as in Lemma 18, and on the same event, for any N1 < n <
N2 ,
                   вӢҶ T
                 (ОІвҲ’k    T
                      ) XвҲ’k (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                                       T
                                                          (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                                                               вӢҶ



                                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                         пЈ«                  пЈ¶вҲ’1
                                 X
             вүӨ c2x L пЈӯО» +                 О»j пЈё               вӢҶ T
                                                  nвҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ(ОІвҲ’k          вӢҶ
                                                                ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k .
                                     j

where N1 , N2 are defined as in Lemma 18.

Proof.
             вӢҶ T
           (ОІвҲ’k    T
                ) XвҲ’k (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                                 T
                                                    (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                                                         вӢҶ

                     вӢҶ T
         вүӨ вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ(ОІвҲ’k    T
                        ) XвҲ’k (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                                   T
                                                      (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                                                           вӢҶ

                     вӢҶ T
         вүӨ вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ(ОІвҲ’k    T
                        ) XвҲ’k (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 (XX T + О»In )(XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                                                                вӢҶ

         вүӨ вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 (ОІвҲ’k
                                      вӢҶ T   T
                                         ) XвҲ’k      вӢҶ
                                               XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
         вүӨ вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k T
                               + О»In )вҲ’1 (ОІвҲ’k
                                           вӢҶ T   T
                                              ) XвҲ’k      вӢҶ
                                                    XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                    пЈ«      пЈ«          пЈ¶пЈ¶вҲ’1
                       1        X
                                                 вӢҶ T         вӢҶ
         вүӨ вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ пЈӯ      пЈӯО» +    О»j пЈёпЈё cx n(ОІвҲ’k   ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                      cx L       j
                     пЈ«                   пЈ¶вҲ’1
                             X
         = c2x L пЈӯО» +            О»j пЈё                     вӢҶ T
                                               nвҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ(ОІвҲ’k          вӢҶ
                                                             ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k .
                             j

The fourth inequality follows from XX T + О»In вүҪ XвҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                                     T
                                                        + О»In .
Lemma 24. Under the same conditions as in Lemma 18, and on the same event, for any N1 < n <
N2 ,
                      (ОІkвӢҶ )T XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k T
                                                                   (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОІkвӢҶ
                             пЈ«            пЈ¶
                       c6           X
                     вүӨ x L пЈӯО» +        О»j пЈё вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ(ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1   вӢҶ
                                                             S,k ОІk .
                       n
                                         j>k

where N1 , N2 are defined as in Lemma 18.

Proof. It can be verified by Woodbury matrix identity that:
                                                                                                    вҲ’1
     (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk = (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                T
                                   + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk Ik + XkT (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                                               T
                                                                  + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk                             .
Therefore,
          (ОІkвӢҶ )T XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                                 T
                                                    (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОІkвӢҶ
                 1                                                                          вҲ’1         2
         = ОЈT,вҲ’k
            2     T
                 XвҲ’k       T
                     (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk Ik + XkT (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                                          T
                                                             + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk                        ОІkвӢҶ
                           T
         вүӨ вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                             T        T
                                                (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k + О»In )вҲ’1
                                                вҲ’1 вӢҶ 2
           В· Xk Ik + XkT (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k
                               T
                                  + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk    ОІk
         = вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ (XвҲ’k XвҲ’kT
                              + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                              T        T
                                                (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k  + О»In )вҲ’1
                                                                            2
                 вҲ’1           вҲ’ 12                          вҲ’ 1 вҲ’1 вҲ’ 12 вӢҶ

           В· Xk ОЈS,k2 ОЈвҲ’1          T        T
                       S,k + ОЈS,k Xk (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k + О»In )
                                                     вҲ’1
                                                        Xk ОЈS,k2    ОЈS,k ОІk
                                                           вҲ’1         вҲ’1
         вүӨ вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k  T
                                 + О»In )вҲ’1 ОЈS,k2 XkT Xk ОЈS,k2
                       вҲ’ 12                               вҲ’ 12 вҲ’2

           В· ОЈвҲ’1
               S,k + ОЈ S,k kX T
                                (XвҲ’k X T
                                      вҲ’k  + О»I n )вҲ’1
                                                     Xk ОЈ S,k     (ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1   вӢҶ
                                                                           S,k ОІk .

In particular,
                                                                                      вҲ’1
                                                 вҲ’1                             вҲ’1

                                     ОЈвҲ’1       2  T       T
                                      S,k + ОЈS,k Xk (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k + О»In )
                                                                    вҲ’1
                                                                       Xk ОЈS,k2


                                                            38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                вҲ’1
                                 вҲ’1                                     вҲ’1

                      вүӨ        ОЈS,k2 XkT (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                               T
                                                  + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОЈS,k2

                                                            вҲ’ 1 вҲ’1
                                               1
                                T              вҲ’
                      вүӨ XвҲ’k XвҲ’k    + О»In      ОЈS,k2 XkT Xk ОЈS,k2
                           пЈ«            пЈ¶
                                 X        cx
                      вүӨ cx пЈӯ О» +     О»j пЈё
                                          n
                                 j>k
                           пЈ«            пЈ¶
                        c2        X
                      = x пЈӯО» +       О»j пЈё .
                         n
                                          j>k

The second inequality follows from Вөmin (ABAT ) вүҘ Вөmin (B)Вөmin (AAT ) where the matrix B is
positive definite.
Therefore,
         (ОІkвӢҶ )T XkT (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 XвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k XвҲ’k
                                                T
                                                   (XX T + О»In )вҲ’1 Xk ОІkвӢҶ
                                                        вҲ’1            вҲ’1
                          T
        вүӨ вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k  + О»In )вҲ’1 ОЈS,k2 XkT Xk ОЈS,k2
                     вҲ’ 12                           вҲ’ 1 вҲ’2

          В· ОЈвҲ’1           T        T
              S,k + ОЈS,k Xk (XвҲ’k XвҲ’k + О»In )
                                             вҲ’1
                                                Xk ОЈS,k2   (ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1   вӢҶ
                                                                    S,k ОІk
                     пЈ«          пЈ«                  пЈ¶пЈ¶вҲ’1               пЈ«           пЈ¶2
                                                                    4
                    1 пЈӯ                   X                       c        X
        вүӨ вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ В· пЈӯ    О»+      О»j пЈёпЈё                   В· cx n В· x2 пЈӯО» +     О»j пЈё В· (ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1   вӢҶ
                                                                                               S,k ОІk
                   cx L                                           n
                              j>k                                          j>k
              пЈ«          пЈ¶
          6
         c         X
        = x L пЈӯО» +    О»j пЈё вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ(ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1   вӢҶ
                                            S,k ОІk .
          n
                      j>k


B.4   M AIN RESULTS
                            вҲ’1             вҲ’1                 1            1
Theorem 25. Let T = ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 and U = ОЈS,вҲ’k    2
                                                           ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                   2
                                                                       . There exists a constant c > 2
depending only on Пғ, such that for any cN < n < rk , if the assumption condNum(k, Оҙ, L) (As-
sumption 2) is satisfied, then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ вҲ’ ceвҲ’n/c ,
                    V        tr [T ]           n tr [U]
                        вүӨ L2         + L2                  2 .
                   cv 2        n                P
                                           О» + j>k О»j
                                      О» + P
                                              j>k О»j                nвҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ i
                     B                                2 h
                             вӢҶ 2
                        вүӨ вҲҘОІk вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                        вҲҘT вҲҘ + L     P
                     c           S,k         n                     О» + j>k О»j
                            вӢҶ    2
                                       h                nвҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ i
                        + ОІвҲ’k    ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                         L2 вҲҘT вҲҘ + L       P         .
                                                      О» + j>k О»j
N is defined as follows:
                                      (
                                                   1   6 вҲ’8                     вҲ’2
                     N = max              k + ln      О» О» вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ2 k 2 (tr [T ]) ,
                                                   Оҙ 1 k
                                                                                          )
                                                                                     вҲ’1
                                                        X
                                      LО»21 О»вҲ’4

                                            k  О»+             О»j вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘk (tr [T ])           .
                                                        j>k

Remark 8 (Sample complexity). We have assumed n > cN in the theorem. The first condition
                                                                      вҲ’2
on N indicates n вү« k. From the inequality О»2k вүӨ вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ2 k 2 (tr [T ]) вүӨ k 2 О»21 , it follows that
n = в„Ұ(k) in the best case, consistent with the sample complexity of classic linear regression.


                                                         39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This optimal case occurs when ОЈS,k вүҲ ОЈT,k . In the worst case, n = в„Ұ(k 3 ) where covariate shift is
significant in the first k dimensionsвҖ“e.g., when the test data lies predominantly in the subspace of the
first dimension. This shift in sample complexity under varying degrees of covariate shift parallels the
analysis of Ge et al. (2024) (see
                                Ptheire Theorem 4.2) for the under-parameterized setting. The second
condition implies n вү« О» + j>k О»j , such that the regularization is not too strong to introduce a
bias greater than a constant (as shown in the first bias term). On the other hand, we assume n < rk
in the theorem, which is consistent with the over-parameterized regime and Assumption 1, where
the last d вҲ’ k components are considered to be essentially high-dimensional.

Proof. The theorem follows from Lemma 18, Lemma 19, Lemma 20, Lemma 21, Lemma 22,
Lemma 23 and Lemma 24. For a constant cвҖІx > 2 depending only on Пғ, these lemmas hold for
values of n that satisfy the following inequalities:
                                     2 вҲ’2
               n > 4cвҖІ4
                     x (k + ln(1/Оҙ))О»1 О»k ,
                             пЈ«            пЈ¶
                                   X
                          вҲ’1 пЈӯ
               n > 2cвҖІ4
                     x LО»   k  О»+      О»j пЈё ,
                                          j>k

                                1
                     вҖІ4
               n > 4cx k + ln       О»41 О»вҲ’4
                                         k ,
                                Оҙ
                                пЈ«             пЈ¶
                                       X
                             вҲ’2 пЈӯ
               n > 2cвҖІ4
                     x LО»1 О»    k О»+       О»j пЈё ,
                                             j>k

                               1
                                                         h 1                  i вҲ’2
                                                             вҲ’2          вҲ’ 12
                     вҖІ4
               n > 4cx k + ln      О»61 О»вҲ’8
                                        k  вҲҘОЈ T,k вҲҘ2 2
                                                    k   tr ОЈ S,k ОЈ T,k ОЈ S,k       ,
                               Оҙ
                               пЈ«             пЈ¶
                                                           h 1                  i вҲ’1
                                                                вҲ’            вҲ’1
                                      X
                          2 вҲ’4 пЈӯ
               n > 2cвҖІ4
                     x LО»1 О»k    О»+       О»j пЈё вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘk tr ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2          ,
                                             j>k
                                X
               n > 2cвҖІ3
                     x (О» +           О»j )О»1 О»вҲ’2
                                              k ,
                                j>k

                                                              вҲ’ 1 вҲ’2

                              1                     вҲ’1
                     вҖІ4
               n > 4cx k + ln     О»61 О»вҲ’8
                                       k вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ
                                                2
                                                  ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2      ,
                              Оҙ
                         пЈ«           пЈ¶
                                                        вҲ’ 21       вҲ’ 12 вҲ’1
                              X
               n > 2cвҖІ4
                     xL О»+
                         пЈӯ       О»j пЈё О»21 О»вҲ’4
                                           k вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k        ,
                                    j>k
                          пЈ«                 пЈ¶
                                    X
               n < О»вҲ’1
                    k+1
                        пЈӯО» +              О»j пЈё .
                                    j>k


A sufficient condition for all the inequalities above is given by 4cвҖІ4
                                                                    x N1 < n < rk . This follows from
the following facts:
                                                    О»1 О»вҲ’1
                                                        k вүҘ 1,
                                                         cвҖІx > 2,
                                                          L вүҘ 1,
                                                 i вҲ’1
                                                                    вҲ’ 1 вҲ’1
                              h 1
                                 вҲ’          вҲ’1              вҲ’1
                          k tr ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2       вүҘ ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2   ,
                              h 1
                                 вҲ’          вҲ’1
                                                 i вҲ’1
                    kвҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ tr ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2      вүҘ О»k .
                                                    вҖІ
Then, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ вҲ’ cвҖІx eвҲ’n/cx :

                                        2 1
                                                h 1
                                                         вҲ’ 12
                                                              i
                                                   вҲ’2
                V /2 вүӨ 16v 2 (1 + cвҖІ4x L ) tr ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k
                                           n

                                                    40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                         пЈ«                          пЈ¶вҲ’2
                                                         X                  h 1           1
                                                                                               i
                        + v 2 cвҖІ3 2 пЈӯ
                               xL n О»+                         О»j пЈё       tr ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                              2
                                                                                   ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                                          2


                                                         j>k

                                    21
                                         h 1
                                                       вҲ’1
                                                           i
                                            вҲ’
                      вүӨ 32v 2 cвҖІ4
                               xL      tr ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2
                                     n
                                       пЈ«             пЈ¶вҲ’2
                                            X                h 1              1
                                                                                  i
                        + v 2 cвҖІ3
                               x  L2 пЈӯ
                                     n  О» +      О» j
                                                     пЈё    tr  ОЈ 2
                                                                S,вҲ’k ОЈ T,вҲ’k ОЈ S,вҲ’k ,
                                                                              2


                                                         j>k
                                 пЈ«    пЈ¶2
                      16cвҖІ4
                         x пЈӯ
                                X                          1         1
                                      пЈё (ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1 ОІkвӢҶ ОЈвҲ’ 2 ОЈT,k ОЈвҲ’ 2
                B/2 вүӨ       О» +   О» j            S,k     S,k       S,k
                       n2
                                          j>k
                                                               вҲ’1           вҲ’1
                        + 32cвҖІx (1 + cвҖІ4 2
                                      xL )
                                                                             вӢҶ T
                                                          ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 (ОІвҲ’k          вӢҶ
                                                                                ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                    пЈ«                     пЈ¶вҲ’1
                                             X
                        + 3cвҖІ2
                            xL О»+
                               пЈӯ                         О»j пЈё                   вӢҶ T
                                                                     nвҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ(ОІвҲ’k          вӢҶ
                                                                                   ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                                 j
                                     пЈ«                     пЈ¶
                             cвҖІ6                 X
                        +3    x
                                   L пЈӯО» +                О»j пЈё вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ(ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1   вӢҶ
                                                                               S,k ОІk
                             n
                                                 j>k
                              вӢҶ T        вӢҶ
                        + 3(ОІвҲ’k ) ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                пЈ«           пЈ¶2
                              1      X         вҲ’1         вҲ’1
                      вүӨ 16cвҖІ4
                           x 2
                                пЈӯО» +     О»j пЈё ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 (ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1   вӢҶ
                                                                        S,k ОІk
                              n
                                                 j>k
                                          вҲ’1         вҲ’1
                        + 64cвҖІ5
                             xL
                                2
                                         ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2               вӢҶ T
                                                                      (ОІвҲ’k          вӢҶ
                                                                           ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                 пЈ«                             пЈ¶вҲ’1
                                                 X
                        + 3cвҖІ2
                            x Ln О» +
                                пЈӯ                         О»j пЈё                  вӢҶ T
                                                                      вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ(ОІвҲ’k          вӢҶ
                                                                                   ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                                     j
                                     пЈ«     пЈ¶
                               1      X
                        + 3cвҖІ6
                            xL
                                 пЈӯО» +   О»j пЈё вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ(ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1   вӢҶ
                                                              S,k ОІk
                               n
                                                  j>k
                             вӢҶ T         вӢҶ
                        + 3(ОІвҲ’k ) ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                     пЈ«                     пЈ¶2
                                1 пЈӯ              X                    вҲ’1         вҲ’1
                      вүӨ 16cвҖІ4
                           x       О»+                    О»j пЈё        ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 (ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1   вӢҶ
                                                                                               S,k ОІk
                                n2
                                                 j>k
                                           вҲ’1                   вҲ’1
                        + 64cвҖІ5
                              xL
                                2                     вӢҶ T
                                   ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 (ОІвҲ’k          вӢҶ
                                                         ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                 пЈ«             пЈ¶вҲ’1
                                        X
                            вҖІ2                                вӢҶ T        вӢҶ
                        + 3cx Ln пЈӯО» +       О»j пЈё вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ(ОІвҲ’k   ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k
                                                 j>k
                                     пЈ«                         пЈ¶
                                    1пЈӯ            X
                        + 3cвҖІ6
                            xL        О»+                  О»j пЈё вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ(ОІkвӢҶ )T ОЈвҲ’1   вӢҶ
                                                                                S,k ОІk
                                    n
                                                  j>k
                                          вҲ’ 12                 вҲ’1
                        + 3cвҖІ5
                            xL
                               2                   вӢҶ T
                                 ОЈS,k ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 (ОІвҲ’k          вӢҶ
                                                      ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k .
The last inequality follows from:
                                                               1
                  вӢҶ T         вӢҶ      вӢҶ T 2                             вҲ’1вӢҶ            вҲ’1    1
                (ОІвҲ’k ) ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k = (ОІвҲ’k ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                   2
                                                      ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                               2
                                                                  ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                   2
                                                                        ОІвҲ’k
                                                  вҲ’1           вӢҶ T     вҲ’1  вӢҶ
                                         вүӨ ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                              2
                                                 ОЈT,вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                          2
                                                             (ОІвҲ’k ) ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k .


                                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By taking c = 134cвҖІ6
                  x , the proof is complete.
                                                              вҲ’1         вҲ’1
Corollary 26 (Restatement of Theorem 2). Let T = ОЈS,k2 ОЈT,k ОЈS,k2 , U = ОЈS,вҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k and V =
ОЈ2S,вҲ’k . There exists a constant c > 2 depending only on Пғ, L, such that for any cN < n < rk , if the
assumption condNum(k, Оҙ, L) (Assumption 2) is satisfied, then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 3Оҙ,
           V     k tr[T ]     n tr[U]
               вүӨ          +            .
          cv 2   n k          Rk tr[V]
                               О» +  P
                                       j>k О»j                          n вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ i
            B                                  2               h
                        2                               2
               вүӨ вҲҘОІkвӢҶ вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                           вӢҶ
                                                  + ОІвҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                вҲҘT вҲҘ +              .
            c             S,k        n                                 rk вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ
N is a polynomial function of k + ln(1/Оҙ), О»1 О»вҲ’1
                                                            P         вҲ’1
                                                 k ,1+ О»+     j>k О»j О»k .


Proof. The first variance term follows directly from Theorem 25.
For the second variance term, by plugging in the definition of Rk ,
                                  n tr [U]       2 n tr [ОЈS,вҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k ]
                          L2                2 = L        P      2
                                   P
                               О» + j>k О»j         R k      j>k О»j

                                                           n tr[U]
                                                    = L2            .
                                                           Rk tr[V]

For the first bias term, by plugging in the definition of rk ,
                                      О» + P
                                             j>k О»j                  nвҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ i
                                                      2 h
                             вӢҶ 2
                          вҲҘОІk вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                        вҲҘT вҲҘ + L     P
                                 S,k        n                      О» + j>k О»j
                                      О» + P
                                             j>k О»j                 n вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ i
                                                      2 h
                             вӢҶ 2
                       = вҲҘОІk вҲҘОЈвҲ’1                         вҲҘT вҲҘ + L               .
                                 S,k        n                      rk О»k+1
Similarly, the second bias term can be transformed into:
         вӢҶ    2
                    h
                       2           nвҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ i         вӢҶ  2
                                                                h
                                                                   2          n вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ i
       ОІвҲ’k    ОЈS,вҲ’k
                      L  вҲҘT вҲҘ + L     P          =   ОІ вҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k
                                                                  L  вҲҘT вҲҘ + L              .
                                  О» + j>k О»j                                  rk О»k+1

Since the statement of Theorem 25 holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ вҲ’ ceвҲ’n/c , we only require
ceвҲ’n/c < Оҙ, which is equivalent as n > c ln c + c ln(1/Оҙ). Combining the lower bounds of n in
Theorem 25, we should have:
                              (
                                            1
                     n > max c ln c + c ln ,
                                            Оҙ
                                        1                              вҲ’2
                               c k + ln О»61 О»вҲ’8           2 2

                                               k вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ k (tr [T ])      ,
                                        Оҙ                                   )
                                                                         вҲ’1
                                              X
                                   2 вҲ’4
                               cLО»1 О»k О» +        О»j вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘk (tr [T ])      .
                                                     j>k

For the first term in the maximum argument,
                                                   1             1
                                   c ln c + c ln     вүӨ c2 + c ln
                                                   Оҙ             Оҙ
                                                        2          1
                                                     вүӨ c k + ln      .
                                                                   Оҙ
The second term:
                                1   6 вҲ’8                     вҲ’2
                        c k + ln   О» О» вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ2 k 2 (tr [T ])
                                Оҙ 1 k
                                 1                                            вҲ’2
                      вүӨ c k + ln О»61 О»вҲ’8        2 2
                                       k вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ k    Вөk (ОЈвҲ’1 S,k ) tr[ОЈT,k ]
                                 Оҙ

                                                     42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  1   8 вҲ’8
                       вүӨ c k + ln    О» О» вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘ2 k 2 вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘвҲ’2
                                  Оҙ 1 k
                                  1  3 8 вҲ’8
                       = c k + ln     О»1 О»k .
                                  Оҙ
The first inequality follows from tr[M N ] вүҘ Вөmin (M ) tr[N ] for postive semi-definite matrices
M, N .
Similar, for the third term:
                                                                          вҲ’1
                                               X
                                cLО»21 О»вҲ’4

                                       k  О»+         О»j вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘk (tr [T ])
                                               j>k
                                                  X
                               вүӨ cLО»21 О»вҲ’4              О»j вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘkО»1 вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘвҲ’1

                                        k    О»+
                                                  j>k
                                          1           X
                               вүӨ cL k + ln О»31 О»вҲ’4
                                                k  О»+  О»j .
                                          Оҙ
                                                              j>k
                                                                     3             8 h                    вҲ’1 i
The proof is complete by taking c as c2 L2 and N = k +ln 1Оҙ              О»1 О»вҲ’1
                                                                                                 P
                                                                             k           1+ О»+   j>k О»j  О»k .



C     L ARGE SHIFT IN MINOR DIRECTIONS
In this section, we consider the scenario where the signal ОІ вӢҶ mainly concentrate on the first k
components (here we choose the basis to be the eigenvectors of ОЈS ), but the target covariance ОЈT
may not be small on the last d вҲ’ k components.

C.1    L OWER BOUND FOR RIDGE REGRESSION

In this subsection, we will show that the original ridge regression algorithm will not work under this
scenario.
Recall our model:
                                              y = ОІ вӢҶT x + Пө,                                              (8)
We can write our data as
                                              Y = XОІ вӢҶ + Пө,                                                (9)
where Y = (y1 , В· В· В· , yn )T вҲҲ RnГ—1 , X = (x1 , В· В· В· , xn )T вҲҲ RnГ—d , Пө = (Пө1 , В· В· В· , Пөn )T вҲҲ RnГ—1 . We
          b S := 1 X T X the sample covariance matrix.
denote by ОЈ       n

Assume the same assumptions as in our previous section still holds. We let ОЈS = E[xi xTi ] be the
following: its eigenvalues О»1 , В· В· В· , О»d satisfies О»1 = В· В· В· = О»k = 1, О»k+1 = В· В· В· = О»k+вҢҠвҲҡn/C2 вҢӢ =
     вҲҡ
C1 / n for sufficiently large constants C1 , C2 , and the remaining eigenvalues are all set to zero. We
let ОЈT = Id . Then the excess risk is EПө [(ОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ )T ОЈT (ОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ )] = EПө вҲҘОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2 . We will show that
under this scenario, ridge regression can not obtain an error rate of O( n1 ). To see this, we explicitly
write out the ridge solution:
                         ОІb = (X T X + О»Id )вҲ’1 X T Y
                               b S + О» Id )вҲ’1 ( 1 X T Y )
                            = (ОЈ
                                     n          n
                               b S + Id ) ( 1 X T (XОІ вӢҶ + Пө))
                            = (ОЈ
                                     О»     вҲ’1
                                     n          n
                               b S + Id ) ( 1 X T XОІ вӢҶ + 1 X T Пө)
                            = (ОЈ
                                     О»     вҲ’1
                                     n          n            n
                                     О»     вҲ’1       вӢҶ     1 T
                            = (ОЈ
                               b S + Id ) (ОЈ   b S ОІ + X Пө)
                                     n                    n

                                                        43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       О» вҲ’1 b вӢҶ         b S + О» Id )вҲ’1 1 X T Пө.
                           = (ОЈ
                              bS +       Id ) ОЈ S ОІ + ( ОЈ                                             (10)
                                       n                      n        n
Therefore
                b S + О» Id )вҲ’1 ОЈ
    ОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ = (ОЈ                               b S + О» Id )вҲ’1 1 X T Пө
                               b S ОІ вӢҶ вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ + (ОЈ
                      n                               n        n
                      О»     вҲ’1       вӢҶ
                               b S ОІ вҲ’ (ОЈ       О»    вҲ’1  b S + О» Id )ОІ вӢҶ + (ОЈ
                                                                            b S + О» Id )вҲ’1 1 X T Пө
                b S + Id ) ОЈ
             = (ОЈ                         b S + Id ) (ОЈ
                      n                         n                n                n        n
                 О» b       О» вҲ’1 вӢҶ                О»    вҲ’1 1    T
             = вҲ’ (ОЈS + Id ) ОІ + (ОЈ         b S + Id )       X Пө
                 n         n                     n       n

Taking expectation with respect to Пө,
                            О»2 b     О»                1          b S + О» Id )вҲ’2 X T Пө)
            EПө вҲҘОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2 =  вҲҘ(ОЈS + Id )вҲ’1 ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2 + 2 tr(ПөT X(ОЈ
                            n2       n               n                 n
                            О»2 b     О» вҲ’1 вӢҶ 2           1           О»
                                                             b S + Id )вҲ’2 ОЈ
                          = 2 вҲҘ(ОЈS + Id ) ОІ вҲҘ + v 2 tr((ОЈ                   bS)
                            n        n                  n           n
                          := B + V                                                                    (11)
               2
where B = nО»2 вҲҘ(ОЈ b S + О» Id )вҲ’1 ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2 is the bias, V = v2 tr((ОЈb S + О» Id )вҲ’2 ОЈ b S ) is the variance. We
                         n                               n               n
state the formal version of Theorem 4 in the following:
Theorem 27. Under the instance we      вҲҡ consider, namely О»1 , В· В· В· , О»d satisfies О»1 = В· В· В· = О»k = 1,
О»k+1 = В· В· В· = О»k+вҢҠвҲҡn/C2 вҢӢ = C1 / n, О»k+вҢҠвҲҡn/C2 вҢӢ+1 = В· В· В· = О»d = 0. WLOG assume Пғ = 1,
             C1 2
C2 вүҘ C1 (( 4C   ) вҲ’ k вҲ’ log 1Оҙ )вҲ’1 for some absolute constant C, and n вүҘ ( 3C2 1 )4 . With probability
                   вҲҡ
1 вҲ’ Оҙ, when О» = c n, we have vV2 вүҘ C вҖІ , where C вҖІ > 0 is some absolute constant. When О» вүӨ n3/4 ,
                                                   вӢҶ 2
we have vV2 вүҘ C вҖІ вҲҡ1n . When О» вүҘ n3/4 , B вүҘ вҲҘОІ вҲҘ
                                              вҲҡ .
                                             9 n


Proof. We will use the following concentration lemma modified from (Vershynin, 2018, Exercise
9.2.5):
Lemma 28. Let {xi }ni=1 be i.i.d. dвҲ’dimensional random vectors, satisfying: xi is mean zero,
E[xxT ] = ОЈ and is Пғ 2 ОЈ-sub-gaussian, in the sense that
                                                       вҲҘПғОЈ1/2 vвҲҘ2

                                       T
                              E[exp(v xi )] вүӨ exp                   .
                                                          2
X = (x1 , В· В· В· , xn )T вҲҲ RnГ—d . Then with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                          пЈ«s                           пЈ¶
                                                        1            1
                           b вҲ’ ОЈвҲҘ вүӨ CПғ 4 пЈӯ     r +  log Оҙ    r + log ОҙпЈё
                          вҲҘОЈ                              +              вҲҘОЈвҲҘ
                                                   n             n

where r := tr(ОЈ)/вҲҘОЈвҲҘ is the stable rank of ОЈ, C is an absolute constant.

Applying Lemma 28, we have
                                              пЈ«s                            пЈ¶
                                                    r + log 1Оҙ   r + log 1Оҙ
                           вҲҘОЈ
                            b S вҲ’ ОЈS вҲҘ вүӨ C пЈӯ                   +            пЈё
                                                        n            n
            Pd                  вҲҡ        C1
where r =      i=1 О»i = k + вҢҠ     n/C2 вҢӢ вҲҡ n
                                             вүӨ k + C1 /C2 . When n вүҘ C1 /C2 + k + log 1Оҙ , we have
                                                 s
                                                                    1
                                 b S вҲ’ ОЈS вҲҘ вүӨ 2C C1 /C2 + k + log Оҙ .
                                вҲҘОЈ
                                                             n

             b1 вүҘ В· В· В· вүҘ О»
We denote by О»              bd the eigenvalues of ОЈ
                                                  b S . Then by WeylвҖҷs inequality (Chen et al.,
2021, Lemma 2.2), вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»i вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘОЈS вҲ’ ОЈS вҲҘ. Combining with previous inequalities, we have 1 вҲ’
                   b             b


                                                    44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



     q                                             q                                              q
         C1 /C2 +k+log Оҙ1                              C1 /C2 +k+log Оҙ1                C1             C1 /C2 +k+log Оҙ1
2C              n           вүӨО»
                             bi вүӨ 1 + 2C
                                                              n         for 1 вүӨ i вүӨ k, вҲҡ n
                                                                                           вҲ’ 2C              n           вүӨ
                                                               вҲҡ
                   q
     C1
bi вүӨ вҲҡ                 C1 /C2 +k+log Оҙ1                                                       C1 2
О»      n
         + 2C                 n           for k + 1 вүӨ i вүӨ k + вҢҠ n/C2 вҢӢ. If we take C2 вүҘ C1 (( 4C ) вҲ’kвҲ’
                      q                    1
                   C1 /C2 +k+log Оҙ
log 1Оҙ )вҲ’1 then 2C        n        вүӨ 2CвҲҡ1n . Therefore we have 2CвҲҡ1n вүӨ О»
                                                                       bi вүӨ 3C
                                                                             вҲҡ1 for k + 1 вүӨ i вүӨ
                                                                            2 n
       вҲҡ                   вҲҡ
k + вҢҠ n/C2 вҢӢ. When О» = c n, we have
                                   V    1      b S + О» Id )вҲ’2 ОЈ
                                      = tr((ОЈ                 bS)
                                   v2   n            n
                                           d
                                        1X b         О»
                                      =       (О»i + )вҲ’2 О»  bi
                                        n i=1        n
                                                      вҲҡ
                                                   k+вҢҠ n/C2 вҢӢ
                                            1           X               О» вҲ’2 b
                                          вүҘ                     (О»
                                                                 bi +     ) О»i
                                            n                           n
                                                     i=k+1
                                                      вҲҡ
                                                   k+вҢҠ n/C2 вҢӢ
                                               1        X
                                                                 bi + вҲҡc )вҲ’2 О»
                                          =                     (О»           bi
                                               n                        n
                                                     i=k+1
                                                      вҲҡ
                                                   k+вҢҠ n/C2 вҢӢ
                                               1        X        3C1   c    C1
                                          вүҘ                     ( вҲҡ + вҲҡ )вҲ’2 вҲҡ
                                               n                 2 n    n  2 n
                                                       i=k+1
                                            1 вҲҡ      C1 3C1        вҲҡ
                                          = вҢҠ n/C2 вҢӢ (       + c)вҲ’2 n
                                            n        2     2
                                             C1 3C1     вҲ’2
                                          вүҘ    (    + c) .                                                          (12)
                                            4C2 2
Similarly, if О» вүӨ n3/4 ,
                                                  вҲҡ
                                               k+вҢҠ n/C2 вҢӢ
                                  V     1              X               О» вҲ’2 b
                                    2
                                      вүҘ                        (О»
                                                                bi +     ) О»i
                                  v     n                              n
                                                 i=k+1
                                                  вҲҡ
                                               k+вҢҠ n/C2 вҢӢ
                                           1           X
                                                                bi + nвҲ’1/4 )вҲ’2 О»
                                     вүҘ                         (О»              bi
                                           n
                                                 i=k+1
                                                  вҲҡ
                                               k+вҢҠ n/C2 вҢӢ
                                           1           X        3C1            C1
                                     вүҘ                         ( вҲҡ + nвҲ’1/4 )вҲ’2 вҲҡ
                                           n                    2 n           2 n
                                                    i=k+1
                                       1 вҲҡ      C1 3C1           вҲҡ
                                     = вҢҠ n/C2 вҢӢ (      + n1/4 )вҲ’2 n
                                       n          2 2
                                        C1 вҲ’1/2
                                     вүҘ      n   ,                                                                   (13)
                                       16C2
when n вүҘ ( 3C2 1 )4 .

As for the bias term, assume О» вүҘ n3/4 . Using the same concentration argument, we have 2 > О»
                                                                                           bi >
                                                    О»
1/2, for 1 вүӨ i вүӨ k. When О» вүӨ n, О»max (ОЈS + n Id ) вүӨ 2 + О»/n вүӨ 3, therefore О»min ((ОЈS +
                                            b                                             b
О»     вҲ’1
n Id )   ) вүҘ 31 . This implies
                                            О»2 b       О»
                                     B=       2
                                                вҲҘ(ОЈS + Id )вҲ’1 ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                            n          n
                                            n3/2 b       О»
                                          вүҘ 2 вҲҘ(ОЈS + Id )вҲ’1 ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                             n           n
                                             1        b S + О» Id )вҲ’1 )вҲҘОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                          вүҘ вҲҡ О»2min ((ОЈ
                                               n            n
                                            вҲҘОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                          вүҘ вҲҡ .
                                             9 n

                                                                45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                   b S + О» Id )вҲ’1 ) вүҘ n This
                  b S + О» Id ) вүӨ 2 + О»/n вүӨ 3О» , which means О»min ((ОЈ
When О» > n, О»max (ОЈ     n                  n                             n            3О»
implies
                                         О»2 b        О»
                                    B=      вҲҘ(ОЈS + Id )вҲ’1 ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                         n2          n
                                         О»2        b S + О» Id )вҲ’1 )вҲҘОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                       вүҘ 2 О»2min ((ОЈ
                                         n               n
                                         О»2 n2     вӢҶ 2
                                       вүҘ 2 2 вҲҘОІ вҲҘ
                                         n 9О»
                                         вҲҘОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                       вүҘ         .
                                            9



C.2    U PPER BOUND FOR PCR

In this subsection, we will give the following upper bound for Principal Component Regression.
                                           О»1                      О»2 k2 вҲҘОЈ вҲҘ2
Theorem 29. When n вүі Пғ 8 (r + log 1Оҙ )( О»k вҲ’О»k+1
                                                 )2 О»4 tr((ОЈ
                                                           1
                                                             S,k )
                                                                   T
                                                                  вҲ’1 ОЈ
                                                                      T ,k )
                                                                            2,
                                                               k


                                  О»1        О»1         r + log 1Оҙ            1
  EПө вҲҘОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ O(Пғ 8 (           )2 ( )2 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ(             )вҲҘОІkвӢҶ вҲҘ2 + v 2 tr((ОЈS,k )вҲ’1 ОЈT,k )
                              О»k вҲ’ О»k+1     О»k             n                 n
                                 вӢҶ
                       вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘвҲҘОІвҲ’k вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ    вӢҶT         вӢҶ
                     +                         + ОІвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k   )
                                 О»k
             Pd
                i=1 О»i
where r =       О»1       .

Proof. For simplicity, we assume we have a sample    size of 2n, and in the first step we obtain an
                                                   I
estimator U вҲҲ R
           b      dГ—k
                       of the top-k subspace U = k вҲҲ RdГ—k , by using principal component anal-
                                                    0
ysis on the sample covariance matrix ОЈ   b S := X X = 1 Pn xi xT , namely U
                                                1  T                               b = (bu1 , В· В· В· , u
                                                                                                      bk )
                                                n            n   i=1     i
where ubi is the i-th eigenvector of ОЈS . We denote the distance between the estimated subspace and
                                      b
the original one by вҲҶ := dist(U, U  b ) = вҲҘU U T вҲ’ U
                                                   bU b T вҲҘ. For controlling вҲҶ, we have the following
lemma (Lemma 6):
Lemma 30. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                               пЈ«s                          пЈ¶
                                             1           1
                                     r + log     r + log        О»1
                   вҲҶ вүӨ CПғ 4 пЈӯ                Оҙ
                                               +         ОҙпЈё
                                         n           n       О»k вҲ’ О»k+1
             Pn
                i=1 О»i
where r =       О»1       .

In the second step, we do linear regression on the projected (second half) data. With a little abuse of
notation, we still use X вҲҲ RnГ—d to denote the data matrix indexed from n + 1 to 2n. The data here
is independent from the data in step 1, and therefore independent of вҲҶ. If we let Z := X U  b вҲҲ RnГ—k
be the projected data matrix, the estimator ОІb we obtained is given by
                                            b (Z T Z)вҲ’1 Z T Y
                                       ОІb = U
                                          =U   bT XT XU
                                            b (U         b )вҲ’1 U
                                                               b T X T Y.                                        (14)
                                                                                                             1
We aim to bound the excess risk on target, which is given by вҲҘОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2ОЈT := вҲҘОЈT2 (ОІb вҲ’
ОІ вӢҶ )вҲҘ2 . We introduce the following notations: suppose ОІ вӢҶ = (ОІ1вҲ— , В· В· В· , ОІdвҲ— )T . We let ОІUвӢҶ :=
(ОІ1вҲ— , В· В· В· , ОІkвӢҶ , 0, В· В· В· , 0)T , ОІвҠҘ
                                       вӢҶ                    вҲ—
                                         := (0, В· В· В· , 0, ОІk+1 , В· В· В· , ОІdвӢҶ )T = ОІ вӢҶ вҲ’ ОІUвӢҶ . Here we present an in-
termediate result for bounding the excess risk:


                                                         46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  О»2k tr((ОЈS,k )вҲ’1 ОЈT ,k )            Пғ 4 О»21 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ2 k3 log(1/Оҙ)
Lemma 31. Assume вҲҶ вүӨ                    4О»1 kвҲҘОЈT вҲҘ         . When n вүі О»4 tr((ОЈ   S,k )
                                                                                       вҲ’1 ОЈ
                                                                                           T ,k )
                                                                                                 2 , then with probabil-
                                                                        k
ity 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                                    О»1 2          1
               EПө вҲҘОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ O(вҲҘОІUвӢҶ вҲҘ2 вҲҶ2 (      ) вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ + v 2 tr((ОЈS,k )вҲ’1 ОЈT,k )
                                                    О»k            n
                                                вӢҶ
                                       вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘвҲҘОІвҲ’k вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ    вӢҶT        вӢҶ
                                     +                         + ОІвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k )
                                                О»k

If further n вүі Пғ 4 вҲҶвҲ’2 k log(1/Оҙ),
                                         О»1
      EПө вҲҘОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ O(вҲҘОІUвӢҶ вҲҘ2 (вҲҶ4 ( )2 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ + вҲҶ2 вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ + вҲҶ3 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ)
                                         О»k
                                                           вӢҶ
                          1 2                     вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘвҲҘОІвҲ’k вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ
                        + v tr((ОЈS,k )вҲ’1 ОЈT,k ) +                            вӢҶT
                                                                          + ОІвҲ’k        вӢҶ
                                                                                ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k )
                          n                                 О»k
                                                   Pn
                                                     i=1 О»i
From Lemma 30, when n вүҘ r + log 1Оҙ =                  + log 1Оҙ , we have
                                                      О»1
                                                           s
                                                 О»1           r + log 1Оҙ
                                       вҲҶ вүӨ 2C           Пғ4
                                              О»k вҲ’ О»k+1           n
                                         О»1                     О»2 k2 вҲҘОЈ вҲҘ2
Therefore when n вүі (r + log 1Оҙ )Пғ 8 ( О»k вҲ’О»k+1
                                               )2 О»4 tr((ОЈ
                                                         1
                                                           S,k )
                                                                 T
                                                                вҲ’1 ОЈ
                                                                    T ,k )
                                                                           2 , the assumption for вҲҶ and n in
                                                   k
Lemma 31 will be both satisfied. We can thus apply Lemma 31 to get
                                 О»1        О»1        r + log 1Оҙ вӢҶ 2 1 2
  EПө вҲҘОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ O(Пғ 8 (          )2 ( )2 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ           вҲҘОІU вҲҘ + v tr((ОЈS,k )вҲ’1 ОЈT,k )
                             О»k вҲ’ О»k+1     О»k            n            n
                                вӢҶ   2
                      вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘвҲҘОІвҲ’k вҲҘ вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ     вӢҶT         вӢҶ
                    +                         + ОІвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k  )
                                О»k
            Pd
              i=1 О»i
where r =      О»1      .



C.3    P ROOFS FOR L EMMA 31

In the following we will prove Lemma 31.

Proof for Lemma 31. The proof idea is similar to (Ge et al., 2023, Theorem 4.4) and (Tripuraneni
et al., 2021b, Theorem 4).
We can decompose ОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ as

               ОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ = U         b )вҲ’1 U
                             bT XT XU
                          b (U            b T X T Y вҲ’ ОІвӢҶ
                        =Ub (U      b )вҲ’1 U
                             bT XT XU     b T X T (XОІ вӢҶ + Пө) вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ
                             =Ub (U      b )вҲ’1 U
                                  bT XT XU     b T X T (XОІUвӢҶ + XОІвҠҘ
                                                                 вӢҶ
                                                                   + Пө) вҲ’ (ОІUвӢҶ + ОІвҠҘ
                                                                                  вӢҶ
                                                                                    )
                                                вӢҶ
                             = A1 + A2 + A3 вҲ’ ОІ вҠҘ ,

where A1 := Ub (U      b )вҲ’1 U
                bT XT XU     b T X T XОІ вӢҶ вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ , A2 := U         b )вҲ’1 U
                                                           bT XT XU
                                                        b (U            b T X T XОІ вӢҶ , A3 :=
                                       U     U                                    вҠҘ
     T T      вҲ’1 b T T
U (U X X U ) U X Пө. Therefore
b  b       b
                                                                               вӢҶ 2
                           вҲҘОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ вҲҘA1 вҲҘ2ОЈT + вҲҘA2 вҲҘ2ОЈT + вҲҘA3 вҲҘ2ОЈT + вҲҘОІвҠҘ вҲҘОЈT                               (15)

We give three lemmas for bounding the related terms. The first lemma considers the bias term A1 :
                 О»k
Lemma 32. If вҲҶ вүӨ 4О» 1
                      and n вүі max{Пғ 4 ( О»О»k1 )2 k log(1/Оҙ), Пғ 4 k log(1/Оҙ)}, then with probability at
least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,


                                                           47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              О»1 2
                                вҲҘA1 вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ O(вҲҘОІUвӢҶ вҲҘ2 вҲҶ2 (        ) вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ)
                                                              О»k
If we further have n вүі Пғ 4 вҲҶвҲ’2 k log(1/Оҙ), then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,


                                   О»1 2
      вҲҘA1 вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ O(вҲҘОІUвӢҶ вҲҘ2 (вҲҶ4 (      ) вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ + вҲҶ2 вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ + вҲҶ3 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ)) вүӨ O(вҲҘОІUвӢҶ вҲҘ2 вҲҶ2 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ)
                                   О»k

The second lemma considers the variance term A3 :
                      О»2k tr((ОЈS,k )вҲ’1 ОЈT ,k )          4       2       2 3
Lemma 33. If вҲҶ вүӨ            4О»1 kвҲҘОЈT вҲҘ         and n вүі Пғ О»вҲҘОЈ S вҲҘ вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ k log(1/Оҙ)
                                                           4 tr((ОЈ
                                                                   S,k )
                                                                        вҲ’1 ОЈ
                                                                            T ,k )
                                                                                   2 , then with probability at
                                                           k
least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                               1
                            EПө [вҲҘA3 вҲҘ2ОЈT ] вүӨ O( v 2 tr((ОЈS,k )вҲ’1 ОЈT,k )).
                                               n

For bounding A2 , we actually have a similar result to bounding A3 :
                                                             вҲҘОЈ  О»kвҲҘ
Lemma 34. If n вүі Пғ 4 ( О»О»k1 )2 k log(1/Оҙ) and вҲҶ вүӨ min{ 2вҲҘОЈT ,k
                                                            TвҲҘ
                                                               , 4О»1
                                                                     }, then with probability at least
1вҲ’Оҙ
                                                         вӢҶ
                                                вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘвҲҘОІвҲ’k вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ
                              вҲҘA2 вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ O(                             )                                 (16)
                                                         О»k

By Lemma 32, 33, 34, together with the decomposition (15), we have with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, when
n вүі N1 ,
                                                 О»1            1
               EПө вҲҘОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ O(вҲҘОІUвӢҶ вҲҘ2 вҲҶ2 ( )2 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ + v 2 tr((ОЈS,k )вҲ’1 ОЈT,k )                      (17)
                                                 О»k            n
                                             вӢҶ
                                   вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘвҲҘОІвҲ’k  вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ    вӢҶT        вӢҶ
                                 +                          + ОІвҲ’k ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k )                             (18)
                                             О»k

If further n вүі Пғ 4 вҲҶвҲ’2 k log(1/Оҙ),
                                      О»1
   EПө вҲҘОІb вҲ’ ОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ O(вҲҘОІUвӢҶ вҲҘ2 (вҲҶ4 ( )2 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ + вҲҶ2 вҲҘОЈT,вҲ’k вҲҘ + вҲҶ3 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ)                                 (19)
                                      О»k
                                                          вӢҶ
                       1                         вҲҘОЈT,k вҲҘвҲҘОІвҲ’k вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ
                     + v 2 tr((ОЈS,k )вҲ’1 ОЈT,k ) +                            вӢҶT
                                                                         + ОІвҲ’k        вӢҶ
                                                                               ОЈT,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k )                (20)
                       n                                  О»k



C.4    T ECHNICAL PROOFS

In the sequel, we give the proofs of Lemma 32, 33, 34 and 30. We first prove some additional
technical lemmas. The following lemma, which is a simple corollary of (Tripuraneni et al., 2021b,
Lemma 20), shows the concentration property of empirical covariance matrix.
Lemma 35. Let {xi }ni=1 be i.i.d. dвҲ’dimensional random vectors, satisfying: xi is mean zero,
E[xxT ] = ОЈ such that Пғmax (ОЈ) вүӨ Cmax and is Пғ 2 ОЈ-sub-gaussian, in the sense that
                                                     вҲҘПғОЈ1/2 vвҲҘ2

                                     T
                             E[exp(v xi )] вүӨ exp                   .
                                                          2
X = (x1 , В· В· В· , xn )T вҲҲ RnГ—d . Then for any A, B вҲҲ RdГ—k , we have with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ
                                                      r           r
           T
    T X X                T              2               k     k      log(1/Оҙ) log(1/Оҙ)
 вҲҘA (            )B вҲ’ A ОЈBвҲҘ2 вүӨ O(Пғ вҲҘAвҲҘвҲҘBвҲҘвҲҘОЈвҲҘ(               + +               +             ). (21)
           n                                            n n              n            n

                                                    48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We write the SVD of A and B: A = U1 Оӣ1 V1T , B = U2 Оӣ2 V2T , where U1 , U2 вҲҲ RdГ—k ,
Оӣ1 , Оӣ2 , V1 , V2 вҲҲ RkГ—k . Then
               XT X                             XT X
       вҲҘAT (        )B вҲ’ AT ОЈBвҲҘ2 = вҲҘV1 Оӣ1 U1T (       )U2 Оӣ2 V2T вҲ’ V1 Оӣ1 U1T ОЈU2 Оӣ2 V2T вҲҘ2
                n                                 n
                                                  XT X
                                 вүӨ вҲҘV1 Оӣ1 вҲҘвҲҘU1T (       )U2 вҲ’ U1T ОЈU2 вҲҘвҲҘОӣ2 V2T вҲҘ
                                                    n
                                                   XT X
                                 вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘвҲҘBвҲҘвҲҘU1T (          )U2 вҲ’ U1T ОЈU2 вҲҘ.                     (22)
                                                     n
Now since U1 , U2 вҲҲ RdГ—k are projection matrices, we can apply Tripuraneni et al. (2021b) Lemma
20, therefore
                                                  r           r
                T
            T X X           T              2        k    k      log(1/Оҙ) log(1/Оҙ)
         вҲҘU1 (      )U2 вҲ’ U1 ОЈU2 вҲҘ вүӨ O(Пғ вҲҘОЈвҲҘ(          + +                +            ))   (23)
                n                                   n n             n             n
which gives what we want.

The following lemma is a basic matrix perturbation result (see Tripuraneni et al. (2021b) Lemma
25).
Lemma 36. Let A be a positive definite matrix and E another matrix which satisfies вҲҘEAвҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ 14 ,
then F := (A + E)вҲ’1 вҲ’ AвҲ’1 satisfies вҲҘF вҲҘ вүӨ 34 вҲҘAвҲ’1 вҲҘвҲҘEAвҲ’1 вҲҘ.

With these two technical lemmas, we are able to prove Lemma 32, 33.

Proof of Lemma 32. Notice that by the definition of U and ОІUвӢҶ , we have U U T ОІUвӢҶ = ОІUвӢҶ . We denote
ОұвӢҶ := U T ОІUвӢҶ , then we also have ОІUвӢҶ = U ОұвӢҶ . Therefore

                           A1 = U
                                b (U      b )вҲ’1 U
                                   bT XT XU     b T X T XОІUвӢҶ вҲ’ ОІUвӢҶ
                              =Ub (U      b )вҲ’1 U
                                   bT XT XU     b T X T XU ОұвӢҶ вҲ’ U ОұвӢҶ
                               = (U
                                  b (U      b )вҲ’1 U
                                     bT XT XU     b T X T XU вҲ’ U )ОұвӢҶ

We consider Ub вҲҲ RdГ—k and U b T вҲҲ RdГ—(dвҲ’k) be orthonormal projection matrices spanning orthogo-
                             вҠҘ
nal subspaces which are rank k and rank d вҲ’ k respectively, so that range(U           bвҠҘ ) = Rd .
                                                                          b ) вҠ• range(U
                     вӢҶ
                b , U ) = вҲҘU T   вӢҶ
                           b U вҲҘ2 . Notice that Id = U     T          T
Then вҲҶ = dist(U              вҠҘ
                                                       bUb +U   bвҠҘ Ub , we have
                                                                     вҠҘ

        U
        b (UbT XT XUb )вҲ’1 U
                          b T X T XU вӢҶ вҲ’ U вӢҶ
       =Ub (UbT XT XUb )вҲ’1 U
                           b T X T X(U
                                     bUbT + U   b T )U вӢҶ вҲ’ U вӢҶ
                                             bвҠҘ U
                                                      вҠҘ

       =U
        b (U      b )вҲ’1 U
           bT XT XU     bT XT XU
                               bUbT UвӢҶ + U  bT XT XU
                                         b (U       b )вҲ’1 U
                                                          bT XT XU
                                                                 bвҠҘ U
                                                                    bвҠҘT вӢҶ
                                                                       U вҲ’ UвӢҶ
       =U
        b (U      b )вҲ’1 U
           bT XT XU     bT XT XU
                               bвҠҘ U
                                  bвҠҘT вӢҶ
                                     U +U   bT UвӢҶ вҲ’ UвӢҶ
                                           bU
       =U
        b (U      b )вҲ’1 U
           bT XT XU     bT XT XU
                               bвҠҘ U
                                  bвҠҘT вӢҶ
                                     U вҲ’U
                                        bвҠҘ U
                                           bвҠҘT вӢҶ
                                              U                                               (24)

Thus
вҲҘA1 вҲҘ2ОЈT = AT1 ОЈT A1
         = ОұвӢҶT (U
                b (U      b )вҲ’1 U
                   bT XT XU     b T X T XU вҲ’ U )T ОЈT (U         b )вҲ’1 U
                                                         bT XT XU
                                                      b (U            b T X T XU вҲ’ U )ОұвӢҶ
          = ОұвӢҶT (U  bT XT XU
                 b (U       b )вҲ’1 U
                                  bT XT XUbвҠҘ U T вӢҶ
                                              bвҠҘ U вҲ’UbвҠҘ U T вӢҶ T
                                                         bвҠҘ U ) ОЈT
                            вҲ’1 b T
             (U (U X X U ) U X X UвҠҘ UвҠҘ U вҲ’ UвҠҘ UвҠҘ U )ОұвӢҶ
              b  b T  T   b         T   b  b T вӢҶ   b  b T вӢҶ


          вүӨ вҲҘОұвӢҶ вҲҘ2 вҲҘU
                    b (U      b )вҲ’1 U
                       bT XT XU     bT XT XU  bT UвӢҶ вҲ’ U
                                           bвҠҘ U           b T U вӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                                       bвҠҘ U
                                                вҠҘ          вҠҘ       ОЈT
              вӢҶ 2         T T     вҲ’1 b T T       T вӢҶ 2              T вӢҶ 2
          вүӨ вҲҘОұ вҲҘ (вҲҘU (U X X U ) U X X UвҠҘ UвҠҘ U вҲҘОЈ + вҲҘUвҠҘ UвҠҘ
                     b  b      b            b  b              b
                                                              T
                                                                  b  U вҲҘОЈ ).    T
                                                                                              (25)
                                      p
Here we use the notation вҲҘM вҲҘОЈT :=        вҲҘM T ОЈT M вҲҘ for matrix M .


                                                 49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For the second term,
                         T вӢҶ 2       T           T вӢҶ 2
                  вҲҘUbвҠҘ U
                       bвҠҘ U вҲҘОЈT вүӨ вҲҘU
                                   bвҠҘ     bвҠҘ вҲҘвҲҘU
                                       ОЈT U    bвҠҘ U вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҶ2 вҲҘ U
                                                             bвҠҘT    bвҠҘ вҲҘ.
                                                                 ОЈT U                                (26)

For the first term,
  вҲҘU   bT XT XU
    b (U          b )вҲ’1 U
                        bT XT XU
                               bвҠҘ U
                                  bвҠҘT вӢҶ 2
                                     U вҲҘОЈ      T
            T              T
= вҲҘU  bT X X U
   b (U                bT X X U
                 b )вҲ’1 U        bвҠҘ U T вӢҶ 2
                                    bвҠҘ U вҲҘОЈT
            n              n
= вҲҘU
   b ((U      b )вҲ’1 + F )(U
       b T ОЈS U           b T ОЈS U
                                 bвҠҘ U T вӢҶ
                                     bвҠҘ U + E1 )вҲҘ2ОЈT
    b T ОЈS U
= вҲҘ(U      bвҠҘ U
              bвҠҘT вӢҶ
                  U + E1 )T ((U       b )вҲ’1 + F )T U
                               b T ОЈS U            b T ОЈT U
                                                          b ((U      b )вҲ’1 + F )(U
                                                              b T ОЈS U           b T ОЈS U
                                                                                        bвҠҘ U
                                                                                           bвҠҘT вӢҶ
                                                                                              U + E1 )вҲҘ
вүӨ вҲҘUb T ОЈS U  b T U вӢҶ + E1 вҲҘ2 вҲҘ(U
           bвҠҘ U                        b )вҲ’1 + F вҲҘ2 вҲҘU
                                b T ОЈS U             b T ОЈT U
                                                            bвҲҘ
               вҠҘ

вүӨ (вҲҘUb T ОЈS U
            bвҠҘ U
               bвҠҘT вӢҶ
                   U вҲҘ + вҲҘE1 вҲҘ)2 (вҲҘ(U       b )вҲ’1 вҲҘ + вҲҘF вҲҘ)2 вҲҘU
                                     b T ОЈS U                 b T ОЈT U
                                                                     bвҲҘ                              (27)

where E1 = U   b T XT X U bвҠҘ U bT UвӢҶ вҲ’ U b T ОЈS U
                                                bвҠҘ U                b T XT X U
                                                     b T U вӢҶ , F = (U        b )вҲ’1 вҲ’ (Ub T ОЈS Ub )вҲ’1 . We
                     n          вҠҘ                     вҠҘ                   n
                                  b T ОЈS U   b T U вӢҶ вҲҘ and вҲҘF вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘ(U          b )вҲ’1 вҲҘ = C
                                                                        b T ОЈS U            вҲ’1
aim to show that вҲҘE1 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘU              bвҠҘ U
                                              вҠҘ                                             min for suffi-
ciently large n, therefore the term in (27) can be bounded well. First we need a careful analysis
    b T ОЈS U
of вҲҘU          b T U вӢҶ вҲҘ. It is obvious that
            bвҠҘ U
                вҠҘ
                    b T ОЈS U
                   вҲҘU         b T U вӢҶ вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘU
                           bвҠҘ U            b T ОЈS U    b T U вӢҶ вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҶвҲҘU
                                                  bвҠҘ вҲҘвҲҘU             b T ОЈS U
                                                                            bвҠҘ вҲҘ.                    (28)
                                вҠҘ                        вҠҘ
        b T ОЈS U
As for вҲҘU      bвҠҘ вҲҘ, notice that if without the вҖқhatвҖқ, we have U T ОЈS UвҠҘ = 0 by the definition of U
and ОЈS is diagonal. By definition of distance between two subspaces, there exist R вҲҲ OkГ—k and
Q вҲҲ O(dвҲ’k)Г—(dвҲ’k) , such that вҲҘU b R вҲ’ U вҲҘ = вҲҶ = вҲҘU   bвҠҘ Q вҲ’ UвҠҘ вҲҘ. Then we have
           b T ОЈS U
          вҲҘU      bвҠҘ вҲҘ = вҲҘRT U
                             b T ОЈS U
                                    bвҠҘ QвҲҘ
                          = вҲҘU T ОЈS UвҠҘ + RT Ub T ОЈS U
                                                    bвҠҘ Q вҲ’ U T ОЈS UвҠҘ вҲҘ
                          = вҲҘRT Ub T ОЈS U
                                        bвҠҘ Q вҲ’ U T ОЈS UвҠҘ вҲҘ
                          = вҲҘRT U
                                b T ОЈS U
                                       bвҠҘ Q вҲ’ U T ОЈS U
                                                     bвҠҘ Q + U T ОЈS U
                                                                   bвҠҘ Q вҲ’ U T ОЈS UвҠҘ вҲҘ
                          вүӨ вҲҘRT U
                                b T ОЈS U
                                       bвҠҘ Q вҲ’ U T ОЈS U
                                                     bвҠҘ QвҲҘ + вҲҘU T ОЈS U
                                                                     bвҠҘ Q вҲ’ U T ОЈS UвҠҘ вҲҘ
                          вүӨ вҲҘRT U
                                b T вҲ’ U T вҲҘвҲҘОЈS U
                                               bвҠҘ QвҲҘ + вҲҘU T ОЈS вҲҘвҲҘU
                                                                 bвҠҘ Q вҲ’ UвҠҘ вҲҘ
                          вүӨ 2вҲҶвҲҘОЈS вҲҘ.                                                                 (29)
Combine (28) and (29), we have
                                   b T ОЈS U
                                  вҲҘU         b T U вӢҶ вҲҘ вүӨ O(вҲҶ2 вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ)
                                          bвҠҘ U                                                       (30)
                                              вҠҘ
                                           T
                                bT X X U
In order to bound вҲҘF вҲҘ, let E = U       b вҲ’U b T ОЈS U
                                                    b , then by Lemma 35, with probability at least
                                    n
1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                      r             r
                                2        k     k       log(1/Оҙ) log(1/Оҙ)
                    вҲҘEвҲҘ вүӨ O(Пғ вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ(       + +                   +         )).                 (31)
                                         n n               n         n
Therefore,
           вҲҘE(U       b )вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘEвҲҘвҲҘ(U
               b T ОЈS U                     b )вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                     b T ОЈS U
                                     вҲ’1
                               вүӨ вҲҘEвҲҘCmin
                                                    r            r
                                      вҲ’1
                                       2                k  k  log(1/Оҙ) log(1/Оҙ)
                               вүӨ O(Пғ Cmin вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ(          + +            +           )),     (32)
                                                        n n        n           n
                                                                                      q
where Cmin := О»min (U        b ). Notice that n вүі Пғ 4 C вҲ’2 вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ2 k log(1/Оҙ) implies
                      b T ОЈS U                                                           k   k
                                                       min                               n + n +
q
  log(1/Оҙ)
     n     + log(1/Оҙ)
                 n    вүІ Пғ вҲ’2 Cmin вҲҘОЈS вҲҘвҲ’1 . Thus, we show that when n is large enough, we have
вҲҘE(U       b )вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ 1 . Therefore we can apply Lemma 36, which gives
    b T ОЈS U
                      4
                                       4           b )вҲ’1 вҲҘвҲҘ(U
                                            b T ОЈS U               b )вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                                            b T ОЈS U
                              вҲҘF вҲҘ вүӨ     вҲҘE(U
                                       3

                                                   50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   4 1 bT     b )вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                  вүӨ  Г— вҲҘ(U ОЈS U
                                   3 4
                                   1 вҲ’1
                                  вүӨ Cmin .                                                    (33)
                                   3
As for вҲҘE1 вҲҘ, directly applying Lemma 35, when n вүі Пғ 4 вҲҶвҲ’2 k log(1/Оҙ) we get
                                              r          r
                                                k    k      log(1/Оҙ) log(1/Оҙ)
             вҲҘE1 вҲҘ вүӨ O(Пғ 2 вҲҘОЈS вҲҘвҲҘU bвҠҘ U
                                      bвҠҘT вӢҶ
                                         U вҲҘ(     + +                +        ))
                                                n n             n          n
                                    r          r
                                       k   k      log(1/Оҙ) log(1/Оҙ)
                    вүӨ O(Пғ 2 вҲҘОЈS вҲҘвҲҶ(      + +               +          ))                      (34)
                                       n n            n           n
when n вүі Пғ 4 k log(1/Оҙ) we have
                                        вҲҘE1 вҲҘ вүӨ O(вҲҶвҲҘОЈS вҲҘ)                                     (35)
, if further we have n вүі Пғ 4 вҲҶвҲ’2 k log(1/Оҙ), then
                                       вҲҘE1 вҲҘ вүӨ O(вҲҶ2 вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ).                                   (36)

Combining (27), (30), (33) and (36), we have
               вҲҘUb (U      b )вҲ’1 U
                    bT XT XU     bT XT XU  b T U вӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                        bвҠҘ U
                                            вҠҘ       ОЈT
                     T       T вӢҶ         2      T
              вүӨ (вҲҘU ОЈS UвҠҘ UвҠҘ U вҲҘ + вҲҘE1 вҲҘ) (вҲҘ(U ОЈS U
                   b    b  b                  b       b )вҲ’1 вҲҘ + вҲҘF вҲҘ)2 вҲҘU
                                                                        b T ОЈT U
                                                                               bвҲҘ
                             вҲ’2 b T
              вүӨ O(вҲҶ4 вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ2 Cmin вҲҘ U ОЈT U
                                        b вҲҘ)
                             вҲ’2
              вүӨ O(вҲҶ4 вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ2 Cmin вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ)                                                       (37)

Combining (25),(26) and (37), we get
        вҲҘA1 вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ вҲҘОұвӢҶ вҲҘ2 (вҲҘU  bT XT XU
                            b (U       b )вҲ’1 U
                                             bT XT XUbвҠҘ U
                                                        bвҠҘT вӢҶ 2
                                                           U вҲҘОЈT + вҲҘU
                                                                    bвҠҘ U
                                                                       bвҠҘT вӢҶ 2
                                                                          U вҲҘОЈT )
                         вӢҶ 2    4    2 вҲ’2           2 bT
                 вүӨ O(вҲҘОұ вҲҘ (вҲҶ вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ C вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ + вҲҶ вҲҘU ОЈT U
                                            min
                                                            bвҠҘ вҲҘ))
                                                              вҠҘ                               (38)
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. Also, similar to (29), we have
                   b T ОЈT U
                  вҲҘU      bвҠҘ вҲҘ = вҲҘQT U
                                     b T ОЈT U
                                            bвҠҘ QвҲҘ
                    вҠҘ                 вҠҘ
                                    T
                                вүӨ вҲҘUвҠҘ ОЈT UвҠҘ вҲҘ + вҲҘQT U
                                                    bвҠҘT            T
                                                           bвҠҘ Q вҲ’ UвҠҘ
                                                        ОЈT U         ОЈT UвҠҘ вҲҘ
                                    T
                                вүӨ вҲҘUвҠҘ ОЈT UвҠҘ вҲҘ + 2вҲҶвҲҘОЈT вҲҘ                                       (39)
Similarly, we can further know that Cmin is close to О»k :
                                  b T ОЈS U
                       Cmin = О»k (U       b)
                            = О»k (RT Ub T ОЈS U
                                             b R)
                             = О»k (U T ОЈS U + RT Ub T ОЈS Ub R вҲ’ U T ОЈS U )
                             вүҘ О»k (U T ОЈS U ) вҲ’ вҲҘRT Ub T ОЈS U
                                                            b R вҲ’ U T ОЈS U вҲҘ
                             вүҘ О»k (U T ОЈS U )2вҲҶвҲҘОЈS вҲҘ
                             вүҘ О»k вҲ’ 2О»1 вҲҶ
                               1
                             вүҘ О»k ,                                                           (40)
                               2
                                         О»k
where the last inequality holds when вҲҶ вүӨ 4О»1
                                             . Finally, combining (38), (39), (40), we have


                                         О»1 2
              вҲҘA1 вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ O(вҲҘОұвӢҶ вҲҘ2 (вҲҶ4 (     ) вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ + вҲҶ2 вҲҘUвҠҘ
                                                           T
                                                             ОЈT UвҠҘ вҲҘ + вҲҶ3 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ))
                                         О»k
                                         О»1
                        вүӨ O(вҲҘОІUвӢҶ вҲҘ2 (вҲҶ4 ( )2 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ + вҲҶ2 вҲҘUвҠҘT
                                                             ОЈT UвҠҘ вҲҘ + вҲҶ3 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ))             (41)
                                         О»k


                                                    51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            О»k
when вҲҶ вүӨ 4О»   1
                and n вүі max{Пғ 4 ( О»О»k1 )2 k log(1/Оҙ), Пғ 4 вҲҶвҲ’2 k log(1/Оҙ)}. If in the previous proofs we
replace (36) by (35), we have

                                         О»1 2
              вҲҘA1 вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ O(вҲҘОІUвӢҶ вҲҘ2 (вҲҶ2 (    ) вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ + вҲҶ2 вҲҘUвҠҘ
                                                           T
                                                             ОЈT UвҠҘ вҲҘ + вҲҶ3 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ))                 (42)
                                         О»k
                                        О»1
                        вүӨ O(вҲҘОІUвӢҶ вҲҘ2 вҲҶ2 ( )2 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ)                                                (43)
                                        О»k
          О»k
when вҲҶ вүӨ 4О» 1
              and n вүі max{Пғ 4 ( О»О»k1 )2 k log(1/Оҙ), Пғ 4 k log(1/Оҙ)}. Notice that by definition of U ,
 T
UвҠҘ ОЈT UвҠҘ = ОЈT,вҲ’k , therefore the result is exactly what we want.

Proof of Lemma 33. Recall A3 := U
                                b (U      b )вҲ’1 U
                                   bT XT XU     b T X T Пө. Therefore

             вҲҘA3 вҲҘ2ОЈT = ПөT X U  bT XT XU
                             b (U       b )вҲ’1 U
                                              b T ОЈT U  bT XT XU
                                                     b (U       b )вҲ’1 U
                                                                      bT XT Пө
                      = tr(ПөT X U  bT XT XU
                                b (U       b )вҲ’1 U
                                                 b T ОЈT U  bT XT XU
                                                        b (U       b )вҲ’1 U
                                                                         b T X T Пө)
                       = tr(ПөПөT X U
                                  b (U      b )вҲ’1 U
                                     bT XT XU     b T ОЈT U         b )вҲ’1 U
                                                            bT XT XU
                                                         b (U            bT XT )

Taking expectation with respect to Пө, using E[ПөПөT ] = v 2 In , we have
          EПө [вҲҘA3 вҲҘ2ОЈT ] = E[tr(ПөПөT X U    bT XT XU
                                        b (U        b )вҲ’1 Ub T ОЈT U   bT XT XU
                                                                   b (U        b )вҲ’1 U
                                                                                     b T X T )]
                         = v 2 tr(X U  bT XT XU
                                    b (U        b )вҲ’1 Ub T ОЈT U   bT XT XU
                                                               b (U        b )вҲ’1 UbT XT )
                       = v 2 tr((U      b )вҲ’1 U
                                 bT XT XU     b T ОЈT U         b )вҲ’1 U
                                                        bT XT XU
                                                     b (U            bT XT XU
                                                                            b)
                       = v 2 tr((U      b )вҲ’1 U
                                 bT XT XU     b T ОЈT U
                                                     b)
                        1 2             b )вҲ’1 + F )U
                                 b T ОЈS U           b T ОЈT U
                       =  v tr(((U                         b)                              (44)
                        n
Here we actually need a bound stronger than (33) for вҲҘF вҲҘ: recall (32), we have with probability
1вҲ’Оҙ
                                              r             r
                T      вҲ’1         2 вҲ’1           k     k       log(1/Оҙ) log(1/Оҙ)
         вҲҘE(U ОЈS U ) вҲҘ вүӨ O(Пғ Cmin вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ(
              b      b                              + +                 +          )).     (45)
                                                 n n              n           n
Applying Lemma 36, which gives
                        4           b )вҲ’1 вҲҘвҲҘ(U
                             b T ОЈS U               b )вҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                             b T ОЈS U
                 вҲҘF вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘE(U
                        3                            r
                                        r
                            2 вҲ’2           k    k       log(1/Оҙ) log(1/Оҙ)
                      вүӨ O(Пғ Cmin вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ(      + +                  +          ))
                                           n n              n           n
                             1
                      вүӨ O(        tr((U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U ))                             (46)
                           kвҲҘОЈT вҲҘ
              вҲ’4
when n вүі Пғ 4 Cmin вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ2 tr((U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U )вҲ’2 k 3 log(1/Оҙ). Therefore we have
                   1 2               b )вҲ’1 + F )U
    EПө [вҲҘA3 вҲҘ2ОЈT ] = v tr(((Ub T ОЈS U             b T ОЈT U
                                                         b)
                   n
                   1                 b )вҲ’1 U
                 = v 2 (tr((Ub T ОЈS U      b T ОЈT U
                                                  b ) + tr(F Ub T ОЈT Ub ))
                   n
                   1                 b )вҲ’1 U      b )) + 1 v 2 вҲҘF вҲҘ tr(U
                 вүӨ v 2 (tr((Ub T ОЈS U      b T ОЈT U                    b T ОЈT U b)
                   n                                      n
                   1                 b )вҲ’1 U      b )) + 1 v 2 kвҲҘF вҲҘвҲҘОЈT вҲҘ
                 вүӨ v 2 (tr((Ub T ОЈS U      b T ОЈT U
                   n                                      n
                   1 2       b T ОЈS Ub )вҲ’1 U      b )) + 1 v 2 O(tr((U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U ))
                                           b T ОЈT U
                 вүӨ v (tr((U                                                                        (47)
                   n                                      n
The remaining thing is to show that indeed tr((U                                   b )вҲ’1 U
                                                                            b T ОЈS U     b T ОЈT U
                                                                                                b ) is
                   T       вҲ’1 T                                            T       вҲ’1 b T
close to tr((U ОЈS U ) U ОЈT U ).                     In fact,       tr((U ОЈS U ) U ОЈT U )
                                                                         b      b             b      =
tr((RT U      b R)вҲ’1 RT U
       b T ОЈS U         b T ОЈT R Ub ). Notice that


                                                   52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  вҲҘRT U
                                      b T ОЈT U
                                             b R вҲ’ U T ОЈT U вҲҘ вүӨ 2вҲҘвҲҶвҲҘвҲҘОЈT вҲҘ,
we have
             tr((RT U      b R)вҲ’1 RT U
                    b T ОЈS U         b T ОЈT U
                                            b R)                                                             (48)
                 T bT        вҲ’1
                         b R) U ОЈT U ) + вҲҘRT U
                                 T               b T ОЈT U
                                                        b R вҲ’ U T ОЈT U вҲҘ tr((U      b )вҲ’1 )
                                                                             b T ОЈS U
         вүӨ tr((R U ОЈS U
         вүӨ tr((RT U      b R)вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U ) + 2вҲҘвҲҶвҲҘвҲҘОЈT вҲҘ tr((U
                  b T ОЈS U                                        b )вҲ’1 )
                                                           b T ОЈS U
         вүӨ tr((RT U      b R)вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U ) + 2вҲҘвҲҶвҲҘвҲҘОЈT вҲҘkC вҲ’1
                  b T ОЈS U
                                                                       min

         вүӨ tr((RT U      b R)вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U ) + tr((U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U )
                  b T ОЈS U                                                                                   (49)
                       T       вҲ’1   T
when вҲҶ вүӨ О»k tr((U 4kвҲҘОЈ
                  ОЈS U ) U ОЈT U )
                       TвҲҘ
                                  . Also, we have

вҲҘ(RT U      b R)вҲ’1 вҲ’ (U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘ(RT U
     b T ОЈS U                                      b R)вҲ’1 вҲҘвҲҘ(U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 вҲҘвҲҘRT U
                                            b T ОЈS U                           b T ОЈS U
                                                                                      b R вҲ’ U T ОЈS U вҲҘ
                                                 вүӨ 4О»вҲ’2
                                                     k О»1 вҲҶ,

therefore
tr((RT U       b R)вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U ) вүӨ tr((U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U ) + вҲҘ(RT U
        b T ОЈS U                                                             b R)вҲ’1 вҲ’ (U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 вҲҘ tr(U T ОЈT U )
                                                                      b T ОЈS U
                                           вүӨ tr((U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U ) + 4О»вҲ’2         T
                                                                             k О»1 вҲҶ tr(U ОЈT U )
                                           вүӨ 2 tr((U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U ),                                  (50)
         О»2k tr((U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U )
if вҲҶ вүӨ          4О»1 tr(U T ОЈT U )
                                           . Combining (47), (48) and (50) we have
                                                1
                             EПө [вҲҘA3 вҲҘ2ОЈT ] вүӨ O( v 2 tr((U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U )),
                                                n
               О»2k tr((U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U )       О»2 tr((U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U ) О»k tr((U T ОЈS U )вҲ’1 U T ОЈT U )
whenever вҲҶ вүӨ             4О»1 kвҲҘОЈT вҲҘ            вүӨ min{ k 4О»1 tr(U    T ОЈ U)
                                                                       T
                                                                                   ,           4kвҲҘОЈT вҲҘ             }
           4 вҲ’4           2       2        T      вҲ’1 T          вҲ’2 3
and n вүі Пғ Cmin вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ вҲҘОЈT вҲҘ tr((U ОЈS U ) U ОЈT U ) k log(1/Оҙ), with probability at least
1 вҲ’ Оҙ. Notice that U T ОЈS U = ОЈS,k and U T ОЈT U = ОЈT,k , therefore the result is exactly what we
want.

Proof of Lemma 34. Recall A2 := U
                                b (U      b )вҲ’1 U
                                   bT XT XU     b T X T XОІ вӢҶ . Also we have
                                                          вҠҘ

                            b T ОЈT U
                           вҲҘU      b вҲҘ = вҲҘRT U
                                             b T ОЈT U
                                                    b RвҲҘ
                                           вүӨ вҲҘU T ОЈT U вҲҘ + вҲҘRT U
                                                               b T ОЈT U
                                                                      b R вҲ’ U T ОЈT U вҲҘ
                                           вүӨ вҲҘU T ОЈT U вҲҘ + 2вҲҶвҲҘОЈT вҲҘ                                           (51)
Therefore
          вҲҘA2 вҲҘ2ОЈT = вҲҘОІвҠҘ
                       вӢҶT
                          XT XU   bT XT XU
                               b (U          b )вҲ’1 U
                                                   b T ОЈT U
                                                          b (UbT XT XU  b )вҲ’1 U
                                                                              b T X T XОІвҠҘ
                                                                                        вӢҶ
                                                                                          вҲҘ
                   вүӨ вҲҘX U  bT XT XU
                        b (U        b )вҲ’1 (U
                                           bT XT XU   b )вҲ’1 U
                                                            b T X T вҲҘвҲҘU
                                                                      b T ОЈT Ub вҲҘвҲҘXОІ вӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                                                                                вҠҘ
                                     T             вӢҶ 2
                      вүӨ вҲҘAвҲҘ(вҲҘU ОЈT U вҲҘ + 2вҲҶвҲҘОЈT вҲҘ)вҲҘXОІвҠҘ вҲҘ
                              T          вӢҶ 2
                      вүӨ 2вҲҘAвҲҘвҲҘU ОЈT U вҲҘвҲҘXОІвҠҘ вҲҘ                                                                  (52)
                  T                                                T          bT   T
when вҲҶ вүӨ вҲҘU2вҲҘОЈОЈTT вҲҘU вҲҘ , where we let A = n1 X
                                               b b T X X b вҲ’2 U X
                                             вҲҡU (U                 . If we define B = X
                                                                                      вҲҡU вҲҲ
                                                      n U)
                                                               вҲҡ
                                                                                        b
                                               n                 n                      n
RnГ—r , then A = n1 B(B T B)вҲ’2 B T . Let the SVD of B be B = P M OT , where P вҲҲ RnГ—k ,
M, O вҲҲ RkГ—k , then
                                             1
                                 вҲҘAвҲҘ2 =        вҲҘB(B T B)вҲ’2 B T вҲҘ2
                                             n
                                             1
                                            = вҲҘP M OT (OM 2 OT )вҲ’2 OM P T вҲҘ2
                                             n
                                             1
                                            = вҲҘP M вҲ’2 P T вҲҘ2
                                             n

                                                           53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   1
                                     вҲҘM вҲ’2 вҲҘ2
                                     вүӨ
                                   n
                                   1
                                = вҲҘ(B T B)вҲ’1 вҲҘ2                                                   (53)
                                   n
         b T XT X U
Let F = (U        b )вҲ’1 вҲ’(U     b )вҲ’1 . Recall (33), which states that with probability at least 1вҲ’Оҙ,
                           b T ОЈU
              n
               1 вҲ’1      2 вҲ’1                   вҲ’2                              О»k
we have вҲҘF вҲҘ вүӨ 3 Cmin вүӨ 3 О»k when n вүі Пғ 4 Cmin     вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ2 k log(1/Оҙ) and вҲҶ вүӨ 4О»   1
                                                                                    . Therefore
                                   1 b T X T X b вҲ’1
                                     вҲҘAвҲҘ вүӨ
                                     вҲҘ(U           U) вҲҘ
                                   n          n
                                = вҲҘ(Ub T ОЈS Ub )вҲ’1 + F вҲҘ
                                   1 bT         b )вҲ’1 вҲҘ + вҲҘF вҲҘ
                                вүӨ вҲҘ(U     ОЈS U
                                   n
                                      1
                                вүӨ O( О»вҲ’1     ).                                           (54)
                                      n k
Thus вҲҘAвҲҘ вүӨ O(О»вҲ’1                вӢҶ 2                                      вӢҶ
                k ). As for вҲҘXОІвҠҘ вҲҘ , notice that the first-k entries of ОІвҠҘ are zero, therefore
   вӢҶ       вӢҶ
XОІвҠҘ = XвҲ’k ОІвҲ’k . by Lemma 35,
                                                               r           r
       T
  вӢҶT XвҲ’k XвҲ’k    вӢҶ     вӢҶT       вӢҶ           2    вӢҶ   2             1    1      log(1/Оҙ) log(1/Оҙ)
вҲҘОІвҲ’k (       )ОІвҲ’k вҲ’ ОІвҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k вҲҘ вүӨ O(Пғ вҲҘОІвҲ’k вҲҘ вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ(          + +                 +        ).
         n                                                        n n             n            n
                                                                                          (55)

Therefore we have
                                    T
               вӢҶ 2     вӢҶT          XвҲ’k XвҲ’k вӢҶ
            вҲҘXОІвҠҘ вҲҘ = nОІвҲ’k (               )ОІвҲ’k
                                      n
                                                          T
                              вӢҶT        вӢҶ      вӢҶT        XвҲ’k XвҲ’k вӢҶ      вӢҶT        вӢҶ
                         вүӨ n(ОІвҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k + вҲҘОІвҲ’k (             )ОІвҲ’k вҲ’ ОІвҲ’k ОЈS,вҲ’k ОІвҲ’k вҲҘ)
                                                            n
                                вӢҶ
                         вүӨ O(nвҲҘОІвҲ’k вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ).                                                 (56)

Combining (52)(54) and (56), we have
                                               вҲҘU T ОЈT U вҲҘвҲҘОІвҲ’k
                                                            вӢҶ
                                                               вҲҘ2 вҲҘОЈS,вҲ’k вҲҘ
                               вҲҘA2 вҲҘ2ОЈT вүӨ O(                               )                     (57)
                                                           О»k
                                                           T
              вҲ’2
when n вүі Пғ 4 Cmin вҲҘОЈS вҲҘ2 k log(1/Оҙ) and вҲҶ вүӨ min{ вҲҘU2вҲҘОЈОЈTT вҲҘU вҲҘ , 4О»
                                                                 О»k
                                                                   1
                                                                     }.

Finally we prove Lemma 30 in the following.

                                                b вҲҲ RdГ—k by selecting the topвҲ’k eigenvectors of
Proof of Lemma 30. In the first step, we obtain U
the sample covariance matrix ОЈb S := 1 XX T = 1 Pn xi xT using PCA. Then by Davis-Kahan
                                      n           n  i=1   i
theorem (Chen et al., 2021, Corollary 2.8),
                                                   b S вҲ’ ОЈS вҲҘ
                                                 2вҲҘОЈ
                                           вҲҶвүӨ                 .                                  (58)
                                                  О»k вҲ’ О»k+1
Therefore it remains to bound вҲҘОЈb S вҲ’ ОЈS вҲҘ. Applying Lemma 28, we immediately have
                                           пЈ«s                        пЈ¶
                                                       1           1
                         b S вҲ’ ОЈS вҲҘ вүӨ CПғ 4 пЈӯ   r + log Оҙ   r + log ОҙпЈё
                       вҲҘОЈ                                +             О»1
                                                   n           n
            Pn
              i=1 О»i
where r =     О»1       . Together with (58), we have with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                     пЈ«s                          пЈ¶
                                                  1            1
                                          r + log Оҙ    r + log Оҙ         О»1
                           вҲҶ вүӨ CПғ 4 пЈӯ               +            пЈё               .
                                              n            n        О»k вҲ’ О»k+1


                                                    54
