Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DYNAMIC N EGATIVE G UIDANCE OF D IFFUSION
M ODELS
                Felix Koulischer1,*    Johannes Deleu1      Gabriel Raya2
                                        1,†
                        Thomas Demeester         Luca Ambrogioni3,†
                          1                               2
                           IDLab, Ghent University          JADS, Tilburg University
                3
                    Donders Institute for Brain Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University



                                               A BSTRACT

            Negative Prompting (NP) is widely utilized in diffusion models, particularly in
            text-to-image applications, to prevent the generation of undesired features. In this
            paper, we show that conventional NP is limited by the assumption of a constant
            guidance scale, which may lead to highly suboptimal results, or even complete
            failure, due to the non-stationarity and state-dependence of the reverse process.
            Based on this analysis, we derive a principled technique called Dynamic Negative
            Guidance, which relies on a near-optimal time and state dependent modulation of
            the guidance without requiring additional training. Unlike NP, negative guidance
            requires estimating the posterior class probability during the denoising process,
            which is achieved with limited additional computational overhead by tracking the
            discrete Markov Chain during the generative process. We evaluate the performance
            of DNG class-removal on MNIST and CIFAR10, where we show that DNG leads to
            higher safety, preservation of class balance and image quality when compared with
            baseline methods. Furthermore, we show that it is possible to use DNG with Stable
            Diffusion to obtain more accurate and less invasive guidance than NP. Our im-
            plementation is available at https://github.com/FelixKoulischer/
            Dynamic-Negative-Guidance.git


1   I NTRODUCTION

Since first proposed as generative models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Karras et al.,
2022; Song et al., 2021), Diffusion models (DMs) have surpassed previous generative models by large
margins on a wide range of tasks, including Text-to-Image (T2I) generation (Rombach et al., 2022),
audio synthesis (Kong et al., 2021), video synthesis (Bar-Tal et al., 2024), and protein design (Watson
et al., 2023). One of the key features behind their success is the simplicity with which these models
can be controlled during generation. This process, referred to as guidance (Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021; Ho & Salimans, 2021), allows users to sample from a conditional distribution. In modern
T2I DMs the guidance is performed through joint text-image latent representations such as CLIP
for Stable Diffusion (Radford et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2024). The language
model behind such a joint embedding is however quite poor and struggles to understand basic textual
operations such as negations (Parcalabescu et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2024; Quantmeyer et al., 2024).
As an example, when prompting Stable Diffusion with the prompt: “A gentleman with a cane from
the 1800s without a mustache”, it is almost guaranteed that the model will produce an image of a
man with a mustache. To resolve this, widespread diffusion models such as Midjourney or Stable
Diffusion rely on a second prompt line that contains a so-called negative prompt (Gandikota et al.,
2023a; Ban et al., 2024; Armandpour et al., 2023; Schramowski et al., 2023; Du et al., 2020). In the
example mentioned above, this line would contain the prompt: “A mustache”. This prompt is then
used similarly to the positive prompt, the only difference being that instead of pushing the model
towards the condition, the model pushes away from it. This is called Negative Prompting (NP).
Negative prompting is commonly accepted in the community, and all publicly available models
    *
        Corresponding author: felix.koulischer@ugent.be
    †
        Joint Senior Authors


                                                      1
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         -5.0                                                     -5.0                                                     -5.0                                                    -5.0



         -2.5                                                     -2.5                                                     -2.5                                                    -2.5

x-axis


                                                         x-axis


                                                                                                                  x-axis


                                                                                                                                                                          x-axis
         0.0                                                      0.0                                                      0.0                                                     0.0



         2.5                                                      2.5                                                      2.5                                                     2.5



         5.0                                                      5.0                                                      5.0                                                     5.0
            0.0     0.25         0.5        0.75   1.0               0.0     0.25         0.5        0.75   1.0               0.0    0.25         0.5        0.75   1.0               0.0   0.25         0.5        0.75   1.0
                           Diffusion time                                           Diffusion time                                          Diffusion time                                         Diffusion time

                  (a) No guidance                                          (b) CFG (λ = 1)                                          (c) NP (λ = 1)                                  (d) Exact DNG (ours)

 Figure 1: Comparison between CFG, NP and DNG using the exact posterior (all used with λ = 1).
 DNG with the exact posterior is equivalent to CFG, while NP fails to sample the target distribution.



rely on some form of NP. Its theoretical aspects remain however understudied (Armandpour et al.,
2023; Ban et al., 2024). Mathematically, NP is straightforward, as it corresponds to the well-studied
Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) scheme (Ho & Salimans, 2021) with a negative guidance scale.
However, while effective in practice, such a simple change of sign is fundamentally flawed. CFG can
be seen as an attractive vector field that aims to guide the model towards the correctly conditioned
outputs. In particular, the further away the noised image is from the desired condition, the stronger
the guidance field is. When designing a guidance scheme that averts the denoising process towards
an output from an undesired region, two properties must be met. First, the corresponding repulsive
field needs to be directed away from the undesired conditional, i.e. a change of sign is required,
which NP satisfies by construction. In addition, the repulsive vector field should be the strongest
close to the undesired regions, such that the negative prompt has no impact at all if the progressive
denoising process remains far from any of the undesired regions. This property is missing from the
traditional NP scheme. The flaws of NP are particularly apparent in one dimension, in which NP
completely fails to sample the desired conditional distribution. This is shown in Fig. 1, in which the
different guidance schemes are compared to each other. Another key flaw of NP is the static nature of
the guidance scheme. It was recently shown that the generative denoising process is far from being
uniform in time, as it is instead demarcated by brief symmetry breaking events corresponding to
‘generative decisions’ (Raya & Ambrogioni, 2024; Biroli et al., 2024; Ambrogioni, 2024a; Sclocchi
et al., 2024; Li & Chen, 2024). Ideally, it is during those key bifurcation moments that guidance
should be active, since outside those semantic decision regions guidance only harms the diversity of
the model (Kynkäänniemi et al., 2024; Sclocchi et al., 2024).
To resolve these issues, we propose a novel theoretically grounded dynamic negative guidance scheme,
coined Dynamic Negative Guidance (DNG), which in the static limit reduces to the widespread
NP scheme. Contrary to NP, our approach requires estimating the posterior, which we achieve by
tracking the discrete Markov chain during the denoising process. The dynamic guidance scale is
proportional to the posterior, which causes the guidance to vanish whenever the posterior probability
of the “forbidden class” is low. This is illustrated in Fig. 5, in which the guidance scale of images
generated using Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) is plotted as a function of the denoising time
next to illustrative diffusion trajectories. When using a negative prompt related to the positive prompt,
the guidance is active, while when using a semantically unrelated negative prompt, the negative
guidance scale drops to zero. Our dynamic approach can self-regulate and even deactivate itself in
the case that the negative prompt is completely unrelated to the positive prompt, which is something
which NP is incapable of doing. The code associated with this paper will be made publicly available
upon acceptance.



 2                R ELATED WORK

To introduce our dynamic negative guidance scheme, the working principles behind Denoising
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs), Classifier-Free-Guidance (CFG) and Negative Prompting
(NP) are required. These are summarized in sections 2.1 and 2.2. In section 2.3, the related topic of
concept erasure in diffusion models is briefly discussed.


                                                                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.1   D ENOISING D IFFUSION P ROBABILISTIC M ODELS (DDPM)

Score based diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021) are
progressive denoisers, that learn to invert a forward noising schedule. In the case of variance
preserving DDPM (Ho et al., 2020), this forward noising process, iteratively adds Gaussian noise
to a clean data distribution. The underlying data distribution q(x, 0) is progressively noised until a
standard normal Gaussian is obtained, i.e. until √               √ T ) ∼ N (x; 0, I). For any forward
                                                  after T steps q(x,
noising schedule {βt }Tt=1 , whereby xt+1 = 1 − βt xt + βt ϵt (with ϵt ∼ N (ϵt√          ; 0, I))), the
forward process can be directly sampled at any step t, according to q(xt |x0 ) ∼ N (xt ; ᾱt x0 , (1 −
                    Qt
ᾱt )I), with ᾱt = i=0 (1 − βi ). The goal is to learn a score based model, defined by sθ (x, t) =
∇x log pt (x; θ), that is able to iteratively reverse the forward process. The reverse process can be
decomposed into a Markov chain
                                                           T
                                                           Y
                                   p(xt:T ; θ) = p(xT )           pi (xi−1 |xi ; θ)                        (1)
                                                          i=t+1
Importantly, each step of the Markov chain is by construction approximately Gaussian
pt (xt−1 |xt ; θ) ∼ N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt ), σt2 I). Instead of modeling the mean, µθ,t , it is common to
instead predict the noise present at any diffusion stage ϵθ,t . The two are linked through a linear
combination
                                               1              βt
                             µθ,t−1 = √              xt − √         ϵθ,t−1                       (2)
                                             1 − βt         1 − ᾱt
The model can then be trained using as optimization objective
                                                  h      √         √               i
                  θ ⋆ = arg min Et∼U (0,T ),x0 ,ϵ ∥ϵθ,t ( ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ) − ϵ∥2 .
                               θ
It should also be noted that the error prediction√ϵθ is proportional to the score function, more
specifically sθ,t = ∇x log pt (xt ; θ) = −ϵθ,t (x)/ 1 − ᾱt .

2.2   C LASSIFIER -F REE G UIDANCE AND N EGATIVE P ROMPTING

Most practical applications require conditional generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho & Salimans,
2021; Schramowski et al., 2023). The first approach to achieve this, introduced by Dhariwal & Nichol
(2021), is called classifier guidance (CG). They consider a classifier p(c|x) that quantifies to what
extent any condition c is met by the object x under generation, such as a desired class label or
adherence to a textual description. The joint probability can be constructed from an unconditional
model p(x) combined with an external classifier p(c|x), i.e., p(x, c) = p(x)p(c|x). By further
sharpening the posterior p(c|x) using a positive exponent λ > 1, i.e. sampling from p(x, c) ∝
p(x)p(c|x)λ , they were able to obtain superior results1 . The exponent λ is called the guidance scale.
The main impact of this exponent is to make sure that the condition c is more closely respected,
which comes at the cost of diversity (Ho & Salimans, 2021; Kynkäänniemi et al., 2024). Like all
score-based models, DMs do not directly model the data distribution. Instead, they restrict themselves
to modeling the so-called score-function, the gradient of the log-likelihood. For CG this results in:
                          ∇x log pt (x|c) = ∇x log pt (x) + λ∇x log pt (c|x)                               (3)
The problem behind such an approach is that for most of the diffusion process, the images are strongly
noised, rendering pretrained classifiers ineffective. Instead, a new time-dependent classifier would
have to be trained to recognize images during the denoising process, which is not only costly but
also suboptimal. This is why Ho & Salimans (2021) proposed to directly train the joint distribution
pt (x, c) using pairs of textual and visual representations, such as LAION (Schuhmann et al., 2022).
Their key insight was to keep the guidance scale λ and reuse Bayes rule again to rewrite the posterior
pt (c|x) = pt (x, c)/pt (x). In score notation, this results in:

               ∇x log pt (x|c) = ∇x log pt (x) + λ ∇x log pt (x, c) − ∇x log pt (x)                (4)
Writing the unconditional score as ∇x log pt (x) = sθ , and the positively conditioned score as
∇x log pt (x, c) = sθ,c+ yields the well-known CFG equation:

                                   sCF G = sθ + λ sθ,c+ − sθ                                (5)
   1
     Strictly speaking, expressions such as p(x)p(c|x)λ = p(x, c) are notationally inconsistent for λ different
than one, but to remain consistent with literature, the loose notation is kept.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For image generation conditioned on textual prompts, sθ is obtained by providing the trained joint
model with an empty prompt. It soon became clear that a similar approach allows guiding the model
away from undesired prompts, by reversing the sign of the guidance scale in the CFG equation (5),
leading to the Negative Prompting (NP) process:

                                   sN P = sθ − λ sθ,c- − sθ                                    (6)
This means that the attractive field (λ > 0) directed towards condition c in Eq. (5) is turned into
a repulsive field directed away from the condition c. Note that conditioning variables and scores
associated with an undesired (or negative) condition are denoted in red (c- and sθ,c- , respectively).
Those referring to wanted (i.e., positive) prompts are written in green (c+ and sθ,c+ ). From a
likelihood perspective, the NP equation (6) implies sampling from a joint distribution that is inversely
proportional to the posterior likelihood p(x, c) ∝ p(x)/p(c- |x)λ .

2.3   R ECENT W ORK R ELATED TO N EGATIVE P ROMPTING

Despite its adoption in influential models, as described in blogs like (Andrew, 2023; Bhasin, 2024),
NP remains understudied on a fundamental level, in particular in terms of how and when it should
be applied for optimal effect. For example, Ban et al. (2024) argue that negative prompting is only
of practical use once the undesired features have been generated by the positive prompt, whereas
Armandpour et al. (2023) propose limiting negative guidance along a direction orthogonal to that of
the positive score,to avoid degrading the effect of the positive prompt.
Most similar to our approach are so-called training free guidance schemes (Yu et al., 2023; Du et al.,
2023; Brack et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2024). Such approaches often work in a fashion very similar to
CG, in which a score field, derived as the gradient of a classifier, is added to the unconditional score
field. These do not require any expensive retraining or fine-tuning of the underlying generative model.
One method closely related to our work is that proposed by Schramowski et al. (2023), called Safe
Latent Diffusion (SLD), which use the model’s knowledge of certain concepts to avoid generation
of undesired features, in a manner very similar to NP. Their scheme differs from NP in two regards.
First, they consider a heuristic non-constant guidance scale that is only active when the predictions of
the negatively prompted model overlaps with that of the positively prompted model. This approach
does not take the explicit time-dependency into account. Second, they consider a pixel wise guidance
scale, which allows to locally mix the ‘allowed’ and ‘forbidden’ outputs of the network. In our work,
we do not use this pixel-wise guidance weights as this feature is not present in the analytical formulas
with known score functions (see our derivations in Sec. 3.1). Finally, Chen et al. (2024) use a very
similar approach to attack the problem of memorization of training samples in DMs. Our approach is
compared to that of Schramowski et al. (2023) in more detail in Appendix E.
Most of the interest in negative guidance within the literature is driven by safety considerations.
Such an approach can indeed be used to move away from undesired Not-Safe-For-Work con-
tent (Schramowski et al., 2023). Most approaches on the subject focus on removing entire concepts
from diffusion models by fine-tuning certain layers inside the U-Net, whereby typically the attention
layers are targeted (Zhang et al., 2024; Gandikota et al., 2023b; Wu et al., 2024; Heng & Soh,
2023; Gandikota et al., 2023a). The most difficult part of fine-tuning approaches is to only remove
the targeted concepts without harming the rest (Heng & Soh, 2023). Another option to avoid the
generation of certain features in T2I applications is to instead modify the textual prompts themselves
before prompting the model (Kumari et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). A good overview of the different
approaches is described by Pham et al. (2024), where the question of how easily such approaches can
be bypassed is treated.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
The most obvious problem with NP is that there is a clear risk that pt (x, c- ) ∝ pt (x)/pt (c- |x)λ is
not normalizable. This happens when more than a single point has a zero posterior likelihood, which,
especially at low noise levels, is a desired property for an ideal classifier. But even from a score-based
perspective, NP is flawed. The score fields are approximately of harmonic nature, implying that the
further one is from satisfying the condition c+ , the larger the magnitude of sθ,c+ . Simply inverting
the score field, as is done in NP, implies the presence of very large score field in regions completely
unrelated to c- . This is illustrated and discussed in more detail in Appendix A. What is desired is a
guidance field that is strong in regions where pt (c- |x, t) ≈ 1 and very weak where pt (c- |x, t) ≈ 0.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1      DYNAMIC N EGATIVE G UIDANCE

Instead of simply reverting the sign of the guidance scale, our approach reconstructs the desired score
function sθ,c+ from a linear combination of the unconditional score sθ and the unwanted score sθ,c- .
This method should correspond to CG, with instead of the typical posterior conditioned on c+ , its
complement conditioned on c- . In the case of negative guidance, one has pt (c+ |x, t) = 1 − pt (c- |x).
Negative guidance should therefore aim to sample from the following conditional distribution:

                                   pt (x|c+ ) ∝ pt (x) 1 − pt (c- |x)                                (7)

Notice that this joint distribution is always normalizable, as the singularity in pt (c- |x) = 0 has been
removed. From a score based perspective, this joint distribution results in:

                      ∇x log pt (x|c+ ) = ∇x log pt (x) + ∇x log 1 − pt (c- |x)                        (8)

Unlike in CFG, the last term is not directly recognizable as a linear combination of scores. Application
of the chain rule yields the score function:
                                                             1
                         ∇x log 1 − pt (c- |x) = −                   ∇x pt (c- |x)
                                                      1 − pt (c- |x)
                                                                                                          (9)
                                                        pt (c- |x)
                                                   =−                ∇x log pt (c- |x)
                                                      1 − pt (c- |x)

By then reapplying Bayes’s rule on the posterior, and sharpening the posterior by an additional
parameter analogous to the guidance scale λ2 , as done in Ho & Salimans (2021):

                                                pt (c- |x)
       ∇x log pt (x|c+ ) = ∇x log pt (x) − λ0               ∇x log pt (x|c- ) − ∇x log pt (x)
                                             1 − pt (c- |x)                                              (10)

                         = ∇x log pt (x) − λ(x, t) ∇x log pt (x|c- ) − ∇x log pt (x)

This is the equation behind our proposed Dynamic Negative Guidance. It is equivalent to CFG with
a hypothetical positive prompt: “everything but c- ”. The minus sign governing the guidance term,
illustrates the repulsive nature of the corresponding guidance field, already present in NP. A key
                                                            pt (c- |x)
distinction with NP is the presence of the additional 1−p       t (c- |x)
                                                                          factor. This is precisely the factor
that causes the negative guidance field to be asymptotically large in regions where pt (c- |x) → 1 and
to be zero in regions where pt (c- |x) → 0. Due to its role, similar to the constant guidance scale λ
in CFG, we decide to reuse the name for our time and state dependent guidance function, i.e. we
refer to λ(x, t) as the dynamic guidance scale. It measures the strength with which the model pushes
away from c- at timestep t. Early in the denoising process, the posterior p(c- |x) corresponds to
the prior p(c- ) as large amounts of noise make classification difficult. As the prior is expected to
be low, this results in a low guidance scale early on. Only when the classifier becomes confident
that c- is being generated does the negative guidance contribution become more pronounced. When
approximating the guidance scale up to zeroth order, a static scheme with constant guidance scale is
retrieved, corresponding to NP. It should be noted that such a non-constant guidance scale is in line
with recent trends in literature (Kynkäänniemi et al., 2024; Castillo et al., 2023; Schramowski et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2024). Algorithm 1 summarizes the DNG scheme.
To validate our method, the case of diffusion of one dimensional Gaussian mixtures is considered. In
this setting, the likelihoods as well as the posterior are analytically tractable throughout the diffusion
process t. The goal is to guide away from a single of the Gaussian modes. The mathematical details
are given in appendix B. These experiments, shown in Fig. 1, reveal that using DNG conditioned on
the unwanted mode with the exact posterior is equivalent to using CFG conditioned on the desired
modes. This is in stark contrast to what is obtained when using NP (visible in Fig. 1c), which
completely fails to model the target distribution, demonstrating the theoretical shortcomings of the
negative prompting algorithm. It should be noted, that while this failure is very apparent in one
dimension, it does not necessarily imply that such a strong statement can be made in arbitrary high
dimensional spaces.

   2
                                                                        λ
       This implies sampling from pt (x|c- ) ∝ pt (x) 1 − pt (c- |x)


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Dynamic Negative Guidance
  Input: Pre-trained unconditional DDPM with noise prediction ϵθ , Pre-trained to-forget DDPM with noise
  prediction ϵf,θ , guidance scale λ0 , prior p0 and Temperature τ
  z ∼ N (0, I), xT ∼ N (0, I)
  p(c- |xT ) = p0                                             Initialize posterior and guidance scale
                      p(c- |xT )
  λT (xT ) = λ0 1−p(c      - |xT )
  for t = T, . . . , 1 do
      ϵθ,guid (xt ) = ϵθ (xt ) − λt (xt ) ϵf,θ (xt ) − ϵθ (xt )                        Apply guidance
                                                           √
      xt−1 = √1αt xt − √1−α          t

                                  1−α¯t
                                        ϵ θ,guid (x t )  +   βt z                           DDPM Step

      p(c- |xt−1 ) = Compute posterior p(c- |xt ), xt−1 , xt , ϵθ (xt ), ϵf,θ (xt )   See Algorithm 2
                         - t−1
                        p(c |x
     λt (xt−1 ) = λ0 1−p(c
                                 )
                                                                           Compute new guidance scale
                           - |xt−1 )
  end for


3.2   P OSTERIOR APPROXIMATION THROUGH M ARKOV C HAIN

Our novel dynamic guidance scale λ(x, t) relies on the posterior likelihood pt (c- |x), which is in
general not available using score-based models. Inspired by ideas from Li et al. (2023), we propose to
approximate the required posterior p(c- |x, t) by estimating the required likelihoods by tracking the
diffusion Markov Chain, defined by Eq. (1) during the denoising process. All the infinitesimal tran-
sition probabilities are approximately Gaussian ps (xs |xs+1 ; θ) ≈ N (xs ; µs,θ (xs+1 ), σs2 I) where
µs,θ (xs+1 ) can be retrieved from the noise predictions ϵs,θ (xs+1 ) using Eq. (2). To compute the
dynamic guidance scale specified by Eq. (10) the posterior can be estimated from the likelihoods
using Bayes rule:
                                       p(xt:T |c- )
             pt (c- |xt:T ) = p(c- )
                                        p(xt:T )
                                              T −1
                                              X                                                             (11)
  ⇐⇒ log pt (c- |xt:T ) = log p(c- ) +                log pi (xi |xi+1 , c- ; θ) − log pi (xi |xi+1 ; θ)
                                              i=t
                           = log pt+1 (c- |xt+1:T ) + log pt (xt |xt+1 , c- ; θ) − log pt (xt |xt+1 ; θ)
It should be noted that the posterior pt (c- |xt:T ), is independent of the diffusion trajectory xt:T and
only depends on the least noisy time step pt (c- |xt:T ) = pt (c- |xt ). This is a consequence of the
Markov Assumption and is proven in Appendix C. The transition probability of the negatively guided
model is also Gaussian of equal variance, i.e. pt (xt |xt+1 , c- ; θ) ≈ N (xt ; µt,θ (xt+1 |c- ), σt2 I). We
therefore obtain the update rule:
                                                1
                                                    ∥xt − µt,θ (xt+1 |c- )∥2 − ∥xt − µt,θ (xt+1 )∥2 (12)

 log pt (c- |xt ) = log pt+1 (c- |xt+1 ) −        2
                                               2σt
To know in which point xt the posterior needs to be estimated, the guidance scale is required, which
depends itself on the posterior. An implicit problem is therefore defined. To resolve the implicitness
of the above equation, we assume that the posterior changes slowly such that the guidance scale
can, up to first order, be approximated by its previous value. This assumption becomes exact as the
number of diffusion time steps becomes infinitely large, an assumption often used in the diffusion
literature. In essence, the computation of the guidance scale and that of the denoising is staggered in
time. To obtain the guidance scale required to find xt−1 , the posterior at time step t is used, which
solely depends on xt , µt,θ (xt+1 ) and µt,θ (xt+1 |c- ), which are all known. Mathematically, this
boils down to replacing log pt (c- |xt ) with log pt−1 (c- |xt−1 ) in Eq. (12).
The term added to the posterior in Eq. (12) can be positive or negative, respectively corresponding to
an increase or a decrease of the posterior likelihood. When the new state is closer to the unwanted
mean µt,θ (xt+1 |c- ) than to the unconditional one µt,θ (xt+1 ), the posterior, and hence the guidance
scale λ(x, t), increases. It should be noted that while the unwanted mean prediction µt,θ (xt+1 |c- )
can sometimes be totally off (imagine a model that can only generate cats that is trying to denoise
the image of a truck), the unconditional mean µt,θ (xt+1 ) is always a good denoiser (using the
previous example, the unconditional model can generate both cats and trucks and therefore has no
problem denoising any of the two). This has as consequence that the likelihood decreasing terms are
much larger in magnitude than the likelihood increasing ones. This is explained visually in Fig. 2.


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            (a) When generating allowed feature                    (b) When generating forbidden feature

Figure 2: Visualization of the different components for estimating the posterior. In (a) an allowed
point is being generated, in which circumstances ∥xt − µt ∥ ≪ ∥xt − µc,t ∥, corresponding to a large
decrease of the posterior. In (b) a forbidden point is being generated, in which circumstances it is
possible that ∥xt − µt ∥ > ∥xt − µc,t ∥ corresponding to a slight increase of the posterior probability.


To regularize this effect, we propose adding a linear transformation to the difference of Euclidean
distances. Rescaling the difference by a factor τ ∈]0, 1[ can diminish stochastic fluctuations present
during denoising, while a small offset δ creates a slight bias towards increasing the posterior. Should
an allowed image be generated, this offset is completely dominated by the very large difference. But
should the predictions of the unconditional and the negatively conditioned model be similar, the
posterior would increase. The estimation of the posterior probability is summarized in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2 Compute posterior
    Input: Previous estimation of filtering posterior pt (c- |xt ), Updated noisy state xt−1 , previous noisy state
    xt , unconditional noise prediction ϵθ (xt ), to-forget noise prediction ϵf,θ (xt ), diffusion constants αt , ᾱt ,
    prior p0 , Temperature τ , offset δ, minimal and maximal posterior values pmin and pmax
    σt2 = 1 − αt                                                             Variance of Gaussian at t
    µ(xt ) = √1αt xt − √1−α      t

                            1−α¯t
                                   ϵ f,θ (x  t )                            Undesired         mean prediction
    µ(xt ) = √1αt xt − √1−α      t

                            1−α¯t θ
                                   ϵ  (x  t )                         Unconditional           mean   prediction

                                                               2                      2
    p(c- |xt−1 ) = pt (c- |xt ) exp − 2στ 2 ∥xt−1 − µ(xt )∥ − ∥xt−1 − µ(xt )∥ + 2σδ 2

                                                t                                              t
    p(c- |xt−1 ) = Clamp p(c- |xt−1 ), min = pmin , max = pmax
    Output: Approximate posterior probability p(c- |xt−1 )


To illustrate the validity of the proposed posterior approximation scheme, the one dimensional
Gaussian case can again be analyzed. The approximated posterior can be compared to the known
exact posterior. To remove any effects possibly caused by the guidance itself, the posterior is tracked at
zero-guidance scale (λ = 0). To visualize the results, 100k points are sampled using the unconditional
model and then classified into two groups based on whether they belong to the forbidden mode3 . For
both groups, the exact and approximated posterior values are averaged at each diffusion time step,
as shown in Fig. 3a, demonstrating the validity of the approximation. An example of a distribution
sampled using our dynamic negative guidance with the approximate posterior is shown in Fig. 3b.
The derived approach is highly flexible, solely requiring a conditional diffusion model. It remains
valid using latent representations, such as used in modern Latent Diffusion Models (Rombach et al.,
2022).

4     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
4.1     C LASS REMOVAL

The proposed algorithm is tested in the context of image generation on labelled datasets, in the present
case MNIST and CIFAR10 are considered. The task is to remove one of the classes by guiding an
   3
     The forbidden mode is chosen to be distinct from others to simplify the classification task (with the
unconditional distribution shown in red in Fig. 3b)


                                                           7
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                100                                                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Unconditional


                                                     Average posterior p(c|x)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Desired
                                                                                10 1                                                                                                                                                         0.6              Sampled


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Density
                                                                                10 2                                                                                                                                                         0.4

                                                                                                                                                  Allowed mode                                                                               0.2
                                                                                10 3                                                              Forbidden mode
                                                                                                                                                  Exact posterior
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                       0       0.2                                    0.4       0.6     0.8       1                                                                                    -4.0          -2.0        0.0                                         2.0          4.0
                                                                                                           Diffusion time                                                                                                                                                       x-axis
                                                                                (a) Posterior estimation (λ = 0)                                                                                                                   (b) Sampled distribution using approx.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   posterior (λ = 1)

Figure 3: Analysis of the posterior estimation. In (a) the dotted lines represent the exact posterior,
while the full lines represent the approximated posterior. The color indicates whether the generated
samples belong to the forbidden region or not. These samples were generated without guidance. (b)
an example of a distribution sampled using the approximate posterior with guidance scale λ = 1.



                                0.30                                                                                                 0.30                                                                               0.30                                                                                      0.30
KL-divergence to ground truth


                                                                                                     KL-divergence to ground truth


                                                                                                                                                                                        KL-divergence to ground truth


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KL-divergence to ground truth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Negative Prompting
                                0.25                                                                                                 0.25                                                                               0.25                                                                                      0.25                        Safe Latent Diffusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Negative Guidance (ours)
                                0.20                                                                                                 0.20                                                                               0.20                                                                                      0.20

                                0.15                                                                                                 0.15                                                                               0.15                                                                                      0.15

                                0.10                                                                                                 0.10                                                                               0.10                                                                                      0.10

                                0.05                                                                                                 0.05                                                                               0.05                                                                                      0.05
                                       0   1              2                       3        4    5                                           0   1          2        3           4   5                                          0     1             2      3          4      5                                            0     1          2          3         4         5
                                               Safety: % of wrong images                                                                            Safety: % of wrong images                                                            Safety: % of wrong images                                                                 Safety: % of wrong images
                                 35                                                                                                   35                                                                                 35                                                                                        35
                                 30                                                                                                   30                                                                                 30                                                                                        30
                                 25                                                                                                   25                                                                                 25                                                                                        25
                                 20                                                                                                   20                                                                                 20                                                                                        20
           FID


                                                                                                                FID


                                                                                                                                                                                                   FID


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FID
                                 15                                                                                                   15                                                                                 15                                                                                        15
                                 10                                                                                                   10                                                                                 10                                                                                        10
                                  5                                                                                                    5                                                                                  5                                                                                         5
                                       0   1              2                       3        4    5                                           0   1          2        3           4   5                                          0     1             2      3          4      5                                            0     1          2          3         4         5
                                               Safety: % of wrong images                                                                            Safety: % of wrong images                                                            Safety: % of wrong images                                                                 Safety: % of wrong images

             (a) Removing “airplane”                                                                                                                (b) “car”                                                                            (c) “bird”                                                                                (d) “cat”

  Figure 4: Evaluation of the KL-divergence (top) and FID (bottom) on single class removal experiments
  performed on CIFAR10 using Negative Prompting, Safe Latent Diffusion and our Dynamic Negative
  Guidance. Despite differences between classes, DNG outperforms both NP and SLD in all settings.


unconditional model with a model trained solely on that specific class. To quantify the safety of the
approach, a classifier assesses the percentage of generated images that belong to the forbidden class,
while the diversity is measured by examining the overall distribution of generated classes across all
images. Ideally, this distribution should contain a single zero and equal weight on all other classes
(see Figure 13). To measure how well this ideal case is approximated, the KL-divergence between
ideal and generated distributions is computed. To observe how the quality of the model is altered, the
standard FID metric (Heusel et al., 2017) is used. Being a statistical tool, the FID is also affected by
large class imbalances. The FID not only measures the quality of the images but also accounts for the
diversity of the model. It still remains the most widespread quality metric for image generation and
has time and again been proven to coincide with human perception. To compute the FID the statistics
of 10240 generated images is compared to the training data without the undesired class.
To compare different approaches, both the FID and the KL-divergence are compared with the safety
of the method when sweeping over the initial guidance scale λ. These graphs are shown when
removing various classes from CIFAR10 in Fig. 4. Similar results are obtained on MNIST. These are
shown in Fig. 14 in appendix G. Especially relevant is the regime of high safety, where as few as
possible forbidden images are generated. In this regime, DNG outperforms both NP and SLD on all
four classes, showcasing that the image removal performed by DNG is less invasive than previous
approaches. Different values of the hyperparameters of SLD are tested and reported in appendix E,
our approach is compared with the setting which performs best at high safety levels.


                                                                                                                                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) Diffusion trajectories using no guidance, NP and DNG            (b) Dynamic guidance scale

Figure 5: In 5a, illustrative diffusion trajectories using Stable Diffusion on different prompts are
shown. Notice that DNG only removes the unwanted object and keeps, for instance, the bread in
the bottom left of the top example. In 5b, the dynamic guidance scale for the specific trajectories is
compared to that used for NP. At which timestep the guidance is most active depends on the specific
diffusion trajectory as well as the prompt.


4.2   T EXT- TO - IMAGE

To demonstrate the flexibility of the proposed DNG scheme, small scale experiments are run using
Stable Diffusion 2 (Rombach et al., 2022). Inspired by Schramowski et al. (2023), the role of the
unguided model is replaced by that of the positively prompted one. Mathematically, sθ is substituted
by sθ,c+ in Algorithm 2. To compare the different negative guidance schemes in the context of T2I,
prompts that implicitly generate objects are required. An example could be an “English breakfast”,
for which it is highly likely that the model generates an image that contains an egg. The term “egg”
can then be chosen as negative prompt. Using ChatGPT we design 5 prompts that are highly likely
to generate certain objects without these features being explicitly mentioned in the prompt. These
5 prompts are given in appendix D. To illustrate the time dependence of our approach, diffusion
trajectories are shown for NP and DNG as well as the unguided case (i.e., without any negative
guidance) in Fig. 5a. The dynamic guidance scale computed through our posterior estimation is
compared to the constant one used in NP in Fig. 5b. We observe that our dynamic guidance scale is
most active at different timesteps depending both on the prompts and the diffusion trajectory itself.
In agreement with current literature we find that the sooner it is activated, the larger the changes in
the resulting image are Kynkäänniemi et al. (2024); Wang et al. (2024). To evaluate how well DNG
preserves the diversity of the underlying model, we examine how the guidance deactivates itself when
the undesired element is not present. To achieve this, we generate a second image with a negative
prompt consisting of a semantically unrelated concept. For example, with “English breakfast”, an
unrelated concept could be “The view of a skyline”. In that case, DNG should let the posterior
p(c- |x, t), and hence the guidance scale, go to zero. A schematic representation of this analysis
is shown in Fig. 6.It shows that while both DNG and NP are able to remove the related negative
prompt (“an egg”) from the original image, only NP modifies the image when using an unrelated
negative prompt (for instance the tea cup on the top left of the image). We acknowledge that the
images generated using NP with an unrelated negative prompt still follow the positive prompt. The
fact they are altered unnecessarily implies a potential loss of image diversity Ho & Salimans (2021);
Wang et al. (2024); Kynkäänniemi et al. (2024). To quantify how much the guided images have been
altered by the guidance scheme, the CLIP-score, i.e. the cosine similarity of their respective CLIP
scace representations, is measured. The shown scores are averaged over 32 images generated using


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         Unrelated guidance     Related guidance                                                     0.84


                                                                                         CLIP-score with unrelated negative prompt
                                          (no change desired)    (change desired)
                                                                                                                                               Negative Prompting
                                                                                                                                     0.86      Negative Guidance (ours)
                                                                                                                                               Prompt 1
                                                                                                                                     0.88      Prompt 2
                             NP
                                                                                                                                               Prompt 3
                                                                                                                                     0.90      Prompt 4
                                                                                                                                               Prompt 5
                                                                                                                                     0.92
                             NG (ours)
                                                                                                                                     0.94

          + prompt:                                                                                                                  0.96
    “An English breakfast”
                                                                                                                                     0.98
                                              - prompt:            - prompt:                                                         1.00
                                          “View of skyline”     “Eggs, sausages”                                                        0.98   0.96   0.94    0.92    0.90    0.88    0.86   0.84
                                                                                                                                                 CLIP-score with related negative prompt

(a) Schematic of the evaluation approach on Stable Dif-                                                             (b) CLIP scores in related and unrelated cases
fusion.

Figure 6: Comparison of NP and DNG on Stable Diffusion. In 6a the evaluation strategy is explained
schematically. A fixed seed is denoised using the same positive prompts with two separate negative
prompts, a semantically related one and a semantically unrelated one. This is done for DNG and
NP. The CLIP score between the guided and unguided images is then measured for both related and
unrelated cases and displayed as a function of each other for different prompts in 6b


both NP and DNG for various guidance strengths. Ideally, the CLIP score should remain equal to
one when negatively prompted with an unrelated text, indicating that the negative guidance was fully
deactivated. On the contrary, the model prompted with a related text should display a decrease of
CLIP score as a function of increasing guidance scale. To compare our results to those obtained with
NP, the average CLIP score of the samples guided with an unrelated negative prompt can be plotted
with respect to the average CLIP score of the samples guided with a related negative prompt. For
intuitiveness, the axes are scaled from 1 to -1, such that points located farther right and higher on
the graph correspond to greater deviation from the original images, indicated by a lower CLIP score.
This is visible in Fig. 6b in which each prompt is given its own marker and color intensity. As both
DNG and NP follow linear relationships per prompt, they are approximated by a linear regression in
a limited interval. As seen in Figure 6b, our method remains consistent with predictions, causing
minimal changes when a semantically unrelated negative prompt is used, while still performing on
par with NP in the case of a related negative prompt. Generated samples are provided in Appendix H.



5       L IMITATIONS

The main limitation of the present work is the non-exhaustive analysis of our approach in the context
of T2I generation. The current results obtained with Stable Diffusion solely demonstrate that the
proposed approach shows promising potential. A more thorough analysis using a larger prompt
dataset, advanced metrics such as the FID, as well as more generic hyperparameter values, are all still
required. Another limitation of the Stable Diffusion experiments, is that no metric is used to verify
how well the negative prompt has been removed from the image. This should be done using a visual
object classifier. All these steps are left as future work.

6       C ONCLUSION

Understanding the theoretical flaws behind the widespread Negative Prompting algorithm, led to a
novel, theoretically grounded Dynamic Negative Guidance scheme. This scheme was first validated
in a low dimensional setting, before being compared to alternative approaches in image generation
tasks. In particular, the proposed scheme outperformed concurrent approaches, such as Negative
Prompting or Safe Latent Diffusion, at the task of class removal from an unconditional MNIST or
CIFAR10 model. The advantages of the dynamic nature of the scheme was further displayed in the
context of T2I generation using Stable Diffusion, in which it was shown that DNG deactivates itself
when the negative prompt is unrelated to the positive prompt.


                                                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partly funded by the Research Foundation - Flanders (FWO-Vlaanderen) under
grant G0C2723N and by the Flemish Government (AI Research Program). Gabriel Raya was funded
by the Dutch Research Council (NWO) as part of the CERTIF-AI project (file number 17998).


R EFERENCES
Luca Ambrogioni. The statistical thermodynamics of generative diffusion models: Phase transitions,
  symmetry breaking and critical instability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17467, 2024a.

Luca Ambrogioni. In search of dispersed memories: Generative diffusion models are associative
  memory networks. Entropy, 26(5):381, 2024b.

Andrew. How to use negative prompts. https://stable-diffusion-art.com/
  how-to-use-negative-prompts/, November 2023. Accessed: 2024-19-11.

Mohammadreza Armandpour, Ali Sadeghian, Huangjie Zheng, Amir Sadeghian, and Mingyuan Zhou.
 Re-imagine the negative prompt algorithm: Transform 2d diffusion into 3d, alleviate janus problem
 and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04968, 2023.

Yuanhao Ban, Ruochen Wang, Tianyi Zhou, Minhao Cheng, Boqing Gong, and Cho-Jui Hsieh.
  Understanding the impact of negative prompts: When and how do they take effect? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.02965, 2024.

Omer Bar-Tal, Hila Chefer, Omer Tov, Charles Herrmann, Roni Paiss, Shiran Zada, Ariel Ephrat,
 Junhwa Hur, Guanghui Liu, Amit Raj, Yuanzhen Li, Michael Rubinstein, Tomer Michaeli, Oliver
 Wang, Deqing Sun, Tali Dekel, and Inbar Mosseri. Lumiere: A space-time diffusion model for
 video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12945, 2024.

Sparsh Bhasin. A guide to negative prompts in stable diffusion. https://blog.monsterapi.
  ai/blogs/negative-prompts-in-stable-diffusion/, July 2024. Accessed:
  2024-19-11.

Giulio Biroli, Tony Bonnaire, Valentin de Bortoli, and Marc Mézard. Dynamical regimes of diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18491, 2024.

Manuel Brack, Felix Friedrich, Dominik Hintersdorf, Lukas Struppek, Patrick Schramowski,
 and Kristian Kersting. SEGA: Instructing text-to-image models using semantic guidance. In
 Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=KIPAIy329j.

Angela Castillo, Jonas Kohler, Juan C. Pérez, Juan Pablo Pérez, Albert Pumarola, Bernard Ghanem,
  Pablo Arbeláez, and Ali Thabet. Adaptive guidance: Training-free acceleration of conditional
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.12487, 2023.

Chen Chen, Daochang Liu, and Chang Xu. Towards memorization-free diffusion models. In The
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. In
  M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 8780–8794. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2021/file/49ad23d1ec9fa4bd8d77d02681df5cfa-Paper.pdf.

Yilun Du, Shuang Li, and Igor Mordatch. Compositional visual generation with energy based
  models. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 6637–6647. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2020/file/49856ed476ad01fcff881d57e161d73f-Paper.pdf.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yilun Du, Conor Durkan, Robin Strudel, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Sander Dieleman, Rob Fergus,
  Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Arnaud Doucet, and Will Sussman Grathwohl. Reduce, reuse, recycle:
  Compositional generation with energy-based diffusion models and MCMC. In Andreas Krause,
  Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8489–8510. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/du23a.html.

Rohit Gandikota, Joanna Materzyńska, Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, and David Bau. Erasing concepts
  from diffusion models. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE International Conference on Computer
  Vision, 2023a.

Rohit Gandikota, Hadas Orgad, Yonatan Belinkov, Joanna Materzyńska, and David Bau. Unified
  concept editing in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14761, 2023b.

Alvin Heng and Harold Soh. Selective amnesia: A continual learning approach to forgetting in deep
  generative models. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 17170–17194. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2023/file/376276a95781fa17c177b1ccdd0a03ac-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, Günter Klambauer, and
 Sepp Hochreiter. Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a nash equilibrium.
 CoRR, abs/1706.08500, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.08500.

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=qw8AKxfYbI.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 6840–6851. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/4c5bcfec8584af0d967f1ab10179ca4b-Paper.pdf.

Benjamin Hoover, Hendrik Strobelt, Dmitry Krotov, Judy Hoffman, Zsolt Kira, and Duen Horng
  Chau. Memory in plain sight: A survey of the uncanny resemblances between diffusion models
  and associative memories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16750, 2023.

Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine.     Elucidating the de-
  sign space of diffusion-based generative models.  In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed,
  A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 26565–26577. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022.   URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/a98846e9d9cc01cfb87eb694d946ce6b-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Zhifeng Kong, Wei Ping, Jiaji Huang, Kexin Zhao, and Bryan Catanzaro. Diffwave: A versatile
  diffusion model for audio synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=a-xFK8Ymz5J.

Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Sheng-Yu Wang, Eli Shechtman, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Ablating concepts in text-to-image diffusion models. In ICCV, 2023.

Tuomas Kynkäänniemi, Miika Aittala, Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Timo Aila, and Jaakko Lehtinen.
  Applying guidance in a limited interval improves sample and distribution quality in diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07724, 2024.

Alexander Cong Li, Mihir Prabhudesai, Shivam Duggal, Ellis Langham Brown, and Deepak Pathak.
  Your diffusion model is secretly a zero-shot classifier. In ICML 2023 Workshop on Structured
  Probabilistic Inference & Generative Modeling, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=Ck3yXRdQXD.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Marvin Li and Sitan Chen. Critical windows: non-asymptotic theory for feature emergence in
 diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01633, 2024.

Senmao Li, Joost van de Weijer, taihang Hu, Fahad Khan, Qibin Hou, Yaxing Wang, and jian Yang.
  Get what you want, not what you don’t: Image content suppression for text-to-image diffusion
  models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=zpVPhvVKXk.

Letitia Parcalabescu, Michele Cafagna, Lilitta Muradjan, Anette Frank, Iacer Calixto, and Albert Gatt.
  VALSE: A task-independent benchmark for vision and language models centered on linguistic
  phenomena. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 8253–8280, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.567. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.
  567.

Minh Pham, Kelly O. Marshall, Niv Cohen, Govind Mittal, and Chinmay Hegde. Circumventing
 concept erasure methods for text-to-image generative models. In The Twelfth International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
 id=ag3o2T51Ht.

Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. SDXL: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=di52zR8xgf.

Vincent Quantmeyer, Pablo Mosteiro, and Albert Gatt. How and where does clip process negation?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10488, 2024.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Marina Meila and Tong
  Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
  139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/radford21a.html.

Gabriel Raya and Luca Ambrogioni. Spontaneous symmetry breaking in generative diffusion models.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis
  with latent diffusion models. In 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10674–10685, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, jun 2022. IEEE Computer Soci-
  ety. doi: 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01042. URL https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.
  org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01042.

Patrick Schramowski, Manuel Brack, Björn Deiseroth, and Kristian Kersting. Safe latent diffusion:
  Mitigating inappropriate degeneration in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05105, 2023.

Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade W Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick Schramowski,
  Srivatsa R Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk, and Jenia
  Jitsev. LAION-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models.
  In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
  Track, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=M3Y74vmsMcY.

Antonio Sclocchi, Alessandro Favero, and Matthieu Wyart. A phase transition in diffusion models
  reveals the hierarchical nature of data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16991, 2024.

Yifei Shen, Xinyang Jiang, Yezhen Wang, Yifan Yang, Dongqi Han, and Dongsheng Li. Understand-
  ing and improving training-free loss-based diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12404,
  2024.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jaisidh Singh, Ishaan Shrivastava, Mayank Vatsa, Richa Singh, and Aparna Bharati. Learn ”no” to say
  ”yes” better: Improving vision-language models via negations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.20312,
   2024.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 2256–2265, Lille, France, 07–09 Jul 2015. PMLR. URL https://
  proceedings.mlr.press/v37/sohl-dickstein15.html.
Yang Song, Conor Durkan, Iain Murray, and Stefano Ermon. Maximum likelihood training of score-
  based diffusion models. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman
  Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 1415–
  1428. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2021/file/0a9fdbb17feb6ccb7ec405cfb85222c4-Paper.pdf.
Xi Wang, Nicolas Dufour, Nefeli Andreou, Marie-Paule Cani, Victoria Fernandez Abrevaya, David
  Picard, and Vicky Kalogeiton. Analysis of classifier-free guidance weight schedulers. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2404.13040, 2024.
Joseph L. Watson, David Juergens, Nathaniel R. Bennett, Brian L. Trippe, Jason Yim, Helen E.
  Eisenach, Woody Ahern, Andrew J. Borst, Robert J. Ragotte, Lukas F. Milles, Basile I. M.
  Wicky, Nikita Hanikel, Samuel J. Pellock, Alexis Courbet, William Sheffler, Jue Wang, Preetham
  Venkatesh, Isaac Sappington, Susana Vázquez Torres, Anna Lauko, Valentin De Bortoli, Emile
  Mathieu, Sergey Ovchinnikov, Regina Barzilay, Tommi S. Jaakkola, Frank DiMaio, Minkyung
  Baek, and David Baker. De novo design of protein structure and function with rfdiffusion. Nature,
  620(7976):1089–1100, 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06415-8.
Bichen Wu, Chenfeng Xu, Xiaoliang Dai, Alvin Wan, Peizhao Zhang, Zhicheng Yan, Masayoshi
  Tomizuka, Joseph Gonzalez, Kurt Keutzer, and Peter Vajda. Visual transformers: Token-based
  image representation and processing for computer vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03677, 2020.
Jing Wu, Trung Le, Munawar Hayat, and Mehrtash Harandi. Erasediff: Erasing data influence in
   diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05779, 2024.
Jiwen Yu, Yinhuai Wang, Chen Zhao, Bernard Ghanem, and Jian Zhang. Freedom: Training-free
  energy-guided conditional diffusion model. In 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 23117–23127, 2023. doi: 10.1109/ICCV51070.2023.02118.
Gong Zhang, Kai Wang, Xingqian Xu, Zhangyang Wang, and Humphrey Shi. Forget-me-not:
  Learning to forget in text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops, pp. 1755–1764, June 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Unconditional                                           Conditional term (CFG)                                     Positive CFG
                                      Data points                                             Desired data points                                        Desired data points
                                                                                              Undesired data points                                      Undesired data points
          4                                                       4                                                             4



          2                                                       2                                                             2
 Y-axis


                                                         Y-axis


                                                                                                                       Y-axis
          0                                                       0                                                             0



          2                                                       2                                                             2



          4                                                       4                                                             4



                4    2     0      2     4                               4    2     0      2              4                          4   2     0      2             4
                         X-axis                                                  X-axis                                                     X-axis


              (a) Unconditional score                                 (b) Additional CFG term                          (c) Total score field CFG (λ = 2)

                                                      Figure 7: Illustration of CFG in 2D


A             I LLUSTRATION OF THE L IMITATIONS OF N EGATIVE P ROMPTING

To understand the working principles behind different guidance schemes, it is helpful to analyze the
score fields of Gaussian mixtures in two dimensions. Even if conclusions taken in low dimensional
spaces do not necessarily transfer to higher dimensions, these can provide valuable insights.
The choice of Gaussian mixtures is not an arbitrary one. Such a score field is the same as that
generated by a diffusion model in the memorization regime, with as data points the means of the
Gaussian modes (Ho et al., 2020). In that case the network behaves as an associative memory system
(Ambrogioni, 2024b; Hoover et al., 2023). To be specific, Gaussian mixtures represent the analytical
diffusion of delta peaks centered around specific data points, which can be thought of as memorized
training samples. To illustrate the flaws of the NP algorithm, the individual components of the total
guided score field are plotted. The most relevant term being the so-called guidance term, i.e. the term
that is added on top of the unconditional score.
  In the example that is discussed, the three memorized data points are shown using red crosses
(Fig. 7(a)). The goal is to guide the model towards the two upper modes of the mixture, or, inversely,
away from the bottom mode.
For CFG the total field is described by the following equation:

                                     sCF G = sθ + λ sθ,c+ − sθ                                      (13)
In this case sθ,c+ can be interpreted as the score field computed using as distribution the Gaussian
mixture consisting solely of the two desired modes. To understand the shape of this additional
classifier term (i.e. sθ,c+ − sθ ), it is useful to think about the problem through the lens of CG. This
additional term represents the gradient of log likelihood of the posterior p(c+ |x, t). This likelihood
can be computed analytically by using Bayes rule p(c+ |x, t) = p(c+ ) p(x|c        + ,t)
                                                                               pt (x) . It is constant and
equal to one close to the desired points, while it changes when approaching the undesired point as at
that point pt (x) ≪ p(c+ )p(x|c+ , t)4 . Hence, the additional term is small surrounding the desired
points, while it is large close to the undesired point. The direction of the vector field, is specified by
the fact that the posterior likelihood decreases when moving closer to the undesired point, implying
an attractive field. All these conclusions are clearly visible in Fig. 7.
On the other hand, when using NP, the conditional field is specified by the undesired data point c- .
The total field is then described by the following equation, with λ a positive constant:

                                        sN P = sθ − λ sθ,c- − sθ                                       (14)
The easiest way to understand this score field is to first understand how ∇x log p(c- |x, t) = sθ,c- −sθ
behaves, and then simply reverse its direction. Essentially this boils down to the case treated above
for CFG, with as only difference that desired and undesired modes have swapped position. Close
to the undesired mode, the posterior is constant and equal to one, corresponding with a very weak
score field. On the other hand, as one approaches the desired means, the posterior drops, implying a
   4
     This change is perpetuated when p(c+ |x, t) → 0 due to the singularity of the logarithm function in zero,
causing an increasing gradient the more the posterior likelihood decreases.


                                                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Unconditional                                             Conditional term (NP)                                      Negative prompting
                                      Data points                                               Desired data points                                        Desired data points
                                                                                                Undesired data points                                      Undesired data points
          4                                                         4                                                             4



          2                                                         2                                                             2
 Y-axis


                                                           Y-axis


                                                                                                                         Y-axis
          0                                                         0                                                             0



          2                                                         2                                                             2



          4                                                         4                                                             4



                4    2     0      2     4                                  4   2     0      2             4                           4   2     0      2             4
                         X-axis                                                    X-axis                                                     X-axis


              (a) Unconditional score                                    (b) Additional NP term                          (c) Total NP score field (λ = 2)

                                                         Figure 8: Illustration of NP in 2D


large repulsive field from the desired modes. Due to the additional minus sign, this repulsive field of
the desired modes becomes attractive, explaining why NP is sensible. The issue is naturally that the
field is much stronger in regions that are far away from the undesired mode. What is really desired is,
as present for CFG, a strong repulsive guidance field surrounding the undesired mode and a close
to zero field as one approaches the desired modes. This is an intuitive explanation of the reasoning
behind our proposed DNG scheme. Mathematically, we have shown in section 3.1 that using DNG
with c- is equivalent to using CFG with c+ = c̄- . It is therefore no surprise that Fig. 9 is equivalent
to Fig. 7. The total field described by DNG can be decomposed as:

                                                                                 p(c- |x)
                                                      sN G = sθ − λ                         sθ,c- − sθ                                                                        (15)
                                                                               1 − p(c- |x)

The difference with NP is the presence of a state dependent guidance scale. This guidance scale is pro-
portional to p(c- |x), which causes the guidance term to drop to zero when x is far from the undesired
point. Additionally, the guidance scale becomes asymptotically large as x approaches the undesired
point (i.e. when p(c- |x, t) → 1). The guidance score field now posses both desired properties, it is
not only directed away from the undesired point, but crucially it is also larger in regions closer to
that point. The results described here can leave one wondering why NP even works in practice. It
should however not be forgotten that the picture here is not only oversimplified by the choice of low
dimensionality of the problem but also by the choice of very simple, well separated Gaussian modes.
In reality the distribution of natural images is much more complex such that the posterior p(c- |x, t)
follows a much more complex pattern. While this clearly illustrates the fundamental shortcomings of
NP, it is important not to over-interpret these results. NP has proven to be a valuable tool for DMs, and
more research is required to better understand how its theoretical shortcomings impact it at large scale.


                                      Unconditional                                             Conditional term (NG)                                      Negative guidance
                                      Data points                                               Desired data points                                        Desired data points
                                                                                                Undesired data points                                      Undesired data points
          4                                                         4                                                             4



          2                                                         2                                                             2
 Y-axis


                                                           Y-axis


                                                                                                                         Y-axis


          0                                                         0                                                             0



          2                                                         2                                                             2



          4                                                         4                                                             4



                4    2     0      2     4                                  4   2     0      2             4                           4   2     0      2             4
                         X-axis                                                    X-axis                                                     X-axis


              (a) Unconditional score                                   (b) Additional DNG term                         (c) Total DNG score field (λ = 2)

                                                        Figure 9: Illustration of DNG in 2D


                                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     O NE - DIMENSIONAL D IFFUSION E XAMPLE : D ETAILS
To validate the theory described in the main body, a one-dimensional diffusion process can be
analyzed. For this purpose, it is useful to choose the sample distribution p(x, 0) as a Gaussian
mixture. One of the advantage of this choice is its good fit with the typically used Gaussian diffusion
kernel, making everything easily tractable.
                                                                                PN
Specifically, starting from an unperturbed distribution defined by p(x, 0) = i=1 ci N x; µi , σi2 I ,
it is straightforward to show that the discrete variance preserving diffusion process at time step
                                                        PN             √                            t
results in the following time dependence pt (x) = i=1 ci N x; ᾱt µi , (1 − ᾱt + ᾱt σi2 )I . By
choosing a Gaussian mixture as underlying distribution, the diffused distribution remains a sum of
Gaussians at every time step. In practice, this distribution is modeled by its score, denoted by s(x, t).
To validate our theory, some of the modes, say M < N , are removed at inference through
different guidance schemes. For this purpose, two helpful distributions are defined, the
                                         PNf ′
to-forget distribution pf (x, 0) =          i=1 ci N x; µi , σi2 I and the to-remember distribution
             PN
pr (x, 0) = i=Nf +1 c′′i N x; µi , σi2 I 5 . Both of these distributions are implicitly defined through


their respective score functions sf (x, t) and sr (x, t). The goal of negative guidance can be resumed
as trying to sample pr (x, 0) by using a combination of the unconditional score s(x, t) and the
to-forget score sf (x, t).
Another advantage of working in this one dimensional setting is that the posterior is analytically
available through Bayes rule:
                                              p(x, t|c = 0)              pf (x, t)
                      p(c = 0|x, t) = p(c = 0)               = p(c = 0)                         (16)
                                                  pt (x)                  pt (x)
The theory can therefore easily be verified using analytical solutions. Negative guidance, with the
exact posterior using s(x, t) and sf (x, t), should exactly correspond to positive guidance using
s(x, t) and sr (x, t). In practice, we demonstrate that:

  Positive guidance s(x, t), sr (x, t) = Negative guidance s(x, t), sf (x, t), p(c = 0|x, t)
                                                         p(c = 0|x, t)                         (17)
      s(x, t) + λ sr (x, t) − s(x, t) = s(x, t) − λ                       sf (x, t) − s(x, t)
                                                       1 − p(c = 0|x, t)

C    I NDEPENDENCE OF P OSTERIOR D ISTRIBUTION AND D IFFUSION
     T RAJECTORY
The likelihood of the entire diffusion path can be decomposed through Bayes rule:
                                   p(xt:T ) = p(xt , xt+1 , · · · , xT )
                                            = p(xt+1 , · · · , xT |xt )p(xt )                               (18)
                                            = p(xt )p(xt+1:T |xt )
Doing this for both the conditional model p(·|c = 0) and the unconditional model p(·) and inserting
this in the equation of the posterior (i.e. Eq (11)):
                                                  p(xt:T |c = 0)
                      p(c = 0|xt:T ) = p(c = 0)
                                                     p(xt:T )
                                                  p(xt |c = 0)p(xt+1:T |xt , c = 0)
                                       = p(c = 0)                                                           (19)
                                                         p(xt )p(xt+1:T |xt )
                                                  p(xt |c = 0) p(xt+1:T |xt , c = 0)
                                       = p(c = 0)
                                                     p(xt )       p(xt+1:T |xt )
The term p(xt+1:T |xt ) refers to the forward process, which corresponds to the fixed, known forward
process denoted by q(xt+1:T |xt ), i.e. one has p(xt+1:T |xt ) ≃ q(xt+1:T |xt ). Both the conditional
and unconditional model follow the same forward process such that the last term of Eq.(19) drops
                                                                                                       PM
   5
     The weighting constants for pf (x, 0) and pr (x, 0) are renormalised, i.e. c′i , c′′i ∝ ci with         ′
                                                                                                        i=0 ci   =
  PN
1, i=M +1 c′′i = 1


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              t+1:T |xt ,c=0)       t+1:T |xt )
out, i.e. p(xp(xt+1:T |xt )
                              ≃ q(x
                                q(xt+1:T |xt ) = 1.
Using this, it is easy to show that the posterior is indeed independent of the trajectory taken to reach xt :
                                                p(xt |c = 0) p(xt+1:T |xt , c = 0)
                     p(c = 0|xt:T ) = p(c = 0)
                                                    p(xt )      p(xt+1:T |xt )
                                                p(xt |c = 0) q(xt+1:T |xt )
                                     ≃ p(c = 0)
                                                    p(xt )   q(xt+1:T |xt )                             (20)
                                                p(xt |c = 0)
                                     = p(c = 0)
                                                    p(xt )
                                     = p(c = 0|xt )

D       E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
D.1     I MPACT OF THE DIFFERENT HYPERPARAMETERS OF DNG

The hyperparameters introduced in the framework of DNG, being the prior p(c), the temperature
τ and the bias δ all have distinct effects. The prior dictates the initial guess for the posterior, i.e.
                                                                                   p(c)
pT (c|xT ) = p(c) and therefore also the initial guidance scale λ(x, T ) = λ 1−p(c)     . Choosing a low
prior can ensure that negative guidance is not immediately active. The temperature hyperparameter τ
can help to reduce the fluctuations caused by the stochastic denoising process, we find that a value of
around τ = 0.2 works well in practice. The offset hyperparameter δ gives the model a slight bias
towards increasing the prior, it could be alternatively described as making the prior time dependent.
From a practical point of view, it’s consequence is that when both the positively and negatively
prompted models give similar prediction, the posterior increases faster, a highly desirable property.
In practice, we suggest either choosing a relatively large prior with no offset (such as we have done for
the MNIST experiments), or a low prior with a small offset (such as we have done for the CIFAR10
and Stable Diffusion experiments). We find that choosing an offset two, or even three, orders of
magnitude lower than the temperature delivers satisfactory results.

D.2     C LASS REMOVAL EXPERIMENTS

For the class removal experiments, unconditional MNIST and CIFAR10 diffusion models are
required. For MNIST our own model is trained, while for CIFAR10 the pretrained model from Ho
et al. (2020) is used6 . For both datasets, a model trained on solely one of the classes is required. For
this, our own models are trained on all the zeros of MNIST and all the airplanes of CIFAR10. Notice
that all the guidance approaches are compared using the same two networks, reducing any additional
bias due to the choices of network architectures. To analyze the generated images, a vision classifier
is required. For MNIST our own basic convolutional based classifier is trained, obtaining over 98%
accuracy over a test set. For CIFAR10, a pretrained vision transformer classifier is used7 (Wu et al.,
2020).
Hyperparameter values for our Negative Guidance scheme for the different datasets are given in
Table 1. A discussion explaining the choice of the different hyperparameters of our scheme is
included in D.1.
For Safe Latent Diffusion (Schramowski et al., 2023) a hyperparameter search was performed
to obtain the values that perform best at high safety. The most important hyperparameter is the
threshold value at which guidance is activated. We found that even in the setting of MNIST and
CIFAR (quite far from the setting of Stable Diffusion in which the scheme is proposed), a threshold
value of λthresh = 0.04 still performs optimally at high safety. This displays the flexibility of the
approach proposed by Schramowski et al. (2023). The other hyperparameters are chosen as follows:
ss = 100, βm = 0.2, sm = 0.1. The meaning and impact of different hyperparameters is discussed
in Appendix E. The absence of the offset for the MNIST experiments is compensated by choosing a
much higher prior. The negative guidance scale has to be chosen significantly differently for the
    6
    The pretrained model can be downloaded from huggingface at https://huggingface.co/google/
ddpm-cifar10-32
  7
    The pretrained classifier can be downloaded from Hugging Face at https://huggingface.co/
aaraki/vit-base-patch16-224-in21k-finetuned-cifar10


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Dataset Prior p(c)         Temperature τ     Offset δ
                       MNIST   0.25               0.25              0.0
                       CIFAR10 0.01               0.2               0.0002

    Table 1: The prompt specific hyperparameters chosen for our Dynamic Negative Prompting.


various approaches. While in SLD the guidance scale can only be smaller or equal to the initial
guidance scale λ0 , our scheme considers a dynamic self-regulating guidance, which can therefore
require very different initial values. In practice, the guidance scale used in DNG is chosen one order
of magnitude larger than that of NP. For NP or SLD, we chose values of around 0.5, while for DNG
we chose values around 5.


D.3       T EXT- TO -I MAGE EXPERIMENTS

To evaluate different negative guidance schemes in the context of T2I, we design 5 prompts that
have a high likelihood of generating objects not included in the prompts themselves. The positive
prompts generating these subjects are generated using ChatGPT8 . For each prompt, a related and
unrelated negative prompt is designed. The related negative prompt contains the name of the implicitly
generated object, suggested by ChatGPT alongside the positive prompt. The semantically unrelated
prompt is freely chosen by the authors. These prompts are given in Table 2. By generating small
batches of images, we verified by hand that the implicitly generated objects are present when using
the positive prompts. To allow the reader to analyze the prompts separately, these are visualized using
different markers in Fig. 6.
We observe that the progressive generation of the various prompts can show diverse behaviors, further
highlighting the complexity of a guidance in the context of Text-To-Image. This is discussed in more
detail in Appendix F. The presented negative guidance results rely on prompt specific hyperparameters
chosen in a limited interval and are all given in Table 3. It should be noted that different prompts
might require different hyperparameters depending on the size and importance of the to remove
object. Further work is required to obtain a general scheme that is effective in all circumstances.
Developing this requires a substantially deeper understanding of the effect of dynamic guidance
schemes, something also left for future work.

E        S AFE L ATENT D IFFUSION : D ETAILS
Due to their non-constant guidance scale, Safe Latent Diffusion as introduced by Schramowski et al.
(2023), is the most similar concurrent work present in the literature. Similarly to ours, their guidance
scheme is only active in the case that the scores of the negative prompt and positive prompt are
aligned. To make the comparison more apparent, their proposed pixelwise guidance scale can be
rewritten in our notation as:

                           λ0 min 1, sg · | ϵθ,t ⊖ ϵθ,c- ,t |   if ϵθ,t ⊖ ϵθ,c- ,t < λthresh
              Λ(x, t) =                                                                             (21)
                           0                                    else
Notice that an important difference between the two approaches is the present of a pixel-wise varying
guidance scale in SLD, highlighted by the matrix Λ(x, t) versus our global, scalar guidance scale
λ(x, t). Schramowski et al. (2023) also introduce additional momentum to the scheme, such that
guidance can remain active for a limited time even if the score difference should increase a bit. They
also add a late initialization of their approach. This is to specifically target the region of semantic
generation with their guidance scheme.
In SLD the guidance scale, defined by Eq.(21), is always smaller than the initial guidance scale,
which is not the case in our approach. Another difference, is that the metric they use to activate the
negative guidance is a simple noise prediction comparison, very different from our dynamic, time
dependent scheme.
Using different values for the threshold hyperparameter λthresh , as suggested by Schramowski et al.
(2023), different safety regimes are obtained. All different proposed settings were tested, in the main
    8
        Accessed before 30/09/2024


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Number       Name          Positive Prompt                             Related NP      Unrelated NP
 1            “Medieval     “A grand medieval feast set in a great      “Chalices, can- “Kids playing
              feast”        hall, filled with long tables covered       dles”           football”
                            in bountiful platters of food, goblets,
                            and flickering light, with knights and
                            nobles enjoying the lavish spread.”
 2            “An English “A classic British breakfast, featur-         “Egg, sausage” “The view of a
              breakfast”    ing a diverse selection of cooked de-                      skyline”
                            lights, perfect for a filling and flavor-
                            ful start to the day.”
 3            “A dinner ta- “A beautifully set dinner table, with       “Flowers, wine “A     person
              ble”          elegant arrangements, a variety of          glasses”       wearing sun-
                            enticing dishes, and delicate decor                        glasses”
                            that speaks to the sophistication of
                            the meal.”
 4            “An art work- “An inspiring art workshop filled           “Paintbrush,    “A bicycle in
              shop”         with creativity, featuring a wide           canvases”       the rain”
                            range of tools and materials used by
                            participants working on their indi-
                            vidual projects.”
 5            “An antique “A charming antique store with                “Lamps,   old   “An electric
              store”        shelves and tables filled with unique       books”          toothbrush”
                            and historical treasures, offering a
                            glimpse into the past.”

Table 2: The five positive prompts with their respective related and unrelated negative prompts used
for the experiments on Stable Diffusion. The related negative prompts are hand chosen after observing
images generated using the positive prompts.


      Number      Name                         Prior p(c)       Temperature τ     Offset δ
      1           “Medieval feast”             0.01             0.2               0.004
      2           “A dinner table”             0.01             0.3               0.003
      3           “An art workshop”            0.01             0.2               0.002
      4           “An antique store”           0.01             0.2               0.004
      5           “An English breakfast”       0.01             0.3               0.003

     Table 3: The prompt specific hyperparameters chosen for our Dynamic Negative Prompting.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               0.30                                                                                                          35
                                                                                                      NP                                                                                                          NP
                                                                                                      SLD                                                                                                         SLD
                                               0.25                                                   NG (ours)                                              30                                                   NG (ours)



               KL-divergence to ground truth
                                               0.20                                                                                                          25


                                                                                                                                        FID (without "0"s)
                                               0.15                                                                                                          20

                                               0.10                                                                                                          15

                                               0.05                                                                                                          10

                                               0.00                                                                                                          5
                                                      0         1        2              3       4                   5                                             0         1        2              3       4                   5
                                                                    Safety: % of wrong images                                                                                   Safety: % of wrong images

                                                          (a) Comparing diversity                                                                                     (b) Comparing quality

Figure 10: Comparison of diversity and quality as a function of safety for SLD, NP and DNG (ours)
when removing the class 0 (”airplanes”) on CIFAR. The SLD hyperparameters are chosen to be least
invasive, explaining the improved quality and relatively low safety of the approach.


                                      0.250                                                                                                         30.0
                                                                                                    thresh = 0.02                                                                                               thresh = 0.02
                                      0.225                                                         thresh = 0.03                                   27.5                                                        thresh = 0.03
                                                                                                    thresh = 0.04                                                                                               thresh = 0.04
                                                                                                    thresh = 0.05                                                                                               thresh = 0.05
                                      0.200                                                                                                         25.0
      KL-divergence to ground truth


                                                                                                    thresh = 0.06                                                                                               thresh = 0.06

                                      0.175                                                                                                         22.5
                                                                                                                               FID (without "0"s)
                                      0.150                                                                                                         20.0

                                      0.125                                                                                                         17.5

                                      0.100                                                                                                         15.0

                                      0.075                                                                                                         12.5

                                      0.050                                                                                                         10.0
                                           0.0            0.5       1.0         1.5       2.0       2.5             3.0                                 0.0           0.5       1.0         1.5       2.0       2.5             3.0
                                                                    Safety: % of wrong images                                                                                   Safety: % of wrong images

                                                          (a) Comparing diversity                                                                                     (b) Comparing quality

                                                Figure 11: Grid search over the threshold parameter of SLD λthresh at high safety.


paper we show the curves containing the version that performs best at high safety, corresponding with
the safest model. An interesting observation, visible in Fig. 10, is that by choosing a low threshold,
one can obtain better FIDs with SLD than with rival approaches at low safety levels. We hypothesize
that this is thanks to the small invasiveness of the SLD approach, which is mainly obtained thanks
to its pixelwise guidance scale. This allows SLD to locally remove details from images, which is a
major difference from both NP and our proposed DNG scheme. Notice that this superior performance
is only at a very low safety level, for instance when there are still 3% of the original 10% of the
forbidden class being generated.
A limited grid search over the threshold parameter of SLD λthresh is also performed in the high safety
regime and is shown in Fig. 11. As outlined by the authors, it is expected that when chosen too
small the method is unsafe (i.e. still generates the unwanted features), and when chosen too high the
method becomes equivalent to NP. We find these results still hold in the class-removal setting. An
optimum is found around the range of λthresh = 0.04, which is the value initially proposed by the
authors in the context of T2I and is therefore also the one used in this paper.


                                                                                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    S TABLE D IFFUSION : E MPIRICAL O BSERVATIONS


As already highlighted in the literature (Kynkäänniemi et al., 2024; Raya & Ambrogioni, 2024;
Brack et al., 2023; Sclocchi et al., 2024), the generation of images happens in phases. At high noise
regime, low frequency details, such as large shapes or main colors, are generated. In the middle of
the denoising process, the semantic content is generated. Towards the end of the process, when only
little noise is remaining, the high-frequency fine details are generated. While these general observed
truths are widely accepted, we observe that the specific location of these events is not an intrinsic
property of the total T2I model, but instead also strongly depends on how the model is prompted.
The main advantage of our self-regulating free guidance scale is that such events can be observed. By
tracking the posterior, the model tells us itself when a specific feature is being generated.
When plotting the average guidance scale for the different prompts, it can be observed that these
events are located at distinct moments in the diffusion process. The evolution of the guidance
scale as a function of time is shown for the five prompts in Fig. 12. The posterior is orders of
magnitude smaller in the case of the unrelated prompt, illustrating once more that our DNG can
deactivate itself. The detailed analysis of the dynamic guidance scale in the case of the related
negative prompts is left for future work. While the dynamic aspect of our guidance scale proves


         (a) Prompt 1                        (b) Prompt 2                        (c) Prompt 3


                         (d) Prompt 4                             (e) Prompt 5

Figure 12: Evolution of the guidance scale throughout the diffusion process. Guidance scale averaged
over 32 images. Maximal noise level is to the right of the x-axis. The guidance scale is respectively
plotted in green and red in the cases of related and unrelated negative prompts



useful in the described scenario, one should be aware that it implies, up to a certain degree, a
loss of user control. The self-regulating guidance is able to increase and decrease throughout
the denoising process, which even though highly desirable, can also lead to unpredictable results
when suboptimally tuned. While using NP increasing the guidance scale always results in stronger
deviations from the unguided images, this does not have to be the case with our DNG scheme.
It is perfectly possible that the guidance scale first decreases slightly and then follows the exact
same trend, even if initialized higher. Losing this control is not problematic if tuned correctly,
such as our scheme on MNIST or CIFAR10, as in that case a self-regulating dynamic guidance
scheme is optimal. However, the effects of different parameters, as well as the prompt dependence
of the scheme, need to be further studied to obtain a method working on large scales in the case of T2I.



                                                  22
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Target
                                                                                                                                 0.8                                                                                                  Sampled


                                                                                    Occurrence in %
                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                  0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
                                                                                                                                                                   Different classes
  Figure 13: Visualization of how the KL-divergence is computed. In this example, the sampled
  distribution is obtained using DNG to remove “0” on MNIST. The classes “1” and “7” that are
  most different from the zero are oversampled, while similar classes such as the “2” or the ”5” are
  undersampled.



    G                                       C LASS - REMOVAL : A DDITIONAL F IGURES

To demonstrate the robustness of our approach, the class removal experiments described in section 4.1
are repeated on four classes on both MNIST and CIFAR109 . For both datasets the first four classes
are chosen. For MNIST this corresponds to the digits:“0”-‘3”, while for CIFAR10 this corresponds to
the classes: “airplanes”, “cars”, “birds” and “cats”10 . DNG outperforms concurrent approaches on
the removal of all classes separately, highlighting its generalizability as well as its robustness. While
the removal of all classes follow similar trends, such as an increase of FID as the safety increases,
some specificities are different. We find the effect of negative prompting to be unreliable, meaning
that removing different classes can result in large differences of performance. This is less the case for
both SLD and DNG. The improved performance of DNG at high safety levels is especially visible
when comparing different approaches using the FID metric.

                                       9
      This will be extended to five classes before the end of the rebuttal period.
                                  10
      The present graphs will be replaced by ones containing a larger number of points before the end of the
  rebuttal period. The class removal experiments on the number “4” as well as the class “deer” will by then also
  be added.


                                0.30                                                                                  0.30                                                                                  0.30                                                                               0.30
KL-divergence to ground truth


                                                                                      KL-divergence to ground truth


                                                                                                                                                                            KL-divergence to ground truth


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               KL-divergence to ground truth


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Negative Prompting
                                0.25                                                                                  0.25                                                                                  0.25                                                                               0.25                     Safe Latent Diffusion
                                0.20                                                                                  0.20                                                                                  0.20                                                                               0.20                     Negative Guidance (ours)
                                0.15                                                                                  0.15                                                                                  0.15                                                                               0.15
                                0.10                                                                                  0.10                                                                                  0.10                                                                               0.10
                                0.05                                                                                  0.05                                                                                  0.05                                                                               0.05
                                0.00                                                                                  0.00                                                                                  0.00                                                                               0.00
                                       0    1   2     3     4    5     6    7   8                                            0     1   2     3     4    5     6     7   8                                          0   1   2     3     4    5     6    7   8                                          0   1   2     3     4     5    6     7       8
                                                Safety: % of wrong images                                                              Safety: % of wrong images                                                           Safety: % of wrong images                                                          Safety: % of wrong images
                                20.0                                                                                  20.0                                                                                  20.0                                                                               20.0
                                17.5                                                                                  17.5                                                                                  17.5                                                                               17.5
                                15.0                                                                                  15.0                                                                                  15.0                                                                               15.0
                                12.5                                                                                  12.5                                                                                  12.5                                                                               12.5
                                10.0                                                                                  10.0                                                                                  10.0                                                                               10.0
FID


                                                                                      FID


                                                                                                                                                                            FID


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FID


                                 7.5                                                                                   7.5                                                                                   7.5                                                                                7.5
                                 5.0                                                                                   5.0                                                                                   5.0                                                                                5.0
                                 2.5                                                                                   2.5                                                                                   2.5                                                                                2.5
                                 0.0                                                                                   0.0                                                                                   0.0                                                                                0.0
                                       0    1   2     3     4    5     6    7   8                                            0     1   2     3     4    5     6     7   8                                          0   1   2     3     4    5     6    7   8                                          0   1   2     3     4     5    6     7       8
                                                Safety: % of wrong images                                                              Safety: % of wrong images                                                           Safety: % of wrong images                                                          Safety: % of wrong images

                                           (a) Removing “0”                                                                                (b) “1”                                                                             (c) “2”                                                                            (d) “3”

  Figure 14: Evaluation of the KL-divergence (top) and FID (bottom) on single class removal exper-
  iments performed on MNIST using Negative Prompting, Safe Latent Diffusion and our Dynamic
  Negative Guidance. Despite differences between classes, DNG outperforms both NP and SLD in all
  settings.


                                                                                                                                                                        23
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                0.30                                                                                0.30                                                                               0.30                                                                               0.30


KL-divergence to ground truth


                                                                                    KL-divergence to ground truth


                                                                                                                                                                       KL-divergence to ground truth


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KL-divergence to ground truth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Negative Prompting
                                0.25                                                                                0.25                                                                               0.25                                                                               0.25                      Safe Latent Diffusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Negative Guidance (ours)
                                0.20                                                                                0.20                                                                               0.20                                                                               0.20

                                0.15                                                                                0.15                                                                               0.15                                                                               0.15

                                0.10                                                                                0.10                                                                               0.10                                                                               0.10

                                0.05                                                                                0.05                                                                               0.05                                                                               0.05
                                       0    1          2        3           4   5                                          0   1          2        3           4   5                                          0   1          2        3           4   5                                          0   1          2          3         4         5
                                                Safety: % of wrong images                                                          Safety: % of wrong images                                                          Safety: % of wrong images                                                          Safety: % of wrong images
                                 35                                                                                  35                                                                                 35                                                                                 35
                                 30                                                                                  30                                                                                 30                                                                                 30
                                 25                                                                                  25                                                                                 25                                                                                 25
                                 20                                                                                  20                                                                                 20                                                                                 20
           FID


                                                                                               FID


                                                                                                                                                                                  FID


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FID
                                 15                                                                                  15                                                                                 15                                                                                 15
                                 10                                                                                  10                                                                                 10                                                                                 10
                                  5                                                                                   5                                                                                  5                                                                                  5
                                       0    1          2        3           4   5                                          0   1          2        3           4   5                                          0   1          2        3           4   5                                          0   1          2          3         4         5
                                                Safety: % of wrong images                                                          Safety: % of wrong images                                                          Safety: % of wrong images                                                          Safety: % of wrong images

             (a) Removing “airplane”                                                                                               (b) “car”                                                                          (c) “bird”                                                                         (d) “cat”

  Figure 15: Evaluation of the KL-divergence (top) and FID (bottom) on single class removal experi-
  ments performed on CIFAR10 using Negative Prompting, Safe Latent Diffusion and our Dynamic
  Negative Guidance. Despite differences between classes, DNG outperforms both NP and SLD in all
  settings.


    H                                      S TABLE D IFFUSION : A DDITIONAL F IGURES
To visually compare how Negative Prompting and Dynamic Negative Guidance fare, we show some
illustrative examples using the five prompts introduced in Appendix D. Results are compared by
choosing the guidance scale such that the average cosine similarity of the related prompt is similar in
both approaches. The initial guidance scale values used for the comparison for each prompt (λNP
and λDNG for NP and DNG respectively) are written in the caption of Figures 16-20. These two,
while serving the same purpose, are not one-to-one comparable for both schemes. A more thorough
description of the connection between the two is done in Appendix D.1. In the case of unrelated
guidance (orange box) as litlle change as possible is desired. This is often achieved using DNG
(bottom row). On the other hand when using a related negative prompt (green box), changes in the
image are expected. This is observed for both NP and DNG. The point of this setting is to be able to
compare both approaches on similar global changes, meaning that both NP and DNG should alter the
images in a similar fashion.
To provide more insights into how negative guidance takes effect, it is insightful to show what happens
when the guidance scale is progressively increased. We display this in Figures 21-23.
To quantitatively compare DNG to NP, we propose a new metric that consists of a combination of the
average CLIP scores measured in the unrelated and related prompted cases. The former should be as
large as possible (i.e. as close to one as possible), implying that unrelated negative prompts have a
negligible effect. On the other hand the CLIP scores computed using a related negative prompt should
significantly differ from one, illustrating that the original image has been altered. The proposed
metric Q consists of the difference between the average CLIP Scores in the unrelated and related
cases, or thus:
                                                  Q(imgno guid , imgrel. , imgunrel. ) = CS(imgno guid , imgunrel. ) − CS(imgno guid , imgrel. )                                                                                                                                                                                         (22)
 Thanks to their linear form clearly visible in Fig. 6b the average CLIP-scores can be used to obtain a
 single scalar value. With as linear regression parameters a, b of the linear function visible in Fig. 6b
 and [xmin , xmax ] the range for which CLIP score in the related case are obtained, the metric can be
 computed as:
                                                   xmax + xmin        xmax + xmin
                                                                +b− Q(imgno guid , imgrel. , imgunrel. ) = a
                                                        2                  2                (23)
                                                          xmax + xmin
                                                = a−1                 +b
                                                               2
 This value can be visually interpreted as the average y value from which the average x value is
 substracted for every set of points in Fig. 6b. The values of our metric Q computed on the sets
 of points obtained using both NP and DNG are given in table 4, in which DNG outperforms NP,
 corresponding with higher Q values.



                                                                                                                                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Prompt Number          1          2          3           4          5           Average
    NP                     -0.015     0.003      0.017       0.016      0.041       0.007 ± 0.014
    DNG (ours)             0.053      0.018      0.080       0.054      0.057       0.052 ± 0.022

Table 4: The values of the Q metric as defined in eq. (23). Higher values correspond to improved
performance.


                                              Unrelated guidance                Related guidance
                                                (no change desired)               (change desired)


                             NP


                             DNG
          + prompt:
                             (ours)
      “A Medieval Feast”


                                                    - prompt:                       - prompt:
                                              “Kids playing football”           “Chalices, candles”


Figure 16: Examples comparing NP (up) to our DNG (down) in the case of unrelated (left) and
related (right) negative prompts for: Prompt 1. Guidance scales: λNP = 3.4, λDNG = 27. NP still
alters the images using unrelated negative prompts, for instance it removes all people present in the
unguided image. This most likely happens because the negative prompt contains the word “Kids”.


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            Unrelated guidance            Related guidance
                                             (no change desired)           (change desired)


                            NP


                            DNG
           + prompt:
                            (ours)
        “A dinner table”


                                                 - prompt:                   - prompt:
                                        “Person wearing sunglasses”    “Flowers, wine glasses”


Figure 17: Examples comparing NP (up) to our DNG (down) in the case of unrelated (left) and
related (right) negative prompts for: Prompt 2. Guidance scales: λNP = 1.7, λDNG = 12. In contrast
to DNG, NP alters images using unrelated negative prompts (see for instance the bottom left image),
while both NP and DNG perform similarly at removing the flowers from the unguided image.

                                           Unrelated guidance            Related guidance
                                            (no change desired)            (change desired)


                           NP


                           DNG
           + prompt:
                           (ours)
       “An art workshop”


                                                 - prompt:                    - prompt:
                                           “A bicycle in the rain”        “Paint, canvases”


Figure 18: Examples comparing NP (up) to our DNG (down) in the case of unrelated (left) and
related (right) negative prompts for: Prompt 3. Guidance scales: λNP = 1.7, λDNG = 27. NP alters
images using unrelated negative prompts, while DNG leaves most of the images unaltered (see for
instance the top right image). Both NP and DNG perform similarly in the case of the related negative
prompt.


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Unrelated guidance             Related guidance
                                              (no change desired)            (change desired)


                               NP


                               DNG
           + prompt:
                               (ours)
       “An antique store”


                                                  - prompt:                    - prompt:
                                           “An electric toothbrush”        “Lamps, old books”

Figure 19: Examples comparing NP (up) to our DNG (down) in the case of unrelated (left) and
related (right) negative prompts for: Prompt 4. Guidance scales: λNP = 2.55, λDNG = 21. NP alters
images using unrelated negative prompts, while DNG leaves most of the images unaltered (see for
instance the floor of the top left image).


                                             Unrelated guidance            Related guidance
                                              (no change desired)            (change desired)


                               NP


                               DNG
            + prompt:
                               (ours)
      “An English breakfast”


                                                  - prompt:                    - prompt:
                                              “View of skyline”             “Eggs, sausages”


Figure 20: Examples comparing NP (up) to our DNG (down) in the case of unrelated (left) and
related (right) negative prompts for: Prompt 5. Guidance scales: λNP = 3.4, λDNG = 18. NP alters
images using unrelated negative prompts, while DNG leaves most of the images unaltered (see for
instance the number of dishes in the bottom right image). Both NP and DNG perform similarly in the
case of the related negative prompt (see for instance the removal of the egg in the bottom left image).


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 (a) DNG with related negative prompt


                                 (b) NP with related negative prompt


                               (c) DNG with unrelated negative prompt


                                (d) NP with unrelated negative prompt

Figure 21: Progressive impact of negative prompts with increasing guidance scale from left to right.
In (a) and (b) the related negative prompt is used, while in (c) and (d) the unrelated negative prompt
is used. Analysis performed for: Prompt 1


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 (a) DNG with related negative prompt


                                 (b) NP with related negative prompt


                               (c) DNG with unrelated negative prompt


                                (d) NP with unrelated negative prompt

Figure 22: Progressive impact of negative prompts with increasing guidance scale from left to right.
In (a) and (b) the related negative prompt is used, while in (c) and (d) the unrelated negative prompt
is used. Analysis performed for: Prompt 2


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 (a) DNG with related negative prompt


                                 (b) NP with related negative prompt


                               (c) DNG with unrelated negative prompt


                                (d) NP with unrelated negative prompt

Figure 23: Progressive impact of negative prompts with increasing guidance scale from left to right.
In (a) and (b) the related negative prompt is used, while in (c) and (d) the unrelated negative prompt
is used. Analysis performed for: Prompt 3


                                                 30
