Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING H OW H ARD TO T HINK :
I NPUT-A DAPTIVE A LLOCATION OF LM C OMPUTATION
 Mehul Damani∗ Idan Shenfeld Andi Peng                          Andreea Bobu                    Jacob Andreas
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology



                                               A BSTRACT

            Computationally intensive decoding procedures—including search, reranking,
            and self-critique—can improve the quality of language model (LM) outputs in
            problems spanning code generation, numerical reasoning, and dialog. Existing
            work typically applies the same decoding procedure for every input to an LM. But
            not all inputs require the same amount of computation to process. Can we allo-
            cate decoding computation adaptively, using more resources to answer questions
            whose answers will be harder to compute? We present an approach that predicts
            the distribution of rewards given an input and computation budget, then allocates
            additional computation to inputs for which it is predicted to be most useful. We
            apply this approach in two decoding procedures: first, an adaptive best-of-k pro-
            cedure that dynamically selects the number of samples to generate as input to a
            reranker; second, a routing procedure that dynamically responds to a query using
            a decoding procedure that is expensive but accurate, or one that is cheaper but
            less capable. Across a suite of programming, mathematics, and dialog tasks, we
            show that accurate computation-allocation procedures can be learned, and reduce
            computation by up to 50% at no cost to response quality, or improve quality by up
            to 10% at a fixed computational budget.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Recent improvements in language models                                             Help me          What is your        Prove the
                                                                                   balance a                            Riemann
(LMs) have dramatically enhanced their ability                                     binary tree.
                                                                                                    name?
                                                                                                                        hypothesis.
to tackle complex tasks in mathematics, cod-
ing, and reasoning. However, as with natural                    Estimate query
                                                                dif culty
                                                                                         Hard               Easy         Impossible

and artificial intelligent agents of all kinds (Sil-
ver et al., 2016), LMs cannot solve all problems                Allocate extra
on the first try: they benefit from the ability                 computation to
                                                                hard-but-
to perform search (Yao et al., 2024), sampling                  solvable queries    LM      LM       LM        LM        LM        LM
(Brown et al., 2024), or more sophisticated de-
coding procedures like chain-of-thought (Wei                                         one   many     small      large    greedy    search
                                                                                   sample samples   LM         LM      decoding
et al., 2022) and self-critique (Wang et al.,
2023).
                                                   Figure 1: Overview of our approach. Given a set
Importantly, computationally intensive prob- of input queries to a language model, we train
lem domains may exhibit considerable varia- a lightweight model to estimate the difficulty of
tion in the difficulty of individual problem in- these queries (more precisely, a model that esti-
stances: not all problems are equally hard to mates how much each query would benefit from
solve. For example, even a novice program- a more computationally intensive decoding proce-
mer can likely write code to to test if an integer dure.) We then allocate extra computation to those
is even. Balancing a binary tree might require queries for which it would be most beneficial.
                                                           fi


multiple attempts, and finding a polynomial-
time set cover algorithm is likely impossible, and not be worth attempting at all. Maximally efficient
use of computational resources thus requires identifying, a priori, the inputs for which additional
computation will improve outputs. In LMs, recent work has shown that significant gains from adap-
tive choice of decoding procedures are theoretically achievable (Snell et al., 2024). However, past
    ∗
        Correspondence to mehul42@mit.edu.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


work has relied on measures of problem difficulty that could only be estimated a posteriori, using a
sampling procedure significantly more expensive than the one used to generate model outputs.
In this paper, we show that it is possible to perform inference-time scaling of computation before
responding to a set of user queries, by predicting how much computation will be required to respond
successfully to each query, and allocating resources accordingly (Fig. 1). Our approach has two
parts. First, we describe how to train a difficulty model that estimates the marginal improvement
in response quality that would result from allocating an additional unit of computing power when
responding to a query. We show that effective difficulty models can be constructed by training
lightweight “probes” on top of a pre-trained LM’s hidden representations, suggesting that LMs may
already learn to encode problem difficulty as a result of pre-training. Second, we describe an efficient
allocation algorithm that, given a collection of queries and a computation budget, uses predictions
from the difficulty model to allocate computation to individual queries. We show how to perform
this optimization online (exactly satisfying the budget for a batch of queries) or offline (computing
a fixed mapping from queries to compute allocations so that constraints are satisfied in expectation).
This approach is flexible with regard to the choice of compute-scaling procedure, and we demon-
strate its effectiveness with two different inference procedures. In best-of-k experiments, we choose
how many samples to generate from an LM before re-ranking with a reward model. In routing ex-
periments, we choose whether to respond to queries using a computationally expensive but capable
decoding procedure, or a less powerful but more cost-effective decoder. For the best-of-k setting,
we present results across 3 domains: Math, Code and Chat. Adaptive sampling outperforms non-
adaptive strategies on all three domains across a range of possible compute budgets. On Math and
Code, we achieve the same performance as non-adaptive methods using up to 50% less compute; on
Chat, we are able to match reward using up to 10% less compute than base models. For routing, we
experiment with both a pair of models (Gemma-2B, Gemma-7B) and a pair of decoding procedures
(ordinary sampling and value-augmented sampling; Han et al., 2024). In both cases, we match the
performance of the more expensive decoder while calling it only 50–75% of the time.
In summary, this work presents (1) a generally applicable framework for adaptively scaling test-time
LM computation; (2) a learned model for estimating the marginal benefit of additional computation
in LM decoding; (3) an efficient algorithm for allocating computation to queries; and (4) experiments
demonstrating significant improvements in LM efficiency and output quality.


2   P RELIMINARIES

Suppose we have an LM-based agent that will interact with a large number of users in parallel.
At any moment, each of a set of users has issued a query xi , for which we wish to produce a
response yi . We have acccess to both a language model (LM) p(y | x), capable of generating
candidate responses, as well as a reward model r(x, y) capable of assessing the quality of candidate
responses. In the absence of any computational constraints, we might wish to find the best response
to every user query by optimizing arg maxy r(xi , y) independently for each query xi .
In practice, however, we generally do not have the ability to perform exhaustive search over can-
didate responses y. Instead, we use a decoding procedure f (x, b) that (stochastically) generates a
response y subject to some constrained computation budget b. (In general, increasing the budget
to a query should increase the quality of the response.) Many such decoding procedures are in wide
use; our experiments will focus on two of the most widely used.
In best-of-k, we generate a finite number of samples, then rerank them:
                               f (x, b) =         arg max              r(x, yi ) .                  (1)
                                            yi ∈{y1 ,...,yb }∼p(·|x)


In routing, we have access to a strong but expensive decoding scheme pS (which could involve
search, reasoning, or even just a larger model). For every query we can either use this decoding
scheme or to fall back to a weak but cheaper decoding scheme pW (e.g. ordinary decoding or a
smaller model). Then:
                                          y ∼ pW (· | x) if b = bW

                             f (x, b) =                            .                         (2)
                                          y ∼ pS (· | x) if b = bS

                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here bW and bS denote the cost of calling the weak and strong decoders respectively. Decoding
procedures including consensus (Jacob et al., 2024), chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022), self-critique
(Luo et al., 2024) and debate (Du et al., 2024) may all be expressed in this form, with the budget b
controlling the number of generated samples, tokens, or rounds of revision.
In current practice, it is typical to set a fixed budget B, and allocate this uniformly for all queries—
returning yi ∼ f (xi , B) for each xi . In this case, the expected reward for a set of queries is simply:
                                         X
                                              Eyi ∼f (xi ,B) [r(xi , yi )]                             (3)
                                           i
But as noted in Section 1, different xi may in practice benefit differentially from increased budgets.
In this paper, we consider a more flexible version of the problem—if we are willing to set a fixed av-
erage computational cost per query, can we improve overall accuracy by allocating this computation
adaptively? In this case, responding to a collection of queries {x1 , . . . , xn } corresponds to solving:
                               X                                       X
                      max          Eyi ∼f (xi ,bi ) [r(xi , yi )] s.t.   bi ≤ B · n                    (4)
                     b1 ,...,bn
                                   i                                   i
Below, we develop a method for solving this adaptive comptuation scaling problem efficiently.

3     M ETHOD
In Eq. (4), we would like to allocate computation bi to queries xi to maximize expected reward,
which we will denote q(xi , bi ) = Eyi ∼f (xi ,bi ) [r(xi , yi )]. But there is a problem: without querying
the LM, we cannot know the value of q(xi , bi ) for some new xi . To make matters worse, reliable
Monte Carlo estimation of q(xi , bi ) (as in Snell et al., 2024) may require more computation (e.g.
more LM samples) than we eventually wish to allocate to xi ! To efficiently allocate computation,
we need some way to predict q(xi , bi ) from xi alone, and then use these predictions to solve Eq. (4).
When estimating problem difficulty and allocating decoding budget, it will be useful to reason about
the benefits of incremental changes in compute budgets. Formally, let us define the marginal re-
                                                                                          Pbi
ward ∆ij = q(xi , j)−q(xi , j −1) (with ∆(·, 0) = 0). Under this definition, q(xi , bi ) = j=1  ∆ij ;
intuitively, ∆ij represents the expected gain from allocating one more “unit” of computation to xi ,
given that we have already allocated j − 1 units. We may then re-write Eq. (4) as:
                        Xn B Xmax               X
                max               cij ∆ij s.t.      cij ≤ B · n ; cij ≤ ci,j−1 ∀i, j             (5)
                         i=1 j=0                        i,j
Here we have introduced auxiliary variables cij ∈ {0, 1} to represent budget increments: intuitively,
setting cij = 1 means we have allocated a jth unit of computation to xi , and constraints enforce that
these units are allocated in sequence, as shown in Figure 2. To determine how to allocate decoding
computation across a set of queries xi , it then suffices to predict the value of each term ∆ij and then
solve Eq. (5) to obtain c. Each of these steps is described in more detail below.

3.1   E STIMATING P ROBLEM D IFFICULTY BY P REDICTING M ARGINAL R EWARDS

Given a training set of queries xi , we collect empirical estimates of ∆ij by decoding from f (x, b)
at values of b up to some Bmax . We then train a model ∆(x ˆ i ; θ) that predicts a vector of marginal
rewards for all budgets j simultaneously by optimizing the mean squared error:
                                            X
                                 arg min         ∥∆i − ∆(xˆ i ; θ)∥2                               (6)
                                                                      2
                                       θ       xi ,∆i
where ∆i = [∆i1 , . . . , ∆iBmax ] is the vector of empirical marginal rewards for the query xi . While
training this model requires sampling from the LM at many budgets to obtain supervision, it can be
called during inference without generating any outputs at all.
We explore two simple parameterizations of ∆:   ˆ (1) a two-layer MLP that takes last the hidden state
of the base LM p (obtained by encoding the query) as input, and (2) parameter-efficient fine-tuning
of the base LM with LoRA (Hu et al., 2022). During inference, the MLP variant adds extremely little
overhead as its input are hidden states that are already computed as part of decoding procedure. The
LoRA variant is slightly more expensive; however, its overhead is also negligible, as the primary
bottleneck during inference occurs when decoding outputs rather than encoding queries.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                         Incremental
                                                                                         computation
                                            Marginal reward predictions                  c11 = 1, c13 = 0          Allocated
                                                                                                                   budget
                                                         Δ̃21   Δ̃22   Δ̃23   Δ̃24
 x1 = Help me balance a binary tree.          Δ̃(x1; θ) = 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.1
                                                                                     1    0.3   0.2    0.1   0.1   b1 = 2

 x2 = What is your name?                                           Reward
                                                                 Predictor
                                                                                     2    1.0   0.0    0.0   0.0   b2 = 1

 x3 = Prove the Riemann hypothesis.                   Language                       3    0.0   0.0    0.0   0.0   b3 = 0
                                                         Model
 x4 = Write an essay about Jane Eyre.         …balance a binary tree.                4    0.1   0.1   0.1    0.1   b4 = 3
                                                                                           1     2      3    4
                                            DIFFICULTY ESTIMATION                    COMPUTATION ALLOCATION

Figure 2: Method overview. In the first step, the marginal reward predictor is used to estimate the
marginal reward gains for a batch of queries. In the second step, the allocation algorithm uses these
predictions to assign compute budgets to individual queries. The simple query what is your name?
is allocated a budget of 1, while the harder query balance a binary tree is allocated a budget of 2.


3.2   A LLOCATING C OMPUTATION

Eq. (5) is an integer linear program. But under the assumption of decreasing marginal benefits from
additional computation, it has a special form that allows it to be solved in O(Bmax · n) time using a
greedy algorithm that incrementally “turns on” cij for which ∆ij is largest. We exploit this property
in two ways:
Online allocation: If queries {xi } are known a priori, we simply replace each ∆ij in Eq. (5) with
                                 ˆ i ; θ), solve for cij , then finally set each bi = maxj cij .
the corresponding estimate from ∆(x
One drawback of this procedure is that responses must be processed in a batch. However, in some
cases it is also possible to effectively set budgets independently for each xi :
Offline allocation: If allocations must be made without access to a full batch of samples, we con-
struct a fixed allocation policy as follows:
                                                                         ˆ then use it to label queries
(1) Hold out a subset of the data used for training the reward estimator ∆,
                                                                 ˆ
in this held-out set (e.g. based on the first-sample prediction ∆(xi )1 ). Divide these queries into a
fixed set of bins according to their predicted marginal rewards.
(2) Solve the allocation problem for this held-out as in Eq. (5), with the additional constraint that all
queries in a bin receive the same budget allocation. For each bin, store the assigned budget.
(3) During deployment, compute a reward prediction for each xi , map it to a bin, and return the
budget associated with that bin.
During deployment, all queries can be processed independently (at the risk of a budget violation if
the distribution of queries is significantly different from those used to compute the allocation policy).

3.3   I NTERESTING S PECIAL C ASES

Binary Reward + Best-of-k: In domains such as coding and math, rewards are often binary, indi-
cating success or failure. For instance, an outcome reward model can be used to assess correctness
in math while unit tests indicate correctness in coding. In such settings, the probability that a single
sample from the model succeeds may be used to analytically compute all marginal rewards.
Let λ = Ey∼p(·|x) [r(x, y)] denote the probability of obtaining a successful result from a single
sample (for r(x, y) ∈ {0, 1}). Then the reward estimate q(x, b) is simply the probability of getting
at least one success in b attempts: q(x, b) = 1 − (1 − λ)b . Then ∆(xi , bi ) = λi (1 − λi )bi .
In this case, rather than training the reward predictor ∆ ˆ using a squared loss as in Eq. (6), we obtain
empirical estimates of λi at training, then minimize the cross-entropy:
                          Xh                                                       i
                                λi log(λ̂(xi ; θ)) + (1 − λi )(log(1 − λ̂(xi ; θ))                    (7)
                           xi ,λi

with an appropriately parameterized λ̂(x; θ).


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           ˆ in a special form that models the probability of outputs
Routing: For the routing setting, we learn ∆
from the strong model pS being preferred over the weak model pW as:
             ˆ i ; θ)bS ≈ p(pS ≻ pW | x) = Ey ∼pS ,y ∼pW [σ(r(x, y1 ) − r(x, y2 ))]
             ∆(x                                                                                   (8)
                                             1      2


4     E XPERIMENTS
We apply our method to several adaptive decoding procedures: best-of-k and routing (to either
a large model or a sophisticated search algorithm). We evaluate improvements over standard de-
coding and procedures that allocate computation uniformly across problem instances, as well as
performance relative to the theoretical upper bound. In addition, we provide intrinsic evaluations of
                                                  ˆ
the accuracy and calibration of reward predictors ∆.

4.1   A DAPTIVE B EST- OF -k

We use best-of-k reranking with a reward model in three settings: Math, Code and Chat.
Methods: We evaluate the following methods:

      1. Online Ada-BoK (ours): The online variant of our method that solves a joint optimization
         problem, as detailed in Section 3.2.
      2. Offline Ada-BoK (ours): The offline variant that solves the allocation problem on a held-
         out dataset, as detailed in Section 3.2. This method is only used in Math and Code domains.
      3. Best-of-k: This baseline allocates the same number of samples k = B to every query.
      4. Oracle: Oracle is a non-implementable method that uses the ground truth marginal rewards
         to solve the allocation problem. This method solves the allocation problem by plugging in
         the true marginal rewards. It is unrealizable in practice, but provides an upper bound on
         the reward that could be obtained if the learned marginal reward predictor ∆ ˆ were perfect.

Evaluation Metrics: Our main evaluation metric for Math and Code is the expected success rate
under an oracle verification procedure:
                                                  n
                                              1X
                  Expected Success Rate =          Ey ∼f (xi ,bi ) [1{yi is correct}]              (9)
                                              n i=1 i

where n is the number of queries. Similarly, for Chat, it is the expected reward:
                                                      n
                                           1X
                         Expected Reward =      Ey ∼f (xi ,bi ) [r(x, yi )]                      (10)
                                           n i=1 i

To estimate these in practice, we sample a large number of generations Bmax for each query and
then use bootstrapping to approximate the expectation for different bi .
The compute budget B is the average number of samples that may be drawn per query. Best-of-k
with k = B uses the same number of total samples as our adaptive method. We plot the performance
of different methods for different compute budgets, where budgets are specified in terms of B.
Note that, in the binary reward-based Math and Code domains, it may be efficient to set bi = 0 for
some queries, as many problems have a 0% success rate. In these cases, a default response such as I
don’t know may be returned, allowing the sample budget to be allocated more effectively elsewhere.
For chat experiments, we require all bi ≥ 1 .

C ODE
Setup: For the coding experiments, we adopt a subset of TACO, a dataset focused on algorith-
mic code generation with problems sourced from various programming contest platforms (Li et al.,
2023). We use a custom off-the-shelf Starcoder-15B model, which was released by the creators of
the TACO dataset after fine-tuning on the dataset. We use the official open-source evaluation frame-
work released with TACO. A generation is classified as a success if it passes all test cases. Finally,


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                CODE


                                                MATH


Figure 3: Results on Code and Math. The left column shows the distribution of LM success
probabilities across queries. A significant number of problems on Code have 0% success rate, while
Math has a flatter distribution of difficulty. The middle column compares predicted marginal reward
predictors to ground-truth values, alongside calibration curves (our predictors are well calibrated
with the ground truth). Finally, the right column shows the performance curves for tested methods.
Here, we observe that adaptive computation generally outperforms the best-of-k baseline.


as unit tests serve as a verifier, a method is considered successful on a query if at least one of its k
generations passes all test cases. We use the MLP variant to learn the marginal rewards.
Results: Figure 3 present success rates for the code dataset. We first observe that while our methods
perform significantly better in the low-budget regime (B < 8), the results in the moderate-to-high
budget regime are mixed. Counter-intuitively, while our offline variant always outperforms best-
of-k, our online variant actually falls below the best-of-k curve in the high-budget regime. This is
because small errors in the learned marginal reward predictor can hugely impact solutions to the
allocation problem (if a problem has a true success rate of 0%, but its success rate is predicted to be
1%, it becomes an attractive candidate for a large budget). 50% of problems in the coding dataset
have 0 success probability (for Math, this is only 5%). The offline variant avoids this pathology by
binning impossible and low-probability solutions together, effectively “regularizing” allocations.
In summary, the coding results highlight the fact that prediction errors in marginal reward can ad-
versely impact online allocation. At the same time, the consistent outperformance of the offline
variant over best-of-k underscores the value of adaptive compute budget allocation.

M ATH

Setup: We use a subset of the Numina-COT Dataset (Li et al., 2024), which contains Math prob-
lems obtained from diverse sources. We use Mistral AI’s Mathstral-7B model, which is specialized
for mathematical tasks, and is based on Mistral 7B (Jiang et al., 2023). We use this model off-the-
shelf and do not perform any fine-tuning. We use an oracle verifier to select the best answer out of
k. This implies that if the model generates at least one correct answer out of k, it will be successful.
The verifier uses a 2-stage pipeline that employs the evaluation framework of Hendrycks et al. in
the first stage and a custom LLM-verifier in the second stage (Hendrycks et al., 2021). This pipeline
is detailed in Appendix A. We used the LoRA variant to learn the marginal rewards.
Results: Figure 3 illustrates the success rate across different compute budgets. Our online and
offline methods consistently outperform best-of-k for all compute budgets. While the improvements
are marginal in the low-budget regime (B < 8), adaptive computation shines in the moderate-to-high


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       (a) Full variant                      (b) Tranches variant

Figure 4: Results of adaptive best-of-k in the Chat domain. Our full variant achieves marginal
improvements, enabling a 0-10% reduction in compute budget while maintaining equivalent reward
levels. More notably, the tranches variant exhibits substantial gains, achieving the same reward
levels with a 25-40% reduction in compute budget.


budget settings (B ≥ 8), where they can achieve the same success rate as best-of-k while using 25–
50% less computation. This efficiency likely stems from allocation of most of the compute resources
to medium and hard problems, which require more samples, while easy problems need only a few to
be solved. Both the online and offline variants perform nearly identically, indicating that solving the
optimization problem offline does not lead to any performance degradation in this setting. Finally,
although we significantly outperform best-of-k, the oracle curve suggests that further improvements
in the marginal reward predictor ∆ˆ could provide even greater gains.

C HAT
Setup: For chat, we use a subset of the LMSYS-Chat dataset, which contains real-world conver-
sations with 25 LLMs (Zheng et al., 2024). We use the popular Gemma-7b-it model, which is an
instruction-tuned model for chat (Team et al., 2024). We use reward as our primary evaluation met-
ric. We use an off-the-shelf reward model called NCSOFT/Llama-3-OffsetBias-RM-8B, which
was ranked amongst the top 10 on RewardBench at the time of writing. We used the MLP variant to
learn the marginal rewards. Finally, we conduct evaluation on 2 different subsets of the dataset-

      1. Full: The vanilla experiment uses the the entire test set.
      2. Tranches: The tranches experiment uses a subset of 20% from the full test set. This subset
         is composed of queries that fall in the lowest 10% or highest 10% of variance in rewards.
         The goal of the tranches experiment is to simulate a more extreme user distribution. The
         main goal of the tranches is to simulate a more extreme user distribution compared to
         typical datasets, which are often collected in somewhat controlled settings and might not
         capture true user diversity. Full details in Appendix A.3.

Results: Figures 4a and 4b present the results for the full and tranches variant respectively. We
focus on the small compute budget regime as chat requires much lesser search and we empirically
observed rewards saturating quickly. In the case of the full variant, the gains are relatively mod-
est. The Oracle curve shows a 15–25% reduction in compute budget while maintaining the same
average reward. Although our adaptive method consistently outperforms best-of-k everywhere, the
reductions in compute budget are relatively small, ranging from 0–10%. This indicates that while
adaptive allocation can provide some benefit, an equitable allocation performs almost at par. For the
tranches variant, the results are notably different. Our adaptive method achieves substantial gains,
reducing the budget by 25–40% while matching the rewards of best-of-k.

4.2     ROUTING

Through this set of experiments, we aim to evaluate the effectiveness of our learned preference
predictor in routing queries between a weak decoding procedure pW and a strong procedure pS .


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Model Size


                                         Value Augmented Sampling


Figure 5: Results for different routing procedures. The left column shows the distribution of
ground-truth preference probabilities for model size and value-augmented sampling. The middle
column compares our learned preference predictors to ground-truth values, alongside calibration
curves (our predictors are well calibrated). Finally, the right column shows the performance curves
for tested methods. We observe that adaptive routing outperforms the random routing baseline,
demonstrating that our learned predictor is able to effectively route more challenging queries to the
stronger model while leaving simpler queries to the weaker model.


Settings: We present results for two different (pW , pS ) pairs which are based on:

      1. Model Size: In this setting, pW and pS are models from the same family but with different
         model sizes. We use the instruction-tuned Gemma-2b-it and Gemma-7b-it models as pW
         and pS . We use the full variant of the LMSYS dataset described in Section 4.1 .
      2. Value-Augmented Sampling: In this setting, pW and pS have the same base LLM model.
         During decoding, a value function is used to guide search, improving performance but with
         significant computational overhead. In this experiment we use Llama-2 7B for both the
         LLM and the value function. In each decoding step, we compute the value of 10 possible
         tokens, increasing the cost of decoding by a factor of 10. We use the harmless subset of the
         popular Anthropic HH dataset (Bai et al., 2022).

Methods: We present results for the following methods:

      1. Online Routing (ours): ∆   ˆ is used to predict the preference probabilities for a set of
         queries. These predictions are then routed using the online allocation procedure.
      2. Random: A simple baseline that randomly routes a fixed fraction of queries to π S . Any
         target B may be obtained by changing this fraction.
      3. Oracle: As above, a non-realizable skyline that uses ground-truth information about the
         reward distribution of pW (· | xi ) and pS (· | xi ) for routing.

Setup: We use expected reward, defined in Eq 10, as our main evaluation metric. For reward
prediction in experiments with variable model size, we use the smaller pW as the base LLM. That
is, we train using the hidden states of pW or perform LoRA fine-tuning of pW . This ensures that
computational overhead during inference is minimal, and pS does not even have to be called at all
for some queries. The compute budget B is the fraction of the total queries that can be routed to pS .
For example, B = 0.7 allows routing 70% of the queries to pS .


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Allocation of compute at different budgets. The “Easy”, “Medium”, and “Hard” cat-
egories are obtained by binning queries according to their predicted success probability. In the
low-budget regime, the majority of the budget is allocated to easy and medium queries; as budget
increases, it is primarily allocated to hard queries.


Results: Figure 5 shows that for both experiments, the learned predictor effectively routes the more
challenging queries to the stronger model, while simpler queries are handled by the weaker model.
This leads to substantial compute savings without a significant loss in overall performance. For
example, in Value augmentation, we achieve up to a 25-40% reduction in calls to the more expensive
decoding scheme while maintaining similar levels of reward.
Strikingly, for some budgets, our routing scheme actually outperforms the strong decoder—because
the weak decoder sometimes outperforms the strong one, routing can achieve better overall perfor-
mance. Our reward predictor learns and exploits this pattern.

4.3   A NALYSIS

H OW DO THE LEARNED MARGINAL REWARD PREDICTORS PERFORM ?
So far, we have seen that our learned marginal reward predictors can be used effectively in adaptive
compute allocation. However, we also evaluate their performance independently of the adaptive
compute allocation. To this end, we introduce three evaluation metrics:

      1. Avg. (Average Loss): The empirical    loss when the prediction for every query is the average
                                ¯ = 1 P ∆i . In this case, the model predicts the same marginal
         marginal reward, i.e., ∆      N    i
         reward for each input. If the representations of the language model do not carry any mean-
         ingful information, we expect the performance to approximately equal this average loss.
      2. Opt.∗ (Oracle Loss): The loss that a perfect predictor would achieve. Since we use soft
         labels rather than binary (0-1) labels, the minimum possible loss is a positive value.
      3. Acc. (Accuracy): The accuracy of predictions if the median of ∆ values is used as a
         threshold. That is, if ∆i > median, the label for that query is 1, and otherwise 0. The
         accuracy of a random predictor would 50%.

Table 1 summarizes the results. In all cases, the          Setting                Ours   Avg.   Opt.∗   Acc
achieved loss is lower than the baseline, indi-            Code                   0.33   0.58   0.20    74%
cating that the queries contain meaningful sig-
                                                           Math                   0.48   0.69   0.34    84%
nals about the model’s response distributions.
                                                           Chat (Model routing)   0.64   0.67   0.58    72%
In routing, the test loss is closer to the baseline,
                                                           Chat (VAS routing)     0.55   0.57   0.51    72%
which can be attributed to the low entropy in
the reward distribution (Figure 5). Across all
                                                       Table 1: Learned predictors achieve lower loss
settings, accuracy exceeds 70%, showing that
                                                       than fixed baselines (Avg.), approach optimal val-
difficulty is predictable but highlighting scope
                                                       ues (Min.), and accurately discriminate queries of
for improvement. In Appendices C and D, we
                                                       above- and below-median difficulty (Acc.).
test how our predictors generalize to different
data distributions and decoding methods.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H OW DOES ALLOCATION VARY WITH PREDICTED DIFFICULTY ?
Having established the performance benefits of adaptive allocation, we now explore what the dis-
tribution of compute budget for different marginal reward predictions looks like. To investigate
this, we focus on the Code and Math domains, where allocation is performed using λx , the success
probability of a query. We stratify the predicted success probabilities into three evenly-sized bins
according to their predicted success probability.
Figure 6 illustrates how the compute allocation changes across bins as the budget increases. At
the lowest budget, the majority of the allocation goes to queries predicted to be easy or medium in
difficulty. At the highest compute budget, by contrast, most of the compute is allocated to the hard
bin. This shift can be understood intuitively: easy-to-moderate queries typically require only a few
samples to solve, beyond which the marginal gain of additional samples decays rapidly. In contrast,
for queries with low success probabilities, the marginal gain remains high even with a large number
of samples and decays extremely slowly. Finally, the distinct allocation patterns between the two
domains highlight how underlying difficulty distributions significantly impact allocation strategies.

5   R ELATED W ORK
Decoding Procedures in LLMs. There has been extensive research into utilizing different decod-
ing schemes to enhance LLM capabilities, usually by expending inference-time compute. One of
the most straightforward approaches is best-of-k sampling, where k different model responses are
generated per query, and the final model output is selected using a reward model (Gao et al., 2023;
Beirami et al., 2024), majority voting (Wang et al., 2023), or verifiers (Li et al., 2022). Another
line of work has shown that allowing LLMs to generate intermediate “reasoning” steps, or “chain-
of-thoughts” (CoTs) can significantly improve their final answer (Wei et al., 2022; Nye et al., 2021;
Zhou et al., 2023). Extending this, some recent works have focused on training models to generate
thought tokens, enabling improved reasoning with longer generations (Zelikman et al., 2024; Goyal
et al., 2023). However, while this can boost performance, it incurs additional computational costs
due to the need to decode (potentially many) reasoning tokens. LLM decoding can also be framed
as sampling from a tree of possible sequences, inspiring research that uses inference-time compute
to search through this tree (Yao et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Han et al., 2024).
Adaptive Computation Time in NN. Several works explored the idea of learning how to adapt
inference-time compute in neural networks (Graves, 2016; Dehghani et al., 2019; Banino et al.,
2021). These works focus on networks with recurring components, where the decision is the number
of times to pass the input through these components. Our work, however, is architecture-agnostic
and focuses on adaptively selecting a decoding procedure. A recent line of works has demonstrated
the compute-optimal inference can outperform simply using larger models (Snell et al., 2024; Wu
et al., 2024). Here, we show how to realize these improvements in practice using learned difficulty
predictors. Concurrent to our work, Manvi et al. (2024) demonstrated that language models can
self-assess their response quality, enabling adaptive compute allocation.

6   C ONCLUSION
We have introduced an approach for adaptively scaling test-time computation by predicting which
queries would benefit the most from additional computation. We first showed that it is possible
to learn lightweight models that predict marginal rewards on top of pre-trained LMs—indicating
that LMs encode usable information about the reward distribution of their responses to inputs. We
then presented an allocation algorithm that adaptively allocates computation to queries. Results in
programming, mathematics, and chat show our approach gives significant reductions in computation
at a target level of output quality, or improvements in quality given a fixed computation budget.
Limitations: In this work, we assumed that we have a training dataset of reasonable size (> 3K
queries) to train our marginal reward probe. We also assumed access to a verifier in the Math
experiments. However, such verifiers will generally not be available, and using specialized reward
models might be the more practical implementation of our method.
Future Work: The gap between our performance and the oracle indicates potential for improvement
in marginal reward prediction. This could be addressed by exploring more advanced prediction
models or by allocating additional inference-time computation for better marginal reward estimation.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab and the National Science Foundation
and Intel under grants IIS-2212310 and CCF-2217064. Jacob Andreas is supported by a Sloan
fellowship; Andi Peng is supported by the NSF GRFP and Open Philanthropy; and Idan Shenfeld is
supported by the Qualcomm Innovation Fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022.
Andrea Banino, Jan Balaguer, and Charles Blundell. Pondernet: Learning to ponder. In 8th ICML
  Workshop on Automated Machine Learning (AutoML), 2021.
Ahmad Beirami, Alekh Agarwal, Jonathan Berant, Alexander D’Amour, Jacob Eisenstein, Chirag
  Nagpal, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Theoretical guarantees on the best-of-n alignment policy.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01879, 2024.
Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V Le, Christopher Ré, and
  Azalia Mirhoseini. Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated sampling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21787, 2024.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
  solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Mostafa Dehghani, Stephan Gouws, Oriol Vinyals, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Lukasz Kaiser. Universal
 transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving fac-
  tuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. In Forty-first International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023.
Sachin Goyal, Ziwei Ji, Ankit Singh Rawat, Aditya Krishna Menon, Sanjiv Kumar, and Vaishnavh
  Nagarajan. Think before you speak: Training language models with pause tokens. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.02226, 2023.
Alex Graves. Adaptive computation time for recurrent neural networks.              arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1603.08983, 2016.
Seungwook Han, Idan Shenfeld, Akash Srivastava, Yoon Kim, and Pulkit Agrawal. Value
  augmented sampling for language model alignment and personalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.06639, 2024.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn
  Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the MATH dataset.
  In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
  Track (Round 2), 2021.
Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Athul Paul Jacob, Yikang Shen, Gabriele Farina, and Jacob Andreas. The consensus game: Lan-
  guage model generation via equilibrium search. In The Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2024.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.
Jia Li, Edward Beeching, Lewis Tunstall, Ben Lipkin, Roman Soletskyi, Shengyi Costa
   Huang, Kashif Rasul, Longhui Yu, Albert Jiang, Ziju Shen, Zihan Qin, Bin Dong,
   Li Zhou, Yann Fleureau, Guillaume Lample, and Stanislas Polu. Numinamath. [https:
   //huggingface.co/AI-MO/NuminaMath-CoT](https://github.com/project-numina/
   aimo-progress-prize/blob/main/report/numina dataset.pdf), 2024.
Rongao Li, Jie Fu, Bo-Wen Zhang, Tao Huang, Zhihong Sun, Chen Lyu, Guang Liu, Zhi Jin, and
  Ge Li. Taco: Topics in algorithmic code generation dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14852,
  2023.
Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation
  with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.
Jiacheng Liu, Andrew Cohen, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Yejin Choi, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Asli
   Celikyilmaz. Don’t throw away your value model! generating more preferable text with value-
   guided monte-carlo tree search decoding. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.
Ziqin Luo, Haixia Han, Haokun Zhao, Guochao Jiang, Chengyu Du, Tingyun Li, Jiaqing Liang,
  Deqing Yang, and Yanghua Xiao. Sed: Self-evaluation decoding enhances large language models
  for better generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16552, 2024.
Rohin Manvi, Anikait Singh, and Stefano Ermon. Adaptive inference-time compute: Llms can
  predict if they can do better, even mid-generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02725, 2024.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin,
 David Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al. Show
 your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2112.00114, 2021.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally
  can be more effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314, 2024.
Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shreya
  Pathak, Laurent Sifre, Morgane Rivière, Mihir Sanjay Kale, Juliette Love, et al. Gemma: Open
  models based on gemini research and technology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08295, 2024.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Yangzhen Wu, Zhiqing Sun, Shanda Li, Sean Welleck, and Yiming Yang. Inference scaling laws:
  An empirical analysis of compute-optimal inference for problem-solving with language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00724, 2024.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Eric Zelikman, Georges Harik, Yijia Shao, Varuna Jayasiri, Nick Haber, and Noah D Goodman.
  Quiet-star: Language models can teach themselves to think before speaking. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.09629, 2024.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Tianle Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yong-
  hao Zhuang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Eric Xing, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Hao Zhang.
  LMSYS-chat-1m: A large-scale real-world LLM conversation dataset. In The Twelfth Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
  mans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, and Ed H. Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables
  complex reasoning in large language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

A.1   M ATH

Dataset: We use a subset of the Numina-COT Dataset (Li et al., 2024),which contains math prob-
lems from various sources. We filtered out multiple choice questions from the dataset. Our final
dataset contained 15K training samples, 2K validation samples and 3K test samples.
Model: We use Mistral AI’s Mathstral-7B model, which is specialized for mathematical tasks,
and is based on Mistral 7B (Jiang et al., 2023). We use this model directly off-the-shelf and do not
perform any fine-tuning.
Verification Pipeline: We used a 2 stage pipeline to verify the correctness of an answer. The first
stage used the evaluation framework of Hendrycks et al. (2021). This framework expects the LM to
enclose its answer within boxed {} and then runs an automated evaluation of the extracted answer
against the ground truth answer. However, we found that the automated evaluation had a high false
negative rate for various reasons:

      1. Answer not enclosed within boxed {}: For some queries, the model had the right answer
         but did not enclose it inside boxed {}. This led to the responses being classified as incorrect.
      2. Errors in Checking: We found that due to errors in checking, many correct responses
         were marked incorrect. Some examples of false negatives are:
         1. Model Response: frac{25}{2} ; Ground Truth Answer: 12.5
         2. Model Response: x=2 ; Ground Truth Answer: 2
         3. Model Response: -0.5 ; Ground Truth Answer: -frac{1}{2}
         4. Model Response: 11.00 ; Ground Truth Answer: 11

These errors were particularly harmful for the training of our marginal reward predictors. because
queries predicted to be (and empirically) easy were being marked incorrect. Furthermore, our online
allocation exacerbated this issue, by assigning very few samples to such queries.
To address this issue, we introduced a second stage in the verification pipeline that used a LM as
an evaluator. Because stage 1 does not have false positives, we only used stage 2 for responses that
were marked incorrect in stage 1. We used Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct with temperature set to 0.1 as our
evaluation LM, and prompted it as follows:

    You are a math evaluation agent. You are tasked with evaluating if the final answer from
    an excerpt of the response matches the given gold truth answer. The format or units of
    the response and gold truth answer might be different. However, you must evaluate if the
    answers are numerically equivalent/identical. Be extra careful when evaluating fractions,
    they must simplify to the same value Your response should be a single word followed by an
    explanation. ’YES’ if the answers are equivalent and ’NO’ if they are not.
    Examples:
    A) 7% and 7 are equivalent
    B) frac{10}{2} and frac {20}{4} are equivalent.
    C) 3,5,7 and 3,8,9 are not equivalent.

    Ground Truth Answer: < >
    Response: < >

Note that if the model’s response had an answer enclosed inside boxed {}, we only provided that
extracted answer. If this was not the case, then we provided the model’s entire response to the LLM
evaluation agent.
The 2-stage pipeline helped us significantly improve the evaluation process, as well as stabilize
the training process for our marginal reward predictors. However, this pipeline is not without
flaws, as we did notice examples a small number of false positives in the second stage.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Training: We generate 128 responses for every query (temperature=0.7) and label them using the
verification pipeline. We use the labels to compute the empirical mean success probabilities λi . The
                                               ˆ
estimated λi are then used as targets to train ∆(x; θ), the marginal reward predictor.
Evaluation: Our adaptive allocation algorithms are assigned a maximum budget of Bmax = 128
samples per query (that is the allocation for any query is capped at 128 samples).


A.2   C ODE

Dataset: We use a subset of TACO, a dataset focused on algorithmic code generation with problems
sourced from various programming contest platforms such as CodeChef, CodeForces and Hacker-
Rank. Our primary reason for selecting TACO was the availability of test cases for most problems,
which is required to train a predictor of success probability. We filtered out problems that did not
have a single unit test. We also filtered out problems that were sourced from geeksforgeeks and
aizu, as the official evaluation framework did not support those. Our final dataset consisted of 10K
training samples, 1K validation samples and 1K test samples. Note that these three splits in our
experiments were extracted from official TACO training set. This is because the TACO test set has
a very different distribution of problem difficulties, while our method aims to produce accurate in-
distribution allocation of computation. We believe producing distributionally robust predictors is an
important topic for future work.
Model: We used the Starcoder-15B model, which was finetuned and open-sourced by the authors
of Taco.
Training: We generate 100 responses for every query (temperature=0.7) and label them using the
unit-test verifier to obtain the mean success probability λi . The estimated λi are then used as targets
         ˆ
to train ∆(x;   θ), the marginal reward predictor.
Evaluation: We used the official evaluation framework released by the creators of the TACO dataset.
A response was considered a success if it passed all available test cases. Our adaptive allocation
algorithms are assigned a maximum budget of Bmax = 100 samples per query (that is the allocation
for any query was capped at 100 samples).


A.3   C HAT

Dataset: We use a subset of the LMSYS-Chat dataset, which contains one million real-world con-
versations with 25 LLMs. We filter the dataset to only select samples in English and with less than
10 turns. We also filter out samples which were labelled redacted, as these were often artificially
modified. Our final dataset consisted of 50K training samples and 5K test samples.
Tranches Variant: The tranches experiment uses a subset of 20% from the full test set. To create
this subset, we first generated multiple responses for each query in the test set and labeled them
using the reward model. We then calculated the reward variance for each query and selected only
those queries that fall in the lowest 10% or highest 10% of variance. In essence, the tranches test
set is composed of queries with the lowest and highest variance in rewards, representing the two
extremes. The main goal of the tranches experiment is to evaluate our method when the distribution
of queries differs from typical datasets, which are often collected in somewhat controlled settings.
Such datasets may not fully capture the true diversity of user queries that are encountered by general
chatbots. While understanding the true distribution of user queries is beyond the scope of this work,
the tranches experiment simulates a more extreme distribution to provide performance insights.
Model: We used the Gemma-2B-it model. We did not perform any fine-tuning.
Training: We generate 8 responses (temperature=0.7) for every query and label them using
NCSOFT/Llama-3-OffsetBias-RM-8B, which was ranked amongst the top 10 on RewardBench
at the time of writing. We then use bootstrapping to approximate ∆i . The approximated ∆i are
                              ˆ
then used as targets to train ∆(x; θ), the marginal reward predictor.
Evaluation: We evaluate using the same reward model as above. Our adaptive allocation algorithm
was assigned a maximum budget of Bmax = 8 samples per query.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4   ROUTING : M ODEL S IZE

Dataset: We used the same LLMSYS-Chat dataset that we used for the best-of-k chat experiments.
Model: Our weak model was Gemma-2B-it. Our strong model was Gemma-7B-it. We did not
perform any fine-tuning on either of these models.
Training: We generate 8 responses (at a temperature of 0.7) for every query with both the models.
We labelled them using NCSOFT/Llama-3-OffsetBias-RM-8B as the reward model. Supervision
for the reward model was then computed using a Monte Carlo estimate of:
                     (pS ≻ pW |x) = Ey1 ∼pS ,y2 ∼pW [σ(r(x, y1 ) − r(x, y2 ))]               (11)

Evaluation: The adaptive allocation procedure uses the predictions of the marginal reward predic-
tor to route the top B th percentile of queries to pS . We evaluated using the same reward model
mentioned above.

A.5   ROUTING : VAS

Dataset: We use the harmless subset of the popular Anthropic-HH dataset. We sampled 8K samples
randomly from the train set, and 400 samples from the test set.
Model: Our weak decoding procedure was a fine-tuned Llama-7B model. Our strong decoding
procedure used an additional value function that was also based on the Llama-7B model.
Training: We generated 4 responses per query. The preference probability was then computed using
a Monte Carlo estimate of:
                    p(pS ≻ pW |x) = Ey1 ∼pS ,y2 ∼pW [σ(r(x, y1 ) − r(x, y2 ))]               (12)
We labelled the responses using OpenAssistant/reward-model-deberta-v3-large-v2 as the reward
model.
Evaluation: Our adaptive allocation used the predictions of the marginal reward predictor to route
the top B th percentile of queries to pS . We evaluated using the same reward model mentioned
above.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Results on MATH and GSM8K. We evaluate the MATH dataset using our adaptive best-
of-k approach and the GSM8K dataset using our routing approach. The results show that adaptive
compute allocation improves performance on both benchmarks, demonstrating the ability of our
learned predictor to effectively assess difficulty and the advantages of allocating compute adaptively.


B     A DDITIONAL B ENCHMARK R ESULTS
B.1   S ETUP

MATH We implement our adaptive best-of-k pipeline on the popular MATH bench-
mark (Hendrycks et al., 2021). Similar to our Numina Math experiments, we use Mistral AI’s
Mathstral-7B model. We use this model directly off-the-shelf and do not perform any fine-tuning.
To train our probe, we generate 64 responses per example for a total of 7, 500 training examples from
the MATH dataset. We employed the 2-stage verifier pipeline used in the Numina experiments, de-
scribed in Appendix A.1. We used the LoRA variant to learn the marginal rewards.

GSM8K We implement our routing setting on the popular GSM8K dataset (Cobbe et al., 2021).
We use the instruction-tuned Gemma-2b-it and Gemma-7b-it models as pW and pS . We use these
models directly off-the-shelf and do not perform any fine-tuning. We use a simple binary reward
structure, where a correct answer is given a reward of 1. To train our probe, we generate 16 responses
per example for a total of 7, 500 training examples from the GSM8K dataset. We perform LoRA
fine-tuning of pW to learn the probe. As all problems in GSM8K have numerical answers, so we
simply extract the last 2 numbers in the model’s answer and classify an answer as correct if either
of them match the ground truth answer.

B.2   R ESULTS

Figure 7 illustrates the results for both benchmarks, highlighting the effectiveness of adaptive com-
pute allocation in both scenarios. In GSM8K, adaptive routing improves absolute success rates by
up to 5% compared to non-adaptive approaches while using same amount of compute. Similarly, in
MATH, while the performance gains are more modest, adaptive compute allocation achieves com-
parable success rates while reducing compute usage by up to 2× compared to the baseline best-of-k
approach. This demonstrates that our learned predictor effectively captures query difficulty and
facilitates efficient compute allocation.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Generalization results on MATH and Anthropic HH. We evaluate the generalization of
our probes trained on Numina and LMSYS by applying them to MATH and HH, respectively. The
results demonstrate that our probes maintain high effectiveness for adaptive compute allocation, even
when used outside their training data distribution. Remarkably, the Numina probe closely matches
the performance of the MATH probe, suggesting that it is able to capture general features that are
applicable across different mathematical datasets.


C     G ENERALIZATION TO D IFFERENT DATA D ISTRIBUTIONS
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of our learned marginal reward predictors (probes)
on adaptively allocating compute on queries outside their training distribution. Specifically, we
conduct two generalization experiments: a) applying the probe trained on Numina dataset to the
MATH dataset and b) applying the probe trained on LMSYS to Anthropic HH.

C.1   S ETUP

Numina → MATH We use our best-of-k probe, which was trained on the Numina dataset, and
apply it to the MATH dataset. Although the original Numina dataset includes MATH as a subset,
we excluded all examples sourced from MATH for this experiment.

LMSYS → Anthropic HH We use our routing probe, which was trained on the LMSYS dataset
and apply it to the Anthropic HH dataset (Bai et al., 2022). While LMSYS is a dataset containing
real-world user conversations collected in the wild, data in HH was collected by instructing vetted
master-qualified US-based MTurk workers with specific instructions. Thus, these datasets have
significant differences in their user composition. We use the probe’s predictions to route queries
between Gemma-2b-it (pW ) and Gemma-7b-it (pS ). Thus, while the same decoding procedures
are used for both datasets, the probe we use has only been trained on the LMSYS dataset.

C.2   R ESULTS

Figure 8 presents the results for our dataset generalization experiments. Our probes remain effective
for adaptive compute allocation even when applied to data outside their training distribution, demon-
strating strong generalization capabilities. Notably, the Numina probe matches the performance of
the probe trained on MATH, suggesting that it successfully extracts general features related to math-
ematical problem difficulty from the language model’s representations, independent of the dataset.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Results of applying best-of-k probe to Routing. We use the probe trained for the best of-
k decoding method and apply it to routing. The results indicate that while there is some reduction in
performance compared to a probe specifically trained for routing, the best-of-k probe demonstrates
effective generalization and is still able to deliver substantial gains.


D     G ENERALIZATION TO DIFFERENT DECODING METHODS
Our marginal reward predictors are typically trained for a specific decoding procedure. In this sec-
tion, we explore whether these predictors can generalize to decoding procedures they were not ex-
plicitly trained on. Specifically, we conduct two generalization experiments: (a) evaluating a probe
trained on the best-of-k approach when applied to routing, and (b) assessing the generalization of a
probe trained on a specific decoding temperature on MATH across different decoding temperatures.

D.1   M OTIVATION

1. Applying BoK probe to Routing Through this experiment, we aim to understand if our adap-
tive best-of-k (BoK) probe can be applied to routing. Intuitively, we want to extract a proxy of query
difficulty from our BoK probe and use that for routing. In the best-of-k setting, queries that have
higher difficulty benefit from additional search (more samples). The difficult queries should thus
have a high difference between the expected reward of best-of-k and the reward of taking a single
sample. This range is given by:
                       Difficulty(x) ≈ Ey∼BoK [r(x, y)] − Ey∼p(·|x) [r(x, y)]                    (13)

Using this, we can now approximate the preference probability (similar to Eqn. 8) of using the
stronger decoding procedure pS as:
                                 p(pS ≻ pW |x) ≈ σ(Difficulty(x))                                (14)

2. Generalization across temperatures The targets for training our probes are generally obtained
by using decoding with a fixed temperature (generally 0.7). In this experiment, we want to test the
generalization of our probe and the effectiveness of adaptive compute allocation if different decoding
temperatures are used.

D.2   S ETUP

1. Applying BoK probe to Routing We use the probe trained for the adaptive best-of-k ex-
periments on LMSYS, (Section 4.1) and apply it routing on LMSYS. We use the instruction-tuned
Gemma-2b-it and Gemma-7b-it models as pW and pS . We compare performance against the probe
that was trained specifically for routing in Section 4.2.

2. Generalization across temperatures We evaluate the performance of our probe on the MATH
dataset, focusing on its adaptability across different temperature settings. The probe is trained at


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Results on decoding with different temperatures. We assess the performance of our
probe, trained at a decoding temperature of 0.7, across various decoding temperatures. Despite being
trained for a specific temperature, the probe remains effective across varying decoding temperatures.
Intuitively, query difficulty is an intrinsic property and should be independent (or only weakly de-
pendent) on the decoding temperature.


a temperature of 0.7, but we evaluate its generalization on two temperatures: 0.2 and 1. For each
temperature, we perform decoding to estimate the empirical ground truth success probabilities and
then test performance effectiveness of adaptive compute allocation. Since the scaling curves for
Oracle and Best-of-K are temperature-sensitive, we present three separate plots to illustrate the
results for each temperature.

D.3   R ESULTS

Figures 9 and 10 present the results for the BoK-routing and temperature experiments respectively.
We find that our BoK probe applied to routing continues to deliver significant gains compared to
non-adaptive baselines. However, we do observe a drop in performance when compared to the
probe that has been trained specifically for routing, indicating the existence of some generalization
gap. In the temperature generalization experiments, we find that our probe remains effective across
multiple decoding temperatures. These results suggest that our probes effectively capture a notion
of query difficulty that shows some degree of consistency for different decoding procedures i.e., a
query considered difficult for procedure A is also likely to be considered difficult for procedure B.


                                                 20
