Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D ON ’ T S TOP M E N OW:
E MBEDDING BASED S CHEDULING FOR LLM S
 Rana Shahout                Eran Malach                  Chunwei Liu             Weifan Jiang
 Harvard University          Harvard University           MIT                     Harvard University

 Minlan Yu                                        Michael Mitzenmacher
 Harvard University                               Harvard University



                                            A BSTRACT
        Efficient scheduling is crucial for interactive Large Language Model (LLM) ap-
        plications, where low request completion time directly impacts user engagement.
        Size-based scheduling algorithms like Shortest Remaining Process Time (SRPT)
        aim to reduce average request completion time by leveraging known or estimated
        request sizes and allowing preemption by incoming requests with shorter service
        times. However, two main challenges arise when applying size-based schedul-
        ing to LLM systems. First, accurately predicting output lengths from prompts is
        challenging and often resource-intensive, making it impractical for many systems.
        As a result, the state-of-the-art LLM systems default to first-come, first-served
        scheduling, which can lead to head-of-line blocking and reduced system effi-
        ciency. Second, preemption introduces extra memory overhead to LLM systems
        as they must maintain intermediate states for unfinished (preempted) requests.
        In this paper, we propose T RAIL, a novel approach that improves the response
        time in LLM inference through two key contributions: (1) obtain output predic-
        tions from the target LLM itself. After generating each output token, we recycle
        the embedding of its internal structure as input for a lightweight classifier that pre-
        dicts the remaining length for each running request. (2) prediction-based SRPT
        variant with limited preemption designed to account for memory overhead in LLM
        systems. This variant allows preemption early in request execution when memory
        consumption is low but restricts preemption as requests approach completion to
        optimize resource utilization. On the theoretical side, we derive a closed-form
        formula for this SRPT variant in an M/G/1 queue model, which demonstrates its
        potential value. In our system, we implement this preemption policy alongside
        our embedding-based prediction method. Our refined predictions from layer em-
        beddings achieve 2.66x lower mean absolute error compared to BERT predictions
        from sequence prompts. T RAIL achieves 1.66x to 2.01x lower mean latency on the
        Alpaca dataset and 1.76x to 24.07x lower mean time to the first token compared
        to the state-of-the-art serving system.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have sparked a new generation of interactive AI
applications. OpenAI’s ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022) exemplifies this trend, facilitating conversational
interaction across diverse tasks. The interactive nature of these applications requires low request
completion time to ensure user engagement. Users expect near-instant responses, making efficient
inference serving critical for LLM-based interactive AI applications.
LLM inference requests exhibit a distinct autoregressive pattern comprising multiple iterations in
which each output token is appended to the input to generate the next token. Orca (Yu et al., 2022)
and vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023) are state-of-the-art solutions for LLM inference systems. These
systems use iteration-level scheduling, which allows new requests to be added or completed requests


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to be removed at the end of each iteration, providing greater flexibility in managing the processing
batch than request-level scheduling. However, these works still process requests using a first-come-
first-served (FCFS) policy, leading to head-of-line blocking (Kaffes et al., 2019) under high load.
This problem is particularly severe for LLM inference, where many short requests may wait for
other long requests to finish.
Size-based scheduling aims to reduce request completion time by leveraging known or estimated
request sizes. For LLM requests, the execution time depends on both input and output lengths, with
the latter being unknown and potentially variable. Preemption allows for dynamic scheduling: when
one scheduled request finishes generating an output token, we can decide whether to continue this
request or preempt it with another (newly arrived) request. The Shortest Remaining Process Time
(SRPT) policy is an example of preemption scheduling. However, preemption here introduces ex-
tra memory overhead to maintain an intermediate state for started but unfinished requests. LLMs
maintain a key-value (KV) cache for each Transformer layer to store the intermediate state. In pre-
emption scheduling policies, the cache must keep the intermediate state for all started but unfinished
requests in the waiting queue, which may cause memory overflow, given the large size of LLMs and
the limited memory capacity of GPUs. (Non-preemptive policies, e.g. FCFS, do not face this issue,
as there are no unfinished requests in the waiting queue.)
Recent works propose methods to predict request sizes. S 3 (Jin et al., 2023) fine-tunes a BERT
model (Sanh, 2019) to predict output sequence lengths from input prompts. While this model is
lightweight in resources, its accuracy diminishes for requests with varying execution times. Zheng
et al. (Zheng et al., 2024) employ a separate, lighter LLM to predict output lengths before schedul-
ing, achieving higher precision than the BERT model. However, this approach consumes more
resources, raising questions about its efficiency and cost-effectiveness in practical applications. An-
other method proposed by the same work is Perception in Advance, where models are asked to
predict the length of the responses they are about to generate. However, this approach is limited
by potential dependencies between the prediction and the generated output, which may affect the
quality of the output.
In this paper, we introduce T RAIL (Token Response and Embedding Adaptive Inference Layer), a
novel approach that improves the response time in LLM inference through two key contributions:
(1) iteration-level predictions for request lengths with low overhead and high accuracy to enable
size-based scheduling, and (2) preemption scheduling at token granularity that accounts for memory
overhead. For predictions, our approach takes advantage of the autoregressive nature of LLM output
generation to predict the output size and facilitate the prediction of request length at the granularity of
individual tokens. We begin with an initial prediction based on the prompt and iteratively refine these
predictions as the sequence progresses by innovatively using LLM layer embeddings. Specifically,
we “recycle” the embedding from intermediate Transformer layers of the LLM, feeding them into a
lightweight linear classifier to predict the remaining sequence length. This method, which involves
analyzing the outputs of the internal model layer by using them as input for a separate machine
learning predictor, is commonly referred to as probing (Belinkov, 2022; Hewitt & Liang, 2019;
Hewitt & Manning, 2019). This approach combines the advantages of LLM-based prediction with
computational efficiency, eliminating the need for an additional LLM dedicated solely to length
predictions. To address the memory constraints for preemption scheduling, T RAIL limits the number
of times each request can be preempted and introduces SRPT with limited preemptions. Early in
the request’s execution, preemption is allowed since its KV cache memory usage is small, making
preemption less costly in terms of memory. However, as the request progresses and its memory
consumption in the KV cache grows, preemption becomes more expensive. To manage this, we turn
the preemption off in the later stages of the request to avoid a heavy memory overhead.
Our contributions in this paper are (1) an output length prediction framework using recycled LLM
embeddings, with dynamic refinement at each iteration. In our experiments, refined predictions
from layer embeddings achieve 2.66x lower mean absolute error compared to BERT predictions
from sequence prompts (2) a proposed variant of Shortest Remaining Processing Time using these
predictions with limited preemptions (3) a derivation of a closed-form formula for this SRPT vari-
ant in an M/G/1 queue model. We also show via experiments that our prediction and scheduling
approaches result in mitigating head-of-line blocking. When T RAIL is integrated with a state-of-
the-art LLM system, it has 1.66x to 2.01x lower mean latency and 1.76x to 24.07x lower mean time
to first token compared to the state-of-the-art serving system tested with the Alpaca dataset. Our



                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     Scheduling                               iteration-level
                                                                                                    LLM
                                  𝑅𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡!


                                             Initial Output length
                                  𝑅𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡%                                                         𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟"
                                                                                                             Probing


                                                   Prediction
                                                                            Scheduler              𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟#
                                  Requests                                                                     Linear
                                    pool                                      Token-


                                                                                                    …
                                                                                                              Classifier
                                                                            resolution             𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟$

                                  𝑅𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡"                                                         𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟!

                                                                                  Refined Output Length Prediction


Figure 1: T RAIL architecture. The system (1) initially orders requests using a BERT model, (2)
schedules requests using a modified SPRPT with limited preemption, and (3) refines predictions
during token generation using embeddings from the LLM’s internal layers. At every iteration, steps
2 and 3 are repeated (represented as red dashed lines), which allows preemption at iteration-level
granularity and refined predictions. We focus on identifying the LLM layer that best predicts output
length rather than using multi-layer embeddings (i = j = 11).


T RAIL approach has the potential to significantly enhance LLM inference efficiency and reliability,
paving the way for more adaptive LLM serving systems.

2    BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
Transformer-Based Generative Models and Key-Value Cache. At each step, a Transformer
model predicts the next most likely token based on the sequence of tokens generated so far. A
generative model of length n must perform n iterations, with each token passing through multiple
transformer layers composed of self-attention and feed-forward networks.
In a typical iteration at the i-th step, the model computes over all previously generated tokens
(t0 , t1 , . . . , ti−1 ) via self-attention. This can be expressed as:
                                                              qi · K ⊤

                                            hout = softmax      √        ·V
                                                                   dh
Where qi is the query vector representing the hidden state of the current token ti , and K, V ∈ Ri×dh
are matrices representing the keys and values derived from all previous tokens.
To enhance efficiency, LLMs cache the key and value matrices (KV cache) throughout the sequence
generation process, eliminating the need to recompute them at every iteration. This caching mech-
anism significantly reduces computation time but requires substantial memory proportional to the
number of layers and hidden dimensions. As more tokens are generated, the cache stores informa-
tion from all previously generated tokens, and its memory demand grows linearly with the length of
the sequence. This makes the memory consumption of the KV cache considerable, especially for
long sequences. For example, in the GPT-3 175B model, a single request with a sequence length of
512 tokens requires at least 2.3 GB of memory to store the key-value pairs. The limited capacity of
GPU memory restricts the size of the KV cache and poses a challenge to efficiently implementing
preemptive scheduling policies.

Iteration-Level Scheduling. Iteration-level scheduling differs from the conventional request-level
scheduling approach. In request-level scheduling, the system processes a batch of requests to com-
pletion, forcing requests that finish earlier to wait until the entire batch completes, while new re-
quests must remain in a queue until the next batch begins. In contrast, iteration-level scheduling (Yu
et al., 2022) offers flexibility by processing only a single iteration (i.e., generating one output token)
for each request in the batch. After each iteration, the scheduler is called, and the completed requests
can exit the batch while newly arrived requests can be added, allowing dynamic batch adjustments.
However, the batch size remains constrained by the GPU memory capacity.

3    M ETHOD
T RAIL leverages the autoregressive nature of LLM inference and iteration-level scheduling, em-
ploying two primary strategies to reduce LLM inference response time: iteration-level prediction


                                                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        Prediction w/ per-layer embeddings
                                150
                                100


                          MAE
                                 50
                                  0 0      5     10 15 20          25     30
                                                   Layer index
         Figure 2: MAE for length prediction using embeddings vs. layer (1,000 prompts).


and preemption that accounts for memory overhead. T RAIL uses low-overhead, high-accuracy pre-
dictions by utilizing the intermediate layer embeddings of the LLM itself to predict output length
while implementing token-granular, limited preemption scheduling to account for the memory over-
head associated with preemption. Figure 1 illustrates the T RAIL architecture. Users submit requests
to the request pool. T RAIL initially orders requests using a BERT model based on input prompts
(Step 1). This method relies exclusively on the prompt using BERT suggested in (Jin et al., 2023).
Given the predictions of the output lengths, the scheduler implements a variant of the Shortest Pre-
dicted Remaining Process Time (SPRPT) with limited preemption (Step 2, Section 3.3). Although
SPRPT is traditionally designed for single-server, sequential scheduling, we adapt it to handle multi-
ple concurrent requests while still prioritizing those with the shortest predicted remaining time. The
number of requests that can be scheduled simultaneously is limited by the available GPU memory.
As the LLM generates each output token, we refine predictions using embeddings from the LLM’s
intermediate layers. A linear classifier processes these embeddings and informs the scheduler, which
adjusts based on updated predictions (Section 3.1).

3.1   R EFINED O UTPUT L ENGTH P REDICTION

In this section, we describe our method for estimating the prompt length based on intermediate layer
embeddings in the LLM.
Problem Definition. Denote by u(1) , . . . , u(N ) ∈ Rd the output of some intermediate layer for
the N output tokens generated by the model (where d is the hidden dimension of the Transformer).
Additionally, we denote by u(0) the embedding of the input (during the prefilling phase), which is
generated by averaging the embeddings of all the input tokens at the given layer. Let B1 , . . . , Bk ⊂
N be a choice of bins for the length prediction, i.e. Bi = {bi , bi +1, . . . , bi+1 −1} for some choice of
bin boundaries b1 < b2 < · · · < bk+1 . We train a linear classifier that, given some embedding u(t) ,
outputs a vector p(t) ∈ [0, 1]k where p(t) (j) indicates the probability that the number of remaining
tokens (i.e., N − t) is in Bj .
Our approach focuses on identifying which LLM layer provides the most accurate predictions for the
output length. One potential extension would be to select multiple layers and estimate the prediction
using either a weighted average of their outputs or training a linear classifier based on embeddings
from several layers. We leave this multi-layer approach for future work. To do so, we have to profile
numerous parameters across all LLM layers for each request.
Using LLama3-8b-instruct as our model and the Alpaca dataset (Taori et al., 2023), our profil-
ing process begins by extracting embedded elements from each layer during the prefilling and de-
coding phases. We profile embeddings across all 32 layers for each token, using 1,000 prompts
from the dataset, and retain the embedding tensors along with the remaining token counts as train-
ing data. The shape of the embedding tensor after the prefilling phase and before decoding is
[1, input token size, 4096], while the embedding tensor for each decoding iteration is [1, 1, 4096].
Predictor architecture. To develop our predictor, we train an MLP using the embeddings from
each layer and evaluate prediction accuracy. We use a neural network model consisting of a fully
connected network with two linear layers. The first layer maps the input embedding to a 512-
dimensional space, followed by a ReLU activation. The second layer outputs predictions for the
number of output tokens by classifying the predicted length into one of k = 10 equal-width bins, rep-


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                         h
                                                                                             512i 512(i+1)
resenting output lengths between 0 and 512 tokens. The i-th bin bi covers the range           10 ,   10          .
For the final bin, b10 , it includes the upper boundary and covers the range [460.8, 512].
The model is trained over 30 epochs with a batch size of 32, using the AdamW optimizer to control
for overfitting. We employ a cosine annealing schedule to reduce the learning rate from 0.01 to 0
gradually. The loss function is CrossEntropyLoss, appropriate for our multi-class classification task.
Here, we present one example of a predictor; our approach can, therefore, be used with any suitable
and efficient learning scheme that yields a predictor. For the first token prediction, we compute the
average of all token embeddings in the prompt, and this averaged embedding serves as input to the
predictor. Preliminary evaluations across all 32 layers (Figure 2) indicate that layers 10-15 provide
the most accurate length predictions.
Focused profiling. Based on this result, we concentrate our profiling on these layers, gathering over
7 million training pairs. Subsequently, we train the predictor, employing smoothing techniques to
improve the accuracy of our length predictions further.
Smoothing. We observe that while the predicted probability vector in each iteration is reasonable,
there can be large variance between iterations. We, therefore, employ Bayesian inference (Särkkä &
Svensson, 2023) to update the probability estimate as new predictions become available, maintain-
ing a more accurate estimate of the probability distribution over time. In the context of Bayesian
inference, the estimate from previous iterations provides a starting point for the current prediction.
After observing the current prediction, the initial estimate is updated to reflect the new information.
This update is done by adjusting the previous estimate based on how well it aligns with the current
prediction and then normalizing it. The updated estimate from this iteration will then be used as the
starting point for the next one.
At each iteration t, the prior is updated because the predicted length may shift between bins over
time. Specifically, let T ∈ [0, 1]k×k represent the transition matrix, where Ti,j denotes the probabil-
ity that a value in bin Bj at iteration t − 1 moves to bin Bi at iteration t. In our case, transitions can
only occur between neighboring bins, specifically from Bi+1 to Bi . We assume that lengths within
each bin are uniformly distributed. Therefore, the diagonal entry Ti,i reflects the probability that the
value remains in the same bin, which is 1 − bin1size , while the off-diagonal entry Ti,i+1 represents
the probability of moving from Bi+1 to Bi , which is bin1size . T is calculated once from bin sizes,
with its structure detailed in Appendix A. The estimated probability q̂ (t) at iteration t is computed
as follows:
                     (0)
      1. Initialize q̂prior = p(0) .
                                                   (t)                (t−1)
      2. At each iteration t, update the prior: q̂prior = T · q̂prior .
                                                              (t)
                                                         q̂         (i)p(t) (i)
      3. Update the current probability: q̂ (t) (i) = P prior
                                                          (t)              (t) (j)
                                                                                     .
                                                         j q̂prior (j)p


The predicted length at iteration t is Lt = i q̂ (t) (i) · mi , where mi is the average length in bin Bi ,
                                            P

namely mi = bi +b2 i+1 = 128(2i+1)
                                5     . This iterative process refines the prior distribution over time.
Figure 3 shows the mean absolute error for predictions from different model layers.

3.2   C OMPUTING O UTPUT L ENGTH P REDICTION P ER I TERATION

There are two approaches to computing predictions based on the embedding extracted from interme-
diate layer(s) (in our case, layer 11) of the LLM. In the first approach, we can compute the prediction
directly on the GPU using the embedding available at the selected layer. While this method avoids
data transfer, it introduces a slowdown in the decoding phase, as both the prediction computation
and the model’s forward pass share the same GPU. In the second approach, we can compute the
prediction on the CPU. For this, we extract the embedding from layer 11 and transfer it to the CPU.
The prediction is then computed in parallel while the LLM processes the remaining layers (in our
case, layers 12-32) on the GPU.
We note that whether we implement the length prediction on the GPU or the CPU, the overhead in
terms of computational cost is minimal. Specifically, the size of the MLP that we train for the length
prediction has around 2.1 million parameters, while the overall Llama model we use has 8 billion


                                                     5
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                       Device  Batch Mean (µs) Std (µs)
                                                                                        CPU      1     0.155       0.0043
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
                        80                                                              CPU     512     9.43        3.75
                                                                                        CPU    1024     6.19        1.46
                        70
                                                                   Input                CPU    2048     5.94        1.09
                        60                                         Refined             CUDA      1     0.087      0.00017
                                                                   BERT                CUDA     512    0.615        0.093
                        50                                                             CUDA    1024    0.497        0.078
                                                                                       CUDA    2048    0.429        0.084
                        40                                                                    LLM Forward Pass
                        30 L10          L11     L12     L13     L14     L15
                                                                                           Mean            101.10 ms
                                                   Layer
                                                                                      Table 1: Mean and standard deviation
      Figure 3: Mean Absolute Error for the pre-                                      of inference time per sample (TPS) for
      dicted length, comparing BERT input em-                                         CPU and CUDA with different batch
      bedding (dashed red), average token embed-                                      sizes, in microseconds (µs). Addition-
      ding without refinement (blue), and with re-                                    ally, the LLM forward pass latency per
      finement (orange), for different layers.                                        token for Meta-LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct
                                                                                      is provided.


      parameters. Since the computation (number of FLOPs) per token is roughly scaled with the number
      of parameters, the overhead of the length prediction is around 0.03%. This overhead becomes even
      more negligible for larger model sizes or when using a smaller MLP for length prediction. Table 1
      shows the mean inference time for length prediction of the two approaches.

       3.3                        S CHEDULING P OLICY

      As background, traditional scheduling typically assumes that request completion times are either
      completely unknown, in which case FCFS is a natural strategy, or completely known in advance,
      allowing strategies such as shortest job1 first (SJF) to minimize average wait time. In many practical
      systems, exact request completion times are unknown. Several studies have explored queueing
      systems with predicted, rather than exact, service times, generally to minimize the average time
      a request spends in the system. Building on previous works, (Mitzenmacher, 2019; Shahout &
      Mitzenmacher, 2024) analyzed the shortest predicted job first (SPJF) and the shortest predicted
      remaining processing time (SPRPT) policies in the context of a single server where only one request
      executes at a time. SPRPT tracks the predicted remaining processing time for each request, allowing
      preemption if a new request arrives with a shorter predicted remaining service time.
      Such previous work, while motivating using predictions, does not take into account the challenge in
      LLM systems that preemptions introduce memory overhead, particularly in managing the key value
      (KV) cache (as explained in Section 2). While preemptions can reduce response time, they increase
      memory consumption, which may ultimately degrade performance due to memory constraints. This
      is because, in LLM systems, when memory is full, we either discard requests from memory and
      recompute them once memory is available, or we swap KV cache entries from the GPU to the
      CPU. Both approaches impact response time, as discarding requires recomputation, and swapping
      interrupts the forward-pass of the model, causing delays for the entire running batch. Intuitively,
      we should limit preemptions to avoid exceeding memory constraints; in particular, we recognize
      that preemptions made earlier in a request’s execution consume fewer resources, while preemptions
      closer to completion should be avoided.
      In T RAIL, given the initial prediction r for a request (which we treat as a number corresponding to
      the middle of its predicted bin), we only allow preemption for the first ⌊c · r⌋ iterations for a fixed
      constant c. This restricts preemption as a request nears completion and takes substantial memory.
      Interestingly, we can analyze a corresponding theoretical model for single-server SPRPT with lim-
      ited preemptions, which we believe is interesting in its own right. While this model does not capture
      the complexity of LLM systems (as it has no notion of memory, and is single-server), we think it
      also provides insight into the potential of limited preemption. Using standard queueing theory as-
                            1
                                The terms job and request are used interchangeably.


                                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


sumptions (M/G/1 queuing system with Poisson arrivals of rate λ < 1 and independent service and
prediction times), we can derive a closed-form expression for the mean response time (Lemma 1).
Specifically, the processing times for each arriving request are independent and drawn based on the
cumulative distribution F (x) with an associated density function f (x). Predictions, independent
             R ∞follow the density function g(x, r), where x is the actual size and r is the predicted
over requests,
size. Thus, r=0 g(x, r)dr = f (x). A request is described by a triple (x, r, a), where x is the actual
size, r is the predicted size, and a is request age (time spent serving the request). We set threshold
a0 = c · r, with c as a tunable parameter. The system allows preemption when a < a0 and disables
it when a ≥ a0 , balancing early resource use with timely completion. When c = 1, the system
becomes the same as SPRPT.
The proof of Lemma 1 below is presented in Appendix C. Simulations showing that SPRPT with
limited preemption improves memory usage compared to traditional SPRPT are presented in Ap-
pendix D. Additionally, in Appendix E, we provide another theoretical model in the same framework
for the setting of refined predictions, that may also be of independent interest.
Lemma 1. For SPRPT with limited preemption, where at age a0 the requests become non-
preemptable, the expected mean response time for a request of true size x and predicted size r
is
                  R     R∞                           R∞       R∞
                    r
               λ y=0 xI =0 x2I · g(xI , y)dxI dy + t=r+a0 xI =t−r g(xI , t) · (xI − (t − r))2 · dxI dt
E[T (x, r)] =
                                                       2(1 − ρ′r )2
                  Z a0
                             1
               +                     da + (x − a0 ).
                   0    1 − ρ′(r−a)+
                Rr R∞
 where ρ′r = λ y=0 xI =0 xI · g(xI , y)dxI dy.

4     E VALUATION
Setup and implementation. Our implementation is based on the open-source vLLM system
(v0.5.0), with chunked prefill enabled in both our scheduler and the baseline scheduling methods.
We set the out-of-memory mode to discard jobs and recompute them once memory becomes avail-
able. The evaluation is conducted on a server with a single NVIDIA A100 80GB GPU and 64 AMD
EPYC 7313 16-Core Processor cores, with 503 GiB of memory and running CUDA version 12.3.
We use LLama3-8b-instruct as a serving model with single-GPU. The workload is generated us-
ing the Alpaca dataset (Taori et al., 2023), derived from open-source conversational exchanges and
originally used to fine-tune the Alpaca model. We sample 10k unique prompts from the dataset for
model serving, distinct from those used to train the length predictor.
Benchmark and Metrics. The benchmark we use simulates a chatbot serving in a client-server
setup, where the server hosts an LLM model, and the client sends requests at a specified request rate.
The server runs the vLLM OpenAI API, while the client sends prompts from the Alpaca dataset to
mimic a real-world scenario. The benchmark measures the mean and median latency and Time To
First Token (TTFT), providing insights into the LLM’s responsiveness under varying request loads.
In addition to regular load, we evaluate performance under burst conditions.
Baselines. We compare our approach with four baselines: (1) vanilla vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023),
using First Come First Served; (2) vLLM with Shortest Job First based on BERT predictions and
chunked prefill; (3) T RAIL with refined embedding predictions; and (4) T RAIL with BERT predic-
tions.

4.1   P REDICTIONS ACCURACY

Figure 3 compares the mean absolute error (MAE) of the BERT predictions from the prompts,
our linear classifier predictions from the embedding layers, and the refined predictions after using
Bayesian inference on the different layers choices. We further evaluated the accuracy of this refined
prediction from layer 11 against the ground truth and compared it to BERT predictions. A heatmap
was used to compare the ground truth remaining length with the predicted remaining length across
multiple sequences. Both the x-axis (ground truth) and y-axis (predictions) were divided into ten
bins, representing the remaining lengths as the sequence progresses: Where the i-th bin bi covers


                                                  7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



           h
                   512(i+1)
 the range 512i
              10 ,    10      . Each request is counted multiple times in the heatmap, once for each
 prediction made during its execution. Each cell in the heatmap contains the logarithm of the num-
 ber of occurrences for a given pair of ground truth and predicted length at different stages. For
 BERT, where only one prediction is made, we subtract one from the initial predicted length after
 each generated token to create a comparable heatmap. As shown in Figure 4, the refined predictions
 from layer-11 embedding are more accurate than the BERT predictions, as they exhibit higher val-
 ues along the diagonal and lower values off the diagonal (indicating greater prediction accuracy).
 Meanwhile, the BERT predictions show lower values along the diagonal and higher values off the
 diagonal, reflecting larger differences between predicted and actual lengths.

                                                                                               10                                                                                                     10
                           b10 b9 b8 b7 b6 b5 b4 b3 b2 b1


                                                                                                                                  b10 b9 b8 b7 b6 b5 b4 b3 b2 b1
          Predicted Remaining Length


                                                                                                                 Predicted Remaining Length
                                                                                               8                                                                                                      8

                                                                                               6                                                                                                      6

                                                                                               4                                                                                                      4

                                                                                               2                                                                                                      2

                                                            b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6 b7 b8 b9 b10     0                                                                   b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6 b7 b8 b9 b10     0
                                                              Groundtruth Remaining Length                                                                           Groundtruth Remaining Length

                    (a) embedding-based predictions                                                                                                                  (b) BERT predictions

 Figure 4: hLog-scaled comparison
                                  of ground-truth vs predicted lengths bins. The i-th bin bi covers
             512i 512(i+1)
 the range 10 , 10          .


 4.2                                                        LLM S ERVING

 We begin by comparing the mean latency and TTFT of T RAIL across different values of c (c =
 0.5, 0.8, 1) while setting the request rate to 14. (c = 1 mimics SRPT without limiting preemption.)
 Figure 5 shows that when c = 1, T RAIL exhibits higher mean latency and TTFT, while c = 0.8
 results in the lowest values, closely followed by c = 0.5. We also evaluated the system with c = 0.2,
 which produced higher latency and TTFT compared to the larger c values (though not shown here
 to focus more closely on this range of c values). These results highlight that while preemption in
 scheduling benefits LLM systems, it should be limited due to the additional memory overhead it
 introduces, which can affect serving efficiency. Based on this, we set the default c value for T RAIL
 to 0.8 in the remainder of the evaluation. The optimal c, however, may vary depending on system
 memory and workload, as it affects the trade-off between preemption benefits and memory overhead.

                      14                                                                                                     250
                      12
Mean Latency (s)


                                                                                                                             200
                                                                                                        Mean TTFT (ms)


                      10
                       8                                                                                                     150
                       6                                                                                                     100
                       4
                                                                                                                                         50
                       2
                       0                                     c = 0.5         c = 0.8         c=1                                                      0              c = 0.5         c = 0.8        c=1

                                                               (a) Mean Latency (s)                                                                                   (b) Mean TTFT (ms)

 Figure 5: Comparison of mean latency and TTFT across different values of c (c = 0.5, 0.8, 1) at a
 request rate of 14.

 Figure 6 presents the mean and median latency, along with TTFT, as a function of the request
 rate for four LLM serving systems: (1) vanilla vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023), which uses First Come
 First Served (FCFS) as the scheduling policy (vLLM-FCFS); (2) vLLM with a Shortest Job First
 (SJF) scheduling policy for newly scheduled sequences based on BERT predictions from sequence
 prompts (vLLM-SJF BERT), which also prioritizes new sequences and implements chunked prefill;


                                                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(3) T RAIL with c = 0.8 using refined predictions from embeddings with chunked prefill enabled;
(4) T RAIL with c = 0.8 using BERT predictions (T RAIL-BERT); and (5)T RAIL+ oracle baseline
where requests are scheduled based on their exact length. The comparison between T RAIL-BERT
and T RAIL evaluates the effectiveness of embedding-based predictions, while the comparison be-
tween vLLM (with both scheduling policies) and T RAIL (with both prediction methods) evaluates
the impact of limited preemption in LLM systems. The figure shows that SJF based on BERT predic-
tions provides minimal benefits over vLLM-FCFS, as vLLM implementation prioritizes incoming
requests over existing running requests. Additionally, both T RAIL and T RAIL-BERT, which im-
plement limited preemption, achieve lower mean and median latency (Figures 11a,11b) and lower
mean and median TTFT (Figures 6b,6d) compared to vLLM, with T RAIL using refined embedding
predictions showing the lowest latency and TTFT due to more accurate predictions (Figures 3,4).

                     400
                                                                                    350
                     350
                                                                                    300
Mean Latency (s)


                     300


                                                                  Mean TTFT (s)
                                                                                    250
                     250
                                                                                    200
                     200
                                                                                    150
                     150
                     100                                                            100
                      50                                                             50
                       0                                                              0
                           20        40      60         80                                20       40       60         80
                                  Request Rate (qp/s)                                            Request Rate (qp/s)
                                (a) Mean Latency                                               (b) Mean TTFT


                     400                                                            400
                     350                                                            350
Median Latency (s)


                                                                                    300
                                                                  Median TTFT (s)
                     300
                     250                                                            250
                     200                                                            200
                     150                                                            150
                     100                                                            100
                      50                                                             50
                       0                                                              0
                           20        40      60         80                                20       40       60         80
                                  Request Rate (qp/s)                                            Request Rate (qp/s)
                           (c) Median Latency                                                  (d) Median TTFT

Figure 6: Mean and median latency, along with TTFT, as a function of request rate for four LLM
systems: (1) vLLM-FCFS, vLLM using FCFS; (2) vLLM-SJF BERT, vLLM using SJF based on
BERT; (3) T RAIL with c = 0.8 and refined embedding predictions; and (4) T RAIL-BERT with
c = 0.8 using BERT predictions.

Figure 7 shows the mean and median latency and TTFT for vLLM, vLLM-SJF BERT, and T RAIL
with two different c values (c = 0.8 and c = 1) under a burst scenario. In this scenario, all requests
arrive within a very short time interval at the beginning of the experiment, simulating a sudden
spike in demand. The results show that T RAIL continues to offer benefits with lower latency and
TTFT, as our implementation ranks all requests (running and waiting) based on length predictions
and prioritizes them accordingly, while vLLM prioritizes new requests over existing running ones.
However, since no new requests arrive during processing, preemption has no advantage, leading to
similar performance between T RAIL with c = 0.8 and c = 1.


5                      R ELATED W ORKS

Recent efforts to optimize the serving of LLMs have been explored. ORCA (Yu et al., 2022) in-
troduced token-level scheduling, assuming that batches are processed at the token level rather than
the sequence level. vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023) applies PagedAttention to reduce memory overhead.
However, these works rely on first-come, first-served scheduling, which could face head-of-line
blocking.


                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   400                                                  400                                                                                                                  400


                                                                                                                 Median Latency (s)
                                                                                                                                      400


                                                                                                                                                                          Median TTFT (ms)
Mean Latency (s)


                                                       Mean TTFT (ms)
                   300                                                  300                                                           300                                                    300
                   200                                                  200                                                           200                                                    200
                   100                                                  100                                                           100                                                    100
                     0                                                    0                                                             0                                                      0
                         LM


                                         0.8

                                                  1
                               SJF


                                                                              LM


                                                                                              0.8

                                                                                                       1


                                                                                                                                                            0.8

                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                    SJF


                                                                                                                                            LM

                                                                                                                                                  SJF


                                                                                                                                                                                                   LM


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SJF
                                                l c=


                                                                                                     l c=


                                                                                                                                                                   l c=


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l c=
                         vL


                                                                              vL


                                                                                                                                            vL


                                                                                                                                                                                                   vL
                                 -


                                                                                      -


                                                                                                                                                    -


                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                       l c=


                                                                                            l c=


                                                                                                                                                          l c=


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l c=
                              LM


                                                                                   LM


                                                                                                                                                 LM


                                                                                                                                                                                                        LM
                                                  i


                                                                                                       i


                                                                                                                                                                     i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i
                                              Tra


                                                                                                   Tra


                                                                                                                                                                 Tra


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tra
                              vL


                                                                                   vL


                                                                                                                                                 vL


                                                                                                                                                                                                        vL
                                         i


                                                                                              i


                                                                                                                                                            i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i
                                     Tra


                                                                                          Tra


                                                                                                                                                        Tra


                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tra
               (a) Mean Latency (s)                                 (b) Mean TTFT (ms)                                    (c) Median Latency (s)                                  (d) Median TTFT (ms)

                               Figure 7: Mean, Median of Latency and TTFT when we have burst of requests


In traditional scheduling, methods like shortest job first (SJF) and shortest remaining processing
time (SRPT) aim to minimize response times, while multi-level feedback queues (MLFQ) adjust
job priorities dynamically without prior knowledge of job sizes. FastServe (Wu et al., 2023) uses
MLFQ to avoid head-of-line blocking. However, this leads to frequent preemptions, which increase
the cost of managing KV cache memory and offloading to the CPU. Several works have proposed
prediction-based scheduling to address these challenges. Zhen et al. (Zheng et al., 2024) enhanced
LLM inference by predicting response lengths with an additional LLM model and scheduling them
according to length predictions. While this approach optimizes inference, it introduces prediction
overhead. Other works predict output lengths using machine learning models such as DistilBERT
and OPT, improving resource allocation and reducing memory issues during inference. The works
in (Jin et al., 2023; Stojkovic et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024) approach length prediction as a clas-
sification problem, while other works (Qiu et al., 2024b;a) adopt regression-based techniques.
LTR (Fu et al., 2024) employs a Learning-to-Rank approach similar to TRAIL. Instead of predicting
the absolute output size of a request, LTR ranks requests based on their output size, allowing the
system to prioritize those with fewer remaining tokens. Although ranking is a simpler task than
absolute size prediction, it requires training a ranking model in an offline phase. A limitation of
LTR is that it ignores the size of the prompt when ranking, considering only the output size.


6                        L IMITATIONS AND C ONCLUSION

We have presented T RAIL, a novel approach that significantly improves response time in LLM
inference. Our method is built on two key contributions. First, we obtained low-overhead, high-
accuracy predictions from the target LLM itself. After generating each output token, we recycle
the embedding of its internal structure as input for a lightweight classifier. This classifier predicts
the remaining length for each running request. We demonstrated the high accuracy of this approach
and its low overhead compared to existing prediction methods that rely solely on sequence prompts.
Specifically, our refined predictions from layer embeddings achieve 2.66x lower mean absolute error
compared to BERT predictions from sequence prompts. Second, utilizing these predictions for
output lengths, we proposed a Shortest Remaining Processing Time (SRPT) variant with limited
preemption. This variant is specifically designed to account for memory overhead in LLM systems.
We derived a closed-form formula for this SRPT variant in an M/G/1 queue model and simulated it to
demonstrate its potential. By integrating T RAIL with vLLM, we have demonstrated improvements
in overall latency and time-to-first-token metrics using real-world datasets. Our experimental results
show that T RAIL achieves 1.66x to 2.01x lower mean latency and 1.76x to 24.07x lower mean time
to first token compared to vLLM tested using the Alpaca dataset.
Limitations. One key challenge is to select the most informative layer embedding to use as input
for the linear classifier. Due to time and resource constraints, we focused only on the Alpaca dataset,
as profiling embeddings across all layers is computationally demanding. There are several promis-
ing directions for future research. We plan to explore the relationship between layer selection and
prediction accuracy across multiple datasets. Another direction is leveraging multiple-layer embed-
dings through weighted averaging to enhance prediction accuracy. Additionally, experimenting with
logarithmic bin sizes for the linear classifier could offer further benefits. A potential optimization
is to compute embedding predictions at specific intervals rather than every iteration, reducing com-
putational overhead. Lastly, to address data drifts and maintain performance over time, we aim to
explore the dynamic retraining of the linear classifier.


                                                                                                            10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Sham Kakade for providing access to the Kempner cluster for evaluation. We also thank
Yonatan Belinkov for the helpful discussions. Rana Shahout was supported in part by the Schmidt
Futures Initiative and Zuckerman Institute. Michael Mitzenmacher was supported in part by NSF
grants CCF-2101140 and DMS-2023528. Rana Shahout, Minlan Yu, and Michael Mitzenmacher
are partially supported by NSF CNS NeTS 2107078. This work was supported in part by ACE, one
of the seven centers in JUMP 2.0, a Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) program sponsored
by DARPA. We are grateful for support from the DARPA ASKEM project (Award HR00112220042)
and the ARPA-H Biomedical Data Fabric project.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Yonatan Belinkov. Probing classifiers: Promises, shortcomings, and advances. Computational
  Linguistics, 48(1):207–219, 2022.
Ke Cheng, Wen Hu, Zhi Wang, Peng Du, Jianguo Li, and Sheng Zhang. Enabling efficient batch
  serving for lmaas via generation length prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04785, 2024.
Yichao Fu, Siqi Zhu, Runlong Su, Aurick Qiao, Ion Stoica, and Hao Zhang. Efficient llm scheduling
  by learning to rank. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.15792, 2024.
John Hewitt and Percy Liang. Designing and interpreting probes with control tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.03368, 2019.
John Hewitt and Christopher D Manning. A structural probe for finding syntax in word representa-
  tions. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 4129–4138, 2019.
Yunho Jin, Chun-Feng Wu, David Brooks, and Gu-Yeon Wei. s3 : Increasing gpu utilization during
  generative inference for higher throughput. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36:18015–18027, 2023.
Kostis Kaffes, Timothy Chong, Jack Tigar Humphries, Adam Belay, David Mazières, and Christos
  Kozyrakis. Shinjuku: Preemptive scheduling for {µsecond-scale} tail latency. In 16th USENIX
  Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 19), pp. 345–360, 2019.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph
 Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
 serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Prin-
 ciples, pp. 611–626, 2023.
Michael Mitzenmacher. Scheduling with predictions and the price of misprediction. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1902.00732, 2019.
OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt, 2022.
Haoran Qiu, Weichao Mao, Archit Patke, Shengkun Cui, Saurabh Jha, Chen Wang, Hubertus Franke,
  Zbigniew Kalbarczyk, Tamer Başar, and Ravishankar K Iyer. Power-aware deep learning model
  serving with {µ-Serve}. In 2024 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 24), pp.
  75–93, 2024a.
Haoran Qiu, Weichao Mao, Archit Patke, Shengkun Cui, Saurabh Jha, Chen Wang, Hubertus Franke,
  Zbigniew T Kalbarczyk, Tamer Başar, and Ravishankar K Iyer. Efficient interactive llm serving
  with proxy model-based sequence length prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08509, 2024b.
V Sanh. Distilbert, a distilled version of bert: Smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.
Simo Särkkä and Lennart Svensson. Bayesian filtering and smoothing, volume 17. Cambridge
  university press, 2023.
Ziv Scully and Mor Harchol-Balter. Soap bubbles: Robust scheduling under adversarial noise. In
  2018 56th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton),
  pp. 144–154, 2018.
Rana Shahout and Michael Mitzenmacher. Skippredict: When to invest in predictions for schedul-
  ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03564, 2024.
Jovan Stojkovic, Chaojie Zhang, Íñigo Goiri, Josep Torrellas, and Esha Choukse. Dynamollm:
  Designing llm inference clusters for performance and energy efficiency. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.00741, 2024.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bingyang Wu, Yinmin Zhong, Zili Zhang, Gang Huang, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. Fast distributed
  inference serving for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05920, 2023.
Gyeong-In Yu, Joo Seong Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim, and Byung-Gon Chun. Orca: A
  distributed serving system for {Transformer-Based} generative models. In 16th USENIX Sympo-
  sium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22), pp. 521–538, 2022.
Zangwei Zheng, Xiaozhe Ren, Fuzhao Xue, Yang Luo, Xin Jiang, and Yang You. Response length
  perception and sequence scheduling: An llm-empowered llm inference pipeline. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
Table of Contents
      A Bayesian Inference Transition matrix                                                      14

      B SOAP Analysis                                                                             14

      C SPRPT with Limited Preemption                                                             15

      D Simulation of SPRPT with Limited Preemption                                               17

      E Refined Prediction Framework                                                              18
        E.1 SPRPT with refined predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    19

      F Dataset Analysis                                                                          21

      G Multi-GPU Evaluation                                                                      21

      H Ministral-3b-instruct Predictions                                                         22



A    BAYESIAN I NFERENCE T RANSITION MATRIX
The transition matrix captures transitions between neighboring bins based on the assumption of
uniform distribution within each bin. The diagonal and sub-diagonal entries reflect the probabilities
of remaining in the same bin or moving to the adjacent lower bin, respectively. Below is the explicit
form of the transition matrix for a general number of bins.

                         1 − bin1size
                                                                                             
                                              0               0         ...         0
                             1
                        
                         bin size       1 − bin1size         0         ...         0         
                                               1
                                                         1 − bin1size
                                                                                              
                     T =
                            0              bin size
                                                                        ...         0         
                                                                                              
                            ..               ..             ..         ..          ..        
                             .                .              .            .         .        
                                0             0               0         ...    1 − bin1size

B    SOAP A NALYSIS
We utilize the SOAP framework (Scully & Harchol-Balter, 2018) to derive precise expressions for
the mean response time. SOAP also provides the Laplace-Stieltjes transform of the response time
distribution, but we focus on mean response time for ease of comparison throughout the paper.
The SOAP framework is designed to analyze scheduling policies for M/G/1 queues that can be
characterized by rank functions. Recent work by Scully and Harchol-Balter (Scully & Harchol-
Balter, 2018) has categorized a broad range of scheduling policies as belonging to the SOAP class.
These policies determine job scheduling based on ranks, always prioritizing the job with the lowest
rank. (If multiple jobs share the same rank, First Come First Served is used as the tiebreaker.)
The rank function itself is a key component, assigned to each job based on certain static properties,
typically referred to as the job’s type or descriptor. For instance, the descriptor could indicate the
job’s class in multi-class models, as well as static characteristics like its service time (job size). The
rank may also depend on the job’s age, or the time it has already been served.
SOAP policies assume that a job’s rank is influenced only by its inherent characteristics and its
age, aligning well with the model and scheduling algorithm used in T RAIL. For more detailed
information, the reader is referred to (Scully & Harchol-Balter, 2018).


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In SOAP analysis, the tagged-job technique is employed. Specifically, we track a tagged job J with
size xJ and descriptor dJ , and use aJ to represent the time J has already been served. The mean
response time for J is calculated as the sum of its waiting time (the period from its arrival to the
start of service) and its residence time (the duration from the start of service to its completion). To
calculate the waiting time, SOAP evaluates the delays caused by both old jobs that arrived before J
and new jobs that arrive after J. A key concept in this analysis is the worst future rank of a job, as
job ranks may change over time. The worst future rank for a job with descriptor dJ and age aJ is
denoted by rankdworst
                   J
                      (aJ ). When aJ = 0, the rank function is represented as rworst = rankdworstJ
                                                                                                    (0).
In the SOAP framework, the waiting time is equivalent to the transformed busy period in an M/G/1
queue, where the arrival rate is λ and the job size is described by X new [rankdworst       J
                                                                                               (a)]. Where
X new [rankdworst
               J
                   (a)] is a random  variable representing   the   time  a newly  arrived job will be served
until it either completes or its rank exceeds rankdworst J
                                                            (a).    The  initial workload during  this period
corresponds to the delays caused by old jobs. To account for the delays from old jobs, SOAP
transforms the system by categorizing jobs according to their rank. Old jobs that exceed the rank
threshold rworst are classified as discarded and are not included in the transformed system. Those
with ranks at or below rworst , referred to as original jobs, are treated as arriving at rate λ with a
specific size distribution X0old [rworst ]. Where X0old [rworst ] is a random variable representing the ser-
vice time of an original job with respect to rank rworst . Recycled jobs, which were once above the
threshold but have now fallen below, are treated as server vacations of length Xiold [rworst ]. Where
Xiold [rworst ] is a random variable representing the service time of a recycled job for the i-th time
with respect to rank rworst for i ≥ 1. In T RAIL, jobs are recycled only once, so we only consider
X1old [rworst ].
SOAP shows that, due to Poisson arrivals see time averages, the stationary delay caused by old
jobs follows the same distribution as the queuing time in the transformed M/G/1/FCFS system,
characterized by sparse server vacations where original jobs arrive at rate λ and follow the size
distribution X0old [rworst ].
Theorem 1 (Theorem 5.5 of (Scully & Harchol-Balter, 2018)). Under any SOAP policy, the mean
response time of a job with descriptor d and size x is:
                                               P∞
                                           λ · i=0 E[Xiold [rworst ]2 ]
                   E[T (x, d)] =
                                 2(1 − λE[X0old [rworst ])(1 − λE[X new [rworst ])
                                   Z x
                                                       1
                                 +                 new [rank worst (a)]]
                                                                         da.
                                     0 1 − λE[X              dJ



C    SPRPT WITH L IMITED P REEMPTION

We begin by describing the rank function for a job with descriptor (x, r, a), where x is the actual
size, r is the predicted size, and a is the job’s age. The threshold where we stop preemption from
occurring is set as a0 = c · r. The rank function is:


                                                        r−a   if a < a0
                                 rank(x, r, a) =
                                                        −∞    otherwise

As this rank function is monotonic, A job’s worst future rank is its initial prediction:


                                      worst             r−a    if a < a0
                                  rankd,x   (a) =                                                        (1)
                                                        −∞     otherwise

                                                         worst
When a = 0, the rank function is denoted by rworst = rankd,x   (0) = r.
Lemma 1. For SPRPT with limited preemption, where at age a0 the requests become non-
preemptable, the expected mean response time for a request of true size x and predicted size r


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is
                     R   R∞                          R∞     R∞
                      r
                λ              x2 · g(xI , y)dxI dy + t=r+a0 xI =t−r g(xI , t) · (xI − (t − r))2 · dxI dt
                      y=0 xI =0 I
E[T (x, r)] =
                                                                   2(1 − ρ′r )2
                    Z a0
                                1
                +                       da + (x − a0 ).
                      0    1 − ρ′(r−a)+
                 R∞
                 Rr
where ρ′r = λ y=0 xI =0 xI · g(xI , y)dxI dy.
Proof. To analyze SPRPT with limited preemption using SOAP, based on the worst future rank
(equation 1), we calculate X new [rankdworst (a)], X0old [rworst ] and Xiold [rworst ] for a tagged job J
with descriptor (x, r, a).

C.0.1    X NEW [rankd,x
                    WORST
                          (a)] COMPUTATION :

Suppose that a new job K of predicted size rK arrives when J has age a. If a < a0 and K has a
predicted job size less than J’s predicted remaining process time (r − a), K will always outrank J.
Thus

                                 Xxnew
                                    K
                                       [r − a] = xK 1(rK < r − a)1(a < a0 )


                                                    Z r−a Z ∞
                                 new
                           E[X         [r − a]] =                      xK · g(xK , y)dxK dy
                                                     0         xK =0


C.0.2    X0OLD [rworst ] COMPUTATION :
Let I be an old job in the system. Whether job I is an original or recycled job depends on its
predicted size relative to J’s predicted size. If rI ≤ r, then I is original until its completion because
its rank never exceeds r.

                                              old
                                             X0,x I
                                                    [r] = xI 1(rI ≤ r).

                                                  Z r Z ∞
                                 E[X0old [r]] =                    xI · g(xI , y)dxI dy.
                                                    y=0    xI =0


                                                    Z r Z ∞
                              E[(X0old [r])2 ] =                      x2I · g(xI , y)dxI dy.
                                                     y=0      xI =0


C.0.3    XiOLD [rworst ] COMPUTATION :
If rI > r, then I starts discarded but becomes recycled when rI − a = r. This means at age
a = rI − r and served till completion only if a < a0 , which will be xI − aI = xI − (rI − r):
Thus, we have
                                             old
                                            X1,x I
                                                   [r] = xI − (rI − r).
For i ≥ 2,
                                                      old
                                                     Xi,x I
                                                            [r] = 0.

                                   Z ∞         Z ∞
                E[X1old [r]2 ] =                              g(xI , t) · (xI − (rI − r))2 · dxI drI .
                                    rI =r+a0      xI =rI −r



                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Applying Theorem 5.5 of SOAP (Scully & Harchol-Balter, 2018) yields that the mean response time
of jobs with descriptor (r) and size x is as follows. Let

                                             Z r Z ∞
                                   ρ′r = λ                  xI · g(xI , y)dxI dy.
                                             y=0    xI =0



Then



                     R  R∞                          R∞     R∞
                     r
                λ             x2 · g(xI , y)dxI dy + t=r+a0 xI =t−r g(xI , t) · (xI − (t − r))2 · dxI dt
                     y=0 xI =0 I
E[T (x, r)] =
                                                               2(1 − ρ′r )2
                    Z a0
                                1
                +                       da + (x − a0 ).
                     0     1 − ρ′(r−a)+


             R∞
Let fp (y) = x=0 g(x, y)dx. Then the mean response time for a job with size x, and the mean
response time of all jobs are given by

                                                   Z ∞
                                    E[T (x)] =           fp (y)E[T (x, y)]dy,
                                                   y=0


                                           Z ∞ Z ∞
                                 E[T ] =                 g(x, y)E[T (x, y)]dydx.
                                             x=0   y=0


D      S IMULATION OF SPRPT WITH L IMITED P REEMPTION

In our simulation, memory usage is modeled as proportional to the age of each job: the amount of
service it has received so far. This reflects the idea that jobs consume more memory the longer they
remain in the system. We measure the response time to evaluate scheduling efficiency along with
memory consumption.
We consider a single-queue setting with Poisson arrivals, where the job service time follows an ex-
ponential distribution with mean 1 (f (x) = e−x ). Two prediction models are used: 1) Exponential
predictions (Mitzenmacher, 2019), where the prediction for a job with service time x is also expo-
                                                         −x−y
nentially distributed with mean x, given by g(x, y) = e x . 2) A “perfect predictor”, where the
prediction is always accurate, given by g(x, y) = e−x .
Figure 8 shows the mean response time (blue line) and the peak memory usage (green line) under
various arrival rates and with different c values. The key takeaway is that limiting preemption;
reducing how often jobs are interrupted and rescheduled, can lead to better memory utilization while
maintaining a reasonable response time.


                                                         17
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                        10                                                                  23
                9
                                                                              0.04                                       9                                                                  22
                8
Response Time                                                                                                            8                                                                  21


                                                                                                        Response Time
                                                                                     Peak Memory


                                                                                                                                                                                            Peak Memory
                7                                                             0.02                                       7                                                                  20
                6                                                                                                        6
                                                                              0.00                                                                                                          19
                5                                                                                                        5                                                                  18
                4                                                               0.02                                     4                                                                  17
                3                                                                                                        3
                                                                                0.04                                                                                                        16
                2                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                     0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95                                                                  0.60   0.65     0.70   0.75 0.80 0.85    0.90    0.95
                                      Arrival Rate                                                                                                      Arrival Rate

                             (a) vs. arrival rate when c = 0                                                                    (b) vs. arrival rate when c = 0.3

                                                                                                                        2.3                                                             17.5
                10                                                                  24                                                                                                  15.0
                                                                                                                        2.2


                                                                                                        Response Time
Response Time


                                                                                                                                                                                        12.5


                                                                                                                                                                                            Peak Memory
                                                                                     Peak Memory
                 8                                                                  22
                                                                                                                        2.1                                                             10.0
                 6                                                                  20                                                                                                  7.5
                                                                                                                        2.0                                                             5.0
                 4                                                                  18
                                                                                                                        1.9                                                             2.5
                 2                                                                  16                                                                                                  0.0
                                                                                                                               0.0          0.2      0.4        0.6    0.8       1.0
                      0.60    0.65     0.70   0.75 0.80 0.85
                                                 Arrival Rate
                                                                0.90   0.95
                                                                                                                                                            C
                        (c) vs. arrival rate when c = 0.5                                                                              (d) vs. c when λ = 0.7

                                                                                    25                                  4.2
                2.9
                                                                                                                        4.1                                                                 20
                2.8                                                                 20
                                                                                                        Response Time
Response Time


                                                                                                                                                                                            Peak Memory
                                                                                     Peak Memory


                                                                                    15                                  4.0                                                                 15
                2.7
                                                                                                                        3.9
                2.6                                                                 10                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                        3.8
                2.5                                                                 5                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                        3.7
                2.4
                                                                                    0                                   3.6                                                                 0
                       0.0           0.2       0.4       0.6     0.8          1.0                                              0.0          0.2       0.4        0.6     0.8          1.0
                                                     C                                                                                                      C
                                (e) vs. c when λ = 0.8                                                                                  (f) vs. c when λ = 0.9

 Figure 8: Comparing memory usage and response time across different arrival rates and values of c.


 The parameter c, used to manage the trade-offs in memory utilization, is influenced by the KV
 cache’s available memory, which depends on the model size, batch sizes, and incoming request
 sizes. In scenarios with a mix of long and short requests, an appropriately chosen c value can
 prevent memory monopolization by long requests, thereby improving throughput. The value of c
 can also be dynamically adjusted in real time.


  E                 R EFINED P REDICTION F RAMEWORK

 We consider M/G/1 queueing systems with arrival rate λ. The processing times for each arriving job
 are independent and drawn based on the cumulative distribution F (x), with an associated density
 function f (x).


                                                                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given a job of size X = x, and a sequence of refined predictions Y0 , Y1 , . . . , Yx , where Yi represents
the prediction after processing i units of x, we model the refined predictions as follows:
The probability of the refined prediction yi at step i, given the actual size x and the entire history of
previous predictions, is denoted as:

                   P (Yi = yi | X = x, Yi−1 = yi−1 , Yi−2 = yi−2 , . . . , Y0 = y0 )

Under the Markovian assumption, the refined prediction in step i depends only on the actual size x
and the previous prediction yi−1 :

P (Yi = yi | X = x, Yi−1 = yi−1 , Yi−2 = yi−2 , . . . , Y0 = y0 ) = P (Yi = yi | X = x, Yi−1 = yi−1 )

The joint probability of the sequence of predictions Y0 , Y1 , . . . , Yx can be modeled as:
                                                                                  x
                                                                                  Y
P (Y0 = y0 , Y1 = y1 , . . . , Yx = yx | X = x) = P (Y0 = y0 | X = x)                   P (Yi = yi | X = x, Yi−1 = yi−1 )
                                                                                  i=1


The density function g(x, y) corresponding to the list of predictions y = [y0 , y1 , . . . , yx−1 ], where
each yi is obtained after processing one unit of job x, is obtained by summing over all possible
refined predictions:
                      ∞ X
                      X ∞                  ∞
                                           X
          g(x, y) =                 ···             P (Y0 = y0 , Y1 = y1 , . . . , Yx−1 = yx−1 | X = x)
                      y0 =0 y1 =0         yx−1 =0



E.1   SPRPT WITH REFINED PREDICTIONS

The relevant attributes are size and the refined prediction list r. We can model the system using
descriptor D = (size, list of refined predictions, age).
Let J be a job with a descriptor (x, r, a), where x is J’s size, r is a list of refined predictions for
J, each generated after processing one unit of the job, and a is J’s age. Thus, SPRPT with refined
predictions has a rank function rank(x, r, a) = r[a] − a for job of size x and predicted size r[a] at
time a. We denote the maximum rank function as rmax .
J’s worst future rank is:
                               worst
                           rankd,x   (a) = sup (r[b] − b) = max (r[b] − b)
                                                    a<b<x              a<b<x


                                                         worst
When a = 0, the rank function is denoted by rworst = rankd,x   (0) = rmax .
To analyze SPRPT with refined predictions using SOAP, the calculation involves solving a multidi-
mensional summation. While obtaining a closed-form expression for such sums may be challeng-
ing, in this section, we propose a method to compute the relevant components (X new [rankdworst (a)],
X0old [rworst ] and Xiold [rworst ]) for the SOAP analysis without requiring a closed-form solution.
Let J be a tagged job with descriptor (x, r, a), based on its worst future rank.
X new [rankd,x
           worst
                 (a)] computation: Suppose that a new job K of predicted size rK arrives when J
has age a. K has a lower rank than the worst possible rank of job J is given by:


                            xK
                            X
Xxnew
   K
           worst
      [rankd,x   (a)] =           1 rK [aK ] − aK < max (r[b] − b) ·1 ∀j < aI , rI [j] − j < max (r[b] − b)
                                                              a<b<x                                         a<b<x
                          aK =0


where 1(·) is the indicator function, which equals 1 if the condition inside is true and 0 otherwise.


                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   ∞
                                   X                     xK
                                                         X
          E X new rankworst

                      d,x (a)    =                              1 rK [aK ] − aK < max (r[b] − b)
                                                                                    a<b<x
                                             xK =0      aK =0

                                             · 1 ∀j < aI , rI [j] − j < max (r[b] − b)
                                                                            a<b<x

                                             ·g(xK , y))

where the density function g(xK , y) is defined as:

                   ∞ X
                   X ∞                   ∞
                                         X
     g(xK , y) =                 ···               P (Y0 = y0 , Y1 = y1 , . . . , YxK −1 = yxK −1 | X = xK )
                   y0 =0 y1 =0         yxK −1 =0


X0old [rworst ] computation: Let I be an old job in the system. Whether job I is an original depends
on its predicted size relative to J’s predicted size. I is original till it is exceeds rmax . we terminate
the summing once you encounter an age where rI [aI ] − aI > rmax :

                                 xI
                                 X
            old
           X0,x I
                  [rmax ] =             1 (rI [aI ] − aI < rmax ) · 1 (∀j < aI , rI [j] − j < rmax )
                              aI =0


Xiold [rworst ] computation: If rI > r, then I starts discarded but becomes recycled when rI [a]−a =
rworst . This means at age a = rI [aI ] − rworst and served till it will be again about rworst ,
Let i be an interval index. The i-interval for job I is defined as the interval of ages during which the
rank of job I is less than rmax . Specifically:

                                                        b0 [r] = 0
This indicates that the first interval starts at age 0.

                                   c0 [r] = inf{a > 0 | rI (a) − a > rmax }
Here, c0 [r] is the smallest age greater than 0 where the rank function rI (a) − a becomes greater than
rmax , marking the end of the first interval where the rank is less than rmax .
For subsequent intervals i ≥ 1:

                                 bi [r] = inf{a ≥ ci−1 [r] | rI (a) − a < rmax }
This is the starting point of the i-th interval, which begins as soon as the rank rI (a) − a drops below
rmax again after the previous interval [bi−1 [r], ci−1 [r]].

                                  ci [r] = inf{a > bi [r] | rI (a) − a > rmax }
Here, ci [r] is the endpoint of the i-th interval, where the rank rI (a) − a becomes greater than rmax
again.
For i ≥ 0, the i-interval work is a random variable, written XiOLD [r], representing the sum of the
tokens where job I has rank less than rmax within its i-interval.
                                      
                                      0                if Xd < bi [r]
                           XiOLD [r] = Xd − bi [r]      if bi [r] ≤ Xd < ci [r]
                                        ci [r] − bi [r] if ci [r] ≤ Xd
                                      


If bi [r] = ci [r] = ∞, we define XiOLD [r] = 0.


                                                            20
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 F                       DATASET A NALYSIS

 The first figure illustrates the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the Alpaca (Taori et al.,
 2023) dataset’s output lengths, showcasing the variation in output sizes.

                                                                   1.00
                                                                   0.75
                                                                   0.50



                                                           CDF
                                                                   0.25
                                                                   0.00
                                                                          0        100    200 300 400                                     500
                                                                                         Output length

                           Figure 9: Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of output lengths in the dataset.

 The second figure presents a histogram of the dataset binned into uniform-sized bins as described in
 Section 3.1, highlighting the number of prompts within each bin.


                                           Figure 10: Histogram of the dataset binned into uniform-sized bins.


 G                       M ULTI -GPU E VALUATION

 Testbed. For testing multi-GPU settings, we used a machine with dual AMD EPYC 7313 CPUs (16
 cores per CPU, totaling 64 threads), 503 GB of RAM, and two NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 80 GB
 memory each connected via NVLink.
 For the first experiment, we used the same serving model (LLama3-8b-instruct), distributed across
 two GPUs using tensor parallelism. As shown in Figure 11, T RAIL continues to perform effectively.

                          vLLM                                                                                      400   vLLM
                   350    Trail (c=0.8)                                                                                   Trail (c=0.8)
                                                                                                                    350
                   300
                                                                                               Median Latency (s)


                                                                                                                    300
Mean Latency (s)


                   250
                                                                                                                    250
                   200                                                                                              200
                   150                                                                                              150
                   100                                                                                              100
                    50                                                                                               50
                     0                                                                                                0
                             14               20             40               64                                             14                  20             40    64
                                             Request Rate (qp/s)                                                                                Request Rate (qp/s)

                                          (a) Mean Latency                                                                                (b) Median Latency

 Figure 11: Mean and median of end-to-end latency with LLama3-8b-instruct as a serving model
 distributed across two GPUs using tensor parallelism.


 For the second experiment, we tested T RAIL+ (T RAIL with perfect prediction) using Vicuna 13B,
 distributed across two GPUs using tensor parallelism.


                                                                                          21
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                   200
                          vLLM                                                                           vLLM
                   175    Trail+ (c=0.8)                                                                 Trail+ (c=0.8)
                                                                                                   175
                   150                                                                             150


                                                                              Median Latency (s)
Mean Latency (s)   125                                                                             125
                   100                                                                             100
                    75                                                                              75
                    50                                                                              50
                    25                                                                              25
                     0                                                                               0
                             14                20             40    64                                      14             20             40    64
                                              Request Rate (qp/s)                                                         Request Rate (qp/s)

                                           (a) Mean Latency                                                           (b) Median Latency

 Figure 12: Mean and median end-to-end latency using Vicuna 13B model, distributed across two
 GPUs using tensor parallelism. Tested with sampling 10000 prompts the first 1000 prompts of the
 Alpaca dataset.


 H                       M INISTRAL -3 B - INSTRUCT P REDICTIONS


 We evaluated the predictive performance of another LLM, Ministral-3b-instruct, using 1,000
 prompts from the Alpaca dataset. The dataset was split such that 75% of the prompts were used
 for training and the remaining 25% for evaluation.
 These results are preliminary. Figure 13 illustrates the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) for predictions
 across different layers of the model, while Figure 3 demonstrates the refined predictions for each
 layer after applying the smoothing method described in Section 3.1. From the results, we observe
 that a specific layer, Layer 10, consistently yields the most accurate predictions.


                                                             Prediction w/ per-layer embeddings

                                           100
                             MAE


                                             50

                                               0         0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                                                  Layer index
                         Figure 13: Mean Absolute Error (MAE) per layer for Ministral-3b-instruct predictions.


                                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     Max: 46.23 (L0)


       Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
                               46
                                                                             Refined
                               45                                            Mean MAE: 42.50
                               44
                               43
                               42
                               41
                               40
                               39
                                    L0
                                         L1
                                              L2
                                                   L3
                                                        L4
                                                             L5
                                                                  L6
                                                                       L7
                                                                            L8
                                                                                 L9

                                                                                      0
                                                                                           1
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                      3
                                                                  Layer



                                                                                      L1
                                                                                           L1
                                                                                                L1
                                                                                                     L1
                                                                                       Min: 38.99 (L10)

  Figure 14: Refined predictions per layer using the smoothing method described in Section 3.1.


                                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               24
