Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LAS E R: T OWARDS D IVERSIFIED AND G ENERALIZ -
ABLE ROBOT D ESIGN WITH L ARGE L ANGUAGE M OD -
ELS

 Junru Song1 , Yang Yang2,∗, Huan Xiao3 , Wei Peng2 , Wen Yao2,∗ , Feifei Wang3,4
 1
   School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
 2
   Intelligent Game and Decision Laboratory
 3
   School of Statistics, Renmin University of China
 4
   Center for Applied Statistics, Renmin University of China
 songjunru@sjtu.edu.cn, bigyangy@gmail.com
 {xiaohuan001, feifei.wang}@ruc.edu.cn
 {weipeng0098, wendy0782}@126.com



                                                A BSTRACT

              Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have stimulated a significant
              paradigm shift in evolutionary optimization, where hand-crafted search heuristics
              are gradually replaced with LLMs serving as intelligent search operators. How-
              ever, these studies still bear some notable limitations, including a challenge to
              balance exploitation with exploration, often leading to inferior solution diversity,
              as well as poor generalizability of problem solving across different task settings.
              These unsolved issues render the prowess of LLMs in robot design automation
              largely untapped. In this work, we present LASeR – Large Language Model-
              Aided Evolutionary Search for Robot Design Automation. Leveraging a novel
              reflection mechanism termed DiRect, we elicit more knowledgeable exploratory
              behaviors from LLMs based on past search trajectories, reshaping the exploration-
              exploitation tradeoff with dual improvements in optimization efficiency and solu-
              tion diversity. Additionally, with evolution fully grounded in task-related back-
              ground information, we unprecedentedly uncover the inter-task reasoning capabil-
              ities of LLMs, facilitating generalizable design processes that effectively inspire
              zero-shot robot proposals for new applications. Our simulated experiments on
              voxel-based soft robots showcase distinct advantages of LASeR over competitive
              baselines. Code at https://github.com/WoodySJR/LASeR.


1        I NTRODUCTION

In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable reasoning, decision
making, and generalization capabilities (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023;
Team, 2023), sparking a flurry of research interest in their application to optimization problems.
Earlier efforts embarked on leveraging LLMs to aid traditional search heuristics within evolutionary
algorithms (EAs), such as selecting parent solutions for mutation and crossover (Liu et al., 2024a; Ye
et al., 2024) or serving as surrogate models and candidate samplers in Bayesian Optimization (Liu
et al., 2024b). More and more recent studies have explored the use of LLMs as “intelligent search
operators”. By receiving previously found solutions through prompts, LLMs effectively draw upon
their in-context learning and pattern completing abilities to iteratively propose improved candidate
solutions (Brahmachary et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024b; Yang et al., 2024; Morris et al., 2024;
Romera-Paredes et al., 2024; Lange et al., 2024). Such LLM-aided evolutionary frameworks have
shown great promise in minimizing reliance on handcrafted search heuristics, facilitating convenient
problem specification in natural language and rendering evolutionary processes more interpretable.
To date, they have showcased proficiency in classic optimization problems such as the Traveling
Salesman Problem and numerical functions, (Liu et al., 2024a; Brahmachary et al., 2024; Huang
     ∗
         Corresponding authors.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


et al., 2024a), as well as real-world scenarios spanning code generation (Morris et al., 2024; Romera-
Paredes et al., 2024), robotic control (Lange et al., 2024), protein design (Tran & Hy, 2024), etc.
Despite the promising results, we contend that existing studies exhibit two major limitations. For
one, as many of them have noted that LLMs often struggle to balance exploration and exploita-
tion and yield inferior solution diversity (Huang et al., 2024b; Tran & Hy, 2024), only expedient
measures have been taken to address this issue, including adjustments to the temperature parameter
(Yang et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024a; Pluhacek et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2024) or utilizing pre-existing
natural selection techniques such as binary tournament selection and “island models” (Qiu et al.,
2024; Romera-Paredes et al., 2024). It remains to be investigated whether the reasoning capabilities
of LLMs could be further harnessed to guide more intelligent exploratory behaviors in the search
space. For the other, current LLM-aided evolutionary approaches generally lack a strong connection
to the specific nature of real-world problems, which leads to suboptimal performances and solutions
that can not generalize well.
Recently, LLMs have also made their way into the realm of robot design automation. Robot design
automation represents a persistent challenge in modern robotics that aims to evolve robot morphol-
ogy with minimal human intervention (Hu et al., 2022; 2023; Song et al., 2024a). However, related
work is sparse and only represent rudimentary attempts. To our best knowledge, the only pertinent
studies are Zhang (2024), Qiu et al. (2024) and Lehman et al. (2023). While Zhang (2024) uti-
lizes LLMs to tune the hyperparameters of traditional EAs, the latter two pioneer the use of LLMs
as search operators for robot design. Nonetheless, they bear the same limitations as listed above,
which greatly hinder the application of LLMs to robot design automation. In particular, with grow-
ing interest in soft robots due to their versatility and biomimetic properties, their vast design spaces
and intricacy of interaction dynamics among body parts cause existing search algorithms to gener-
ally fall short. This highlights the need for more judicious exploration that navigates a variety of
design options while ensuring progressive enhancement in functionality (Bhatia et al., 2021; Shah
et al., 2021; Song et al., 2024a; Saito & Oka, 2024). Furthermore, as it is common to have access
to a repository of pre-designed robots from related tasks when designing for new applications, it is
highly relevant to explore the inter-task reasoning capabilities of LLMs to facilitate positive transfer
of prior design experience, thus fostering more generalizable design processes.
To address the aforementioned limitations, here we propose LASeR – Large Language Model-
Aided Evolutionary Search for Robot Design Automation. LASeR distinguishes itself from previ-
ous LLM-aided evolutionary frameworks with a more delicate exploration strategy and generalizable
optimization processes. Specifically, we present a novel Diversity Reflection Mechanism termed Di-
Rect, which strategically instructs an LLM to reflect upon previously generated designs and suggest
viable modifications to enhance diversity while preserving essential functional substructures. This
mechanism thus fosters more knowledgeable exploratory behaviors that closely align with task ob-
jectives. Furthermore, by exploiting the abundant descriptive information available in robotic tasks,
we not only yield substantially accelerated convergence to high-performing designs, but also un-
precedentedly uncover the potential of LLMs to reason across different tasks and assimilate prior
design experience for zero-shot robot proposals in new tasks.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows: (i) By interleaving evolutionary processes with
diversity-oriented reflective thinking, we reshape the exploration-exploitation tradeoff of LLM-aided
evolution with simultaneous improvements in solution diversity and optimization effciency. The for-
mer is particularly relevant for enhancing the robustness of robotic systems in volatile environments.
(ii) With evolution firmly grounded in the background information of optimization tasks, we unlock
the inter-task reasoning capabilities of LLMs in evolutionary computation, hopefully inspiring fu-
ture work to further promote the generalizability of LLM-aided evolution across different problem
settings. (iii) By unleashing the prowess of LLMs for robot design automation, we also aim to in-
spire future work that synergizes both robotic design and control with LLMs, achieving closed-loop
development of embodied agents.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Large Language Models as Evolutionary Search Operators. Large Language Models (LLMs)
represent a class of deep generative neural networks comprising billions or trillions of parameters
and pretrained on web-scale texual data. In recent years, LLMs have demonstrated impressive rea-


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


soning, decision making, and generalization capabilities (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023;
Team et al., 2023; Team, 2023), which have sparked a flurry of research into exploiting them for op-
timization problems (Huang et al., 2024b; Wu et al., 2024). By receiving history search trajectories
from the prompt (or context), LLMs have demonstrated effectiveness as pattern completion engines
(Mirchandani et al., 2023), proposing improved solutions and facilitating evolutionary optimization
through iterative interactions. Moreover, LLMs are adept at conditioning problem-solving processes
on various kinds of prior knowledge expressed in natural language, without needing tedious mathe-
matical formulations (Song et al., 2024b). All these favorable attributes position LLMs as promising
substitutes for the manually designed search heuristics in traditional evolutionary algorithms (EAs),
acting as novel, intelligent search operators. Since Lehman et al. (2023) introduced this LLM-
aided evolutionary paradigm, subsequent studies have extended its methodology and showcased its
proficiency in classic optimization tasks like the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) and numeri-
cal functions (Liu et al., 2024a; Brahmachary et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024a), as well as practical
problems spanning prompt optimization (Guo et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024), code generation (Mey-
erson et al., 2023; Morris et al., 2024; Romera-Paredes et al., 2024), robotic control (Lange et al.,
2024), etc. However, we argue that the use of LLMs as search operators is still in its early stage,
with much of their potential untapped. Notably, existing studies have focused solely on single-task
optimization, overlooking the intriguing possibility of LLMs to transfer experience across different
tasks. Additionally, although LLMs have been shown to trail behind traditional EAs in balancing ex-
ploration and exploitation (Huang et al., 2024a; Tran & Hy, 2024), this nuanced aspect has received
limited attention from previous research. We aim to tackle these limitations in this work.
Robot Design Automation. As Artificial Intelligence (AI) continues to revolutionize academia
and industry, there is an increasing focus on integrating the perceptual and planning capabilities
of multi-modal foundation models into various physical embodiments capable of interacting with
their environments – a research field known as Embodied AI (Roy et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2024c).
These advancements highlight the significance of autonomous robot design. Earlier works on robot
design automation relied on traditional evolutionary algorithms and primarily targeted rigid robots
(Sims, 1994; Chocron & Bidaud, 1997; Leger, 2012; Wang et al., 2019). In recent years, modular
soft robots have garnered broad attention due to their flexibility, expressiveness, and biomimetic
characteristics (Hiller & Lipson, 2011; Bhatia et al., 2021; Medvet et al., 2021). However, these
advantages are accompanied by a combinatorially vast design space, necessitating more efficient
search algorithms (Cheney et al., 2014). Consequently, an emerging line of research resorts to the
estimation-of-distribution algorithms (EDAs) to enhance sample efficiency by explicitly tracking the
distribution of high-performing robot designs. These approaches further leverage deep generative
models, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs; Goodfellow et al., 2020) and Variational
Autoencoders (VAEs; Kingma, 2013), to bolster the representational capacity of EDAs (Hu et al.,
2022; Song et al., 2024a). Despite their promising results, these models still require problem-specific
mathematical formulation and neural architecture design, which is highly dependent on domain
expertise and poorly generalizable. In this respect, Large Language Models, with their strong in-
context learning abilities and extensive prior knowledge, hold the promise to transform the robotic
design process (Stella et al., 2023). Nevertheless, the exploration of LLMs in this respect is sparse
and warrants further investigation (Lehman et al., 2023; Zhang, 2024; Qiu et al., 2024).


3     LAS E R: LLM-A IDED E VOLUTIONARY S EARCH FOR ROBOT D ESIGN
      AUTOMATION

In this section, we first present an overview of our algorithm, and then delve into the details of our
prompt design and the novel Diversity Reflection Mechanism. Subsequently, we describe how LLMs
can be instructed to facilitate effective knowledge transfer across different tasks, followed by a brief
introduction to our fitness evaluation protocols.

3.1   A LGORITHM F RAMEWORK

As illustrated in Figure 1(a) and detailed by Algorithm 1 in Appendix P, we integrate an LLM into
the bi-level optimization framework commonly employed in robot design automation. Specifically,
the inner loop optimizes a controller for each robot morphology through reinforcement learning,
with the resulting task performance serving as the fitness evaluation. The outer loop evolves a


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             (a) Algorithm Overview of LASeR
                                                                Inner Loop
            EA Warm Start
                  or                                     Control Optimization &                                          Termination
      Zero-Shot Proposals by LLM                           Fitness Evaluation

         Generated Offspring                                 Natural Selection                            Elite Robot Designs
                                                                Outer Loop


        Diversity Reflection (DiRect) Mechanism                                                          Prompt
                                                                                      Metadata (task objective, constraints, etc.)
                      Output
                                                                                               Elite Design-Fitness Pairs
                                                                     Input
         LLM as Intelligent Search Operator                                                           Target Fitness


               (b) DiRect Mechanism                                          (c) An example of Diversity Reflection
               Originally Generated                                          LLM
                  Robot Designs

                                                                                     This robot design is too similar to an existing
      pass                            fail                                           one. Which voxels could be modified to increase
                 Similarity Check                                                    diversity, without compromising its fitness?

                               Diversity Reflection                      Replace (4,3) with a horizontal actuator.
                                                                         Change (2,1) and (2,3) to soft voxels
                                                                         ......
                       pass                           fail
                                Similarity Check                                        Please generate the modified robot design
      append               append                                                       based on your analysis.

               Generated Offspring             discard



Figure 1: (a) algorithm overview of LASeR; (b) the Diversity Reflection (DiRect) Mechanism; (c)
an example illustrating how Diversity Reflection works on a carrying robot. The illustration takes
voxel-based soft robots (VSRs; Bhatia et al., 2021) as an example. Each VSR is represented as
a two-dimensional material matrix, where each entry, ranging from 0 to 4, represents the material
type at the corresponding position. , , , and denote rigid voxels, soft voxels, horizontal
actuators, vertical actuators and empty voxels, respectively.


population of robot morphologies by carrying out natural selection and generating new offspring
solutions in each generation. Here, instead of traditional evolutionary algorithms (EAs) that rely on
manually designed search heuristics for generating offspring, an LLM is properly prompted to be
our search operator. This is achieved by providing the LLM with previously evaluated robots and
various kinds of metadata as context. However, we still bootstrap the evolutionary process with a
few generations of conventional EAs before letting the LLM play its part, as this warm start would
provide the LLM with an initial momentum (i.e., improving directions) to build upon. Evolution
terminates when a maximum number of robot evaluations is reached. We term our approach LASeR,
short for LLM-Aided Evolutionary Search for Robot Design Automation. The following subsections
elaborate on the key components of LASeR. Note that while the introduction takes voxel-based soft
robots (VSRs) proposed in Bhatia et al. (2021) as an example, our approach is readily applicable to
other robot types. For a detailed introduction to VSRs, please refer to Bhatia et al. (2021).

3.2    P ROMPT D ESIGN

As discussed in Section 3.1, the LLM is prompted to propose new offspring designs in each gen-
eration. As effective prompt design is crucial to elicit desired responses from LLMs, we craft a
well-structured prompt comprising the following essential components:

        • Task-related metadata: this part includes various auxiliary information to in-context
          adapt the LLM to serve as a search operator, including task objectives, descriptions of


                                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         simulation environment, constraints on robot designs, etc. This component is largely de-
         rived from the official documents of EvoGym (Bhatia et al., 2021). This metadata is largely
         missing in previous studies. We would showcase in our experiments that by fully ground-
         ing the evolutionary process on task-related metadata, we not only achieve more efficient
         design optimization, but also elicit inter-task reasoning capabilities from LLMs that greatly
         boost the generalization of design experience.
       • Elite design-fitness pairs: this part includes robot designs that have survived natural se-
         lection, each accompanied by its fitness score. These designs are sorted in ascending order
         of fitness, so as to make it easier for the LLM to infer continuation patterns and extrapolate
         to potentially improved designs.
       • Target fitness: we instruct the LLM to extrapolate from the sequence of elite designs and
         generate new designs that meet a pre-specified fitness score (e.g. 120% of current maximal
         fitness). This is referred to as the “just-ask” query in previous studies (Lim et al., 2024).
Additionally, we include some basic requirements into the system prompt to better align the behavior
of the LLM with our intention. For instance, the LLM is strictly demanded to output new robot
designs in numpy array format, enclosed between <solution> and </solution>, to allow for easier
parsing. Even so, LLMs are still not guaranteed to generate valid robot designs in every interaction.
To keep runtime and cost under control, we set an upper limit on interactions; once the limit is
reached, we revert to a conventional EA to generate the remaining offspring. For full prompts please
refer to Appendix A.

3.3   D I R ECT: D IVERSITY R EFLECTION M ECHANISM

The exploration-exploitation tradeoff is a longstanding dilemma in evolutionary computation. Prop-
erly timed exploratory behavior would contribute to search processes that not only are less prone
to getting stuck in local optima, but also produce more diversified solutions. The latter property
is particularly relevant for developing robotic systems in dynamic environments, where first-choice
robots, once fail, must be immediately replaced with alternatives. However, it has been shown that
LLMs often struggle to balance exploration and exploitation, yielding inferior solution diversity to
existing EAs (Huang et al., 2024a; Tran & Hy, 2024). While many previous studies addressed this
issue by tuning the temperature parameter of LLMs or resorting to diversity-preserving selection
techniques, in this work we introduce a novel Diversity Reflection Mechanism (DiRect) that lever-
ages the reasoning capabilities of LLMs to guide exploratory behaviors.
The idea of DiRect is straightforward. As depicted in Figure 1(b), for each newly proposed robot
design, we assess its similarity to previously evaluated designs with a probability p. The new design
is said to fail the similarity check if it shares more than s voxels with at least one existing robot.
In this case, the DiRect mechanism is triggered. Specifically, the LLM is first prompted to suggest
modifications to voxels that could enhance variability without compromising fitness, with existing
high-performing examples as reference. The LLM is then asked to return the modified robot design
according to these suggestions. In section 4 we show that this reflection mechanism fosters more
beneficial exploratory behavior in the search space, leading to more diversified robot designs while
maintaining relevance to the task objective. Figure 1(c) displays a specific example where DiRect
helps to modify a newly proposed carrying robot. The similarity threshold s is an important hyper-
parameter that controls the performance of LASeR. We include general principles for choosing s,
supported by experimental evaluations, in Appendix L.

3.4   LLM FOR I NTER -TASK K NOWLEDGE T RANSFER

The algorithm described thus far treats the robot design of each task independently, starting with
a randomly initialized population. However, it is often the case that we already have access to a
repository of pre-designed robots from existing tasks when designing for a new one. Under this
circumstance, leveraging the prior design experience in one way or another would hopefully afford
a boost in sample efficiency. However, to discern functional substructures from highly abstract robot
morphologies (e.g. voxel-based soft robots), as well as to speculate which substructures will benefit
a new task, poses a major challenge to humans. Our work represents a pioneering effort to exploit
the reasoning capabilities of LLMs for this purpose. Specifically, by specifying the characteristics of
task A and B, along with a collection of high-performing robot designs from task A, we instruct an


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LLM to analyze the similarities and differences between the two tasks and infer potentially favorable
substructures (such as specific patterns of voxel assembly) for task B. Based on this analysis, the
LLM then proposes robot designs for task B, thus enabling zero-shot robot proposals (where “zero-
shot” means that no evaluated robot samples from the new task are required). These robot proposals
can then serve as an informative initialization to initiate further design search for task B.

3.5   F ITNESS E VALUATION

In this work, we use the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm to optimize a separate con-
troller for each robot design. The PPO algorithm enhances conventional gradient-based reinforce-
ment learning algorithms by incorporating importance sampling into gradient estimation, allowing
for the reuse of sample trajectories across multiple parameter updates. The PPO algorithm alternates
between two key phases – data collection and policy update – until a predefined number of iterations
are completed. With an optimized controller that maps environmental observations to appropriate
actuation signals, we measure the fitness of a robot by calculating the cumulative reward it receives
over a complete episode, which reflects its performance in accomplishing a given task. For further
details on the PPO algorithm, please refer to Schulman et al. (2017).


4     E XPERIMENTS

We begin this section with an introduction to our experimental setups, and then analyze the results of
our comparison and ablation studies in detail. Our experiments are designed to address the following
questions:

• Q1: Can LASeR outperform state-of-the-art baselines in robot design automation?
• Q2: To what extent does DiRect improve the exploration-exploitation tradeoff of LLM-aided
  evolution?
• Q3: Does task metadata bring additional benefits to single-task robot design automation? More-
  over, does it aid inter-task experience transfer and enable zero-shot robot design for new tasks?
• Q4: Previous studies have shown that different temperature parameters and versions of LLMs
  yield varying evolutionary outcomes. What are the specific impacts of these factors in our context?

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS

Benchmark Setting. We base our experiments on Evolution Gym (EvoGym; Bhatia et al., 2021), a
simulation environment designed for voxel-based soft robots (VSRs). In EvoGym, VSRs are repre-
sented in a grid-like layout and consist of five types of voxels: rigid voxels, soft voxels, horizontal
actuators, vertical actuators, and empty voxels. VSRs achieve motion control by altering the vol-
umes of actuators either horizontally or vertically according to action signals. For benchmarking of
single-task optimization, we select four task instances: one locomotion task, Walker-v0, and three
manipulation tasks, Carrier-v0, Pusher-v0 and Catcher-v0. For experiments of inter-task knowl-
edge transfer, we use BridgeWalker-v0 and UpStepper-v0. A detailed introduction to these tasks is
provided in Appendix B. For more information on EvoGym, please refer to Bhatia et al. (2021).
Baselines. We compare our method against the following baselines: (i) Bayesian Optimization
(BO) (Kushner, 1964; Mockus, 1974)), a classic algorithm for optimizing expensive-to-evaluate
functions. It employs a probabilistic model as the surrogate function and samples candidate solu-
tions based on predicted mean and uncertainty. (ii) Speciated Evolver (SE) (Medvet et al., 2021)),
a variant of the genetic algorithm (GA; Michalewicz, 2013) that divides the population into species
to preserve diversity and prevent premature convergence. (iii) RoboGAN (Hu et al., 2022), an
estimation-of-distribution algorithm (EDA) that utilizes the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
to track the distribution of high-performing robot designs and generate new candidate solutions. (iv)
The last baseline, which we term LLM-Tuner, is adapted from Zhang (2024) that uses LLMs to
supervise the hyperparameter tuning of a genetic algorithm. Drawing comparison with LLM-Tuner
would directly verify the benefits of LLMs serving as intelligent search operators. We addition-
ally draw comparisons with two latest generative model-based evolutionary algorithms, MorphVAE
(Song et al., 2024a) and OPRO (Yang et al., 2024), with results presented in Appendix F.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Evaluation Metrics. We employ the following metrics to evaluate the performance of various
approaches: (i) Maximal Fitness, defined as the fitness of the best-performing robot design achieved
within a specific number of evaluations. This metric is commonly used in robot design automation to
assess optimization efficiency. (ii) Diversity: Given the significance of developing diverse robotic
ecosystems to handle volatile environments, we measure the diversity of high-performing robot
designs1 from two perspectives: one is the average edit distance among all pairs of high-performing
robot designs (Saito & Oka, 2024), and the other is the total number of distinct high-performing
robot designs. We further aggregate the two values via weighted averaging, where the latter is
multiplied by 0.1 so that they are roughly on the same scale and given equal importance. Please
refer to Appendix J for a detailed discussion on diversity measurement. We also include an analysis
of computational efficiency in Appendix O.
Implementation Details. We use GPT-4o-mini for both LASeR and LLM-Tuner, with the tempera-
ture parameter set as 0.7. For ablation studies, we additionally try out GPT-3.5-Turbo and tempera-
tures of 1 and 1.5. Following the common practice in previous VSR studies (Song et al., 2024a; Saito
& Oka, 2024; Dong et al., 2023; Bhatia et al., 2021), we choose the simple yet effective control pro-
tocol for fitness evaluation, i.e., Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) as the controller for each robot design
and PPO algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017) for policy training. Following previous studies on VSR
design (Song et al., 2024a; Saito & Oka, 2024; Dong et al., 2023; Bhatia et al., 2021), robot designs
are constrained to a 5×5 bounding box for an expressive yet tractable search space. Nevertheless, as
demonstrated in Appendix G, our approach is scalable to larger design spaces. For fair comparison,
each method is permitted 1000 robot evaluations. Experimental results of comparative studies are
averaged across five independent runs. Our experiments are conducted on a server equipped with
Intel Xeon processors running at 2.20 GHz and four NVIDIA Tesla RTX GPUs, with the system
operating under Ubuntu 22.04. We relegate additional parameter settings to Appendix C. For further
implementation details, please refer to our code repository2 .

4.2                      C OMPARISON S TUDIES

4.2.1                      S INGLE -TASK O PTIMIZATION
We begin our analysis by examining single-task optimization performances. As demonstrated in
Figure 2, LASeR nearly consistently outperforms all baselines across the three tasks with significant
margins. Specifically, LASeR achieves rapid convergence speeds to optimal robot designs, with
only one exception on Walker-v0, where LLM-Tuner demonstrates slightly faster convergence in the
early stage of evolution but ends up further from optimality. The superior performance of LASeR
compared to LLM-Tuner highlights that LLMs have more important roles to play beyond merely
tuning hyperparameters for traditional EAs. Results of significance tests are in Appendix D.

                  10.7
                                                  Maximal Fitness


                                                                                                  Maximal Fitness


                                                                                                                    12.5
Maximal Fitness


                                                                                                                                                Maximal Fitness


                                                                    10                                                                                            0.8
                  10.6                                                                                              10.0
                                                                     5                                                                                            0.7
                                                                                                                     7.5
                  10.5                                               0 250 500 750 1000                                0 250 500 750 1000
                      0     250 500 750 1000                                                                                                                        0     250 500 750 1000
                          Number of Evaluations                       Number of Evaluations                             Number of Evaluations                           Number of Evaluations
                         (a) Walker-v0                                   (b) Carrier-v0                                    (c) Pusher-v0                                (d) Catcher-v0
                                    LASeR (ours)                              BO          SE                                   RoboGAN                            LLM-Tuner


                                   Figure 2: Comparative results of single-task optimization efficiency.

Table 4.2.1 further demonstrates the diversity of high-performing robot designs achieved by dif-
ferent methods. We observe that LASeR surpasses all baselines in three of the four tasks. We
additionally compare the fitness performance of robot designs before and after being modified by
DiRect, and find no significant difference (see Appendix E). This suggests that our Diversity Reflec-
tion Mechanism indeed encourages the LLM to introduce variability into robot design while keeping
    1
      We first calculate the 90% quantile of fitnesses obtained by all methods, and consider robot designs with
fitness exceeding this threshold as high-performing.
    2
      https://github.com/WoodySJR/LASeR


                                                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


its functionality largely intact. These results validate the distinct advantage of DiRect to promote
beneficial exploratory behaviors directed towards high-performing regions. It is worth noting that
the Bayesian Optimization algorithm, known for a balance between exploration and exploitation in
its acquisition function, actually compromises a great deal of optimization efficiency for exploration
and fails to generate high-performing robots in many cases. On the contrary, LASeR reshapes the
exploration-exploitation tradeoff of LLM-aided evolution to yield dual benefits in optimization ef-
ficiency and diversity. For separate results of the edit distance and the number of high-performing
designs, please refer to Appendix J. However, we note that the diversity of LASeR in Catcher-v0
is not as competitive. We suspect this is due to task complexity. Specifically, for more challeng-
ing tasks like Catcher-v0, while LLMs are still capable of extrapolating from existing solutions (as
shown in Figure 2(d)), they struggle to recognize finer-grained functional structures. As a result,
they might have difficulty introducing variability without compromising performance. We believe
that helping LLMs better understand the roles of different parts within robot morphology—such as
by incorporating images/videos of robots interacting with the environment—could be a promising
direction for future research.

                    Table 1: Comparative results of diversity (reported as mean (std)).
                             Walker-v0       Carrier-v0         Pusher-v0     Catcher-v0     Average Rank
          BO                    N/A         11.88 (2.77)       13.68 (2.10)   19.76 (1.10)         3
          SE                 5.24 (0.26)    15.26 (1.52)       7.26 (3.91)    13.91 (2.27)       3.25
          RoboGAN               N/A         10.94 (N/A)            N/A        18.27 (1.44)         4
          LLM-Tuner         11.60 (4.35)    18.26 (6.00)       14.17 (6.83)   13.89 (7.32)        2.5
          LASeR (ours)      23.09 (5.33)    20.87 (4.27)       20.91 (8.85)    8.07 (2.48)         2

Note: When no more than one high-performing robot design is produced, diversity cannot be calculated.
When this is the case across all repeated trials (e.g. BO on Walker-v0), the result is reported as “N/A”. When
high-performing robots emerge in only one trial (e.g. RoboGAN in Carrier-v0), the standard deviation is
unavailable and reported as “N/A”.


4.2.2      I NTER -TASK K NOWLEDGE T RANSFER

Now we proceed to examine the ability of LLMs to transfer design experience across different
tasks. To achieve this purpose, we introduce two more tasks: BridgeWalker-v0 and UpStepper-
v0. Specifically, both BridgeWalker-v0 and UpStepper-v0 bear some resemblance to Walker-v0,
but differ in their terrains: BridgeWalker-v0 involves locomotion on a soft rope-bridge, whereas
UpStepper-v0 requires climbing stairs of varying lengths. The LLM is prompted to generate robot
designs for each new task, given elite Walker-v0 robot designs. As shown in Figure 3(b)3 , the zero-
shot proposals by LLM outperform both randomly generated designs and elite Walker-v0 designs
evolved by LASeR, in terms of accomplishing the new tasks. This serves as sound evidence that
the LLM is not simply replicating examplars in its context, but rather assimilating design experience
that is beneficial for new settings. This is largely owing to our incorporation of task-related metadata
that provokes inter-task reasoning within the LLM. For illustration, Figure 3(a) demonstrates some
insights that the LLM drew from Walker-v0 elites to transfer to BridgeWalker-v0.
The zero-shot proposals are then leveraged as the initial population for further optimization. Figure
3(c-1) and 3(c-2) demonstrate that this informative initialization results in faster evolution than start-
ing from scratch, and pulls away from baseline algorithms with even greater advantage. Also note
that the zero-shot proposals for BridgeWalker-v0 turn out to be already near optimal before under-
going marginal improvement with evolution. These promising results unprecedentedly uncover the
possibility of generalizable evolutionary processes driven by LLMs and hopefully inspire closer in-
vestigation in future work. Please note that while here we focus on intuitively similar task instances,
we show in Appendix M that this is not strictly necessary for successful experience transfer.


   3
       The result is averaged over ten robot designs in each case.


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       (a) Example of design experience transferred from Walker-v0 to BridgeWalker-v0.


                           (b) Zero-shot performance                                        (c-1) BridgeWalker-v0                                      (c-2) UpStepper-v0

                                              Figure 3: Results of inter-task knowledge transfer.


4.3                      A BLATION S TUDIES

4.3.1                      E FFECTIVENESS OF D I R ECT

As shown in Table 4.3.1, the Diversity Reflection Mechanism fosters a robust increase in diversity
compared to an ablated version. It is further demonstrated in Figure 4 that the exploratory behaviors
led by DiRect also facilitate more efficient navigating of design spaces, leading to reduced sus-
ceptibility to local optima and higher optimization efficiency. These results combine to underscore
the distinct superiority of DiRect to yield dual benefits in optimization efficiency and diversity by
exploiting the reasoning capabilities of LLMs.

                                         Table 2: Ablative results of diversity (reported as mean (std))
                                                                               Walker-v0         Carrier-v0                           Pusher-v0        Catcher-v0
                                 LASeR                                        23.09 (5.33)      20.87 (4.27)                         20.91 (8.85)      8.07 (2.48)
                                 LASeR w/o DiRect                             16.96 (1.38)       7.28 (1.13)                         10.50 (1.04)      5.65 (1.11)


                  10.7
                                                                                                                       12.5
                                                                                                                                                       Maximal Fitness
Maximal Fitness


                                                  Maximal Fitness


                                                                                                     Maximal Fitness


                                                                    10.0                                                                                                 0.8

                  10.6                                                                                                 10.0
                                                                     7.5
                                                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                        7.5
                  10.5                                               5.0
                      0     250 500 750 1000                            0     250 500 750 1000                             0     250 500 750 1000                          0     250 500 750 1000
                          Number of Evaluations                             Number of Evaluations                              Number of Evaluations                           Number of Evaluations
                         (a) Walker-v0                                     (b) Carrier-v0                                     (c) Pusher-v0                                    (d) Catcher-v0
                                                                                 LASeR                                  LASeR (w/o DiRect)


Figure 4: Ablative results of single-task optimization efficiency. The results of the ablated version
are averaged across three repeated runs.



                                                                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.3.2                  E FFECTIVENESS OF TASK -R ELATED M ETADATA
As explained in Section 3.2, current LLM-aided evolutionary frameworks mostly lack sufficient
grounding in task-related background information, which potentially impedes their performances
in real-world applications. We test this conjecture by removing descriptions of task objectives and
simulation environment from our prompts, and see a significant performance drop (Figure 5(a)),
hence justifying our prompt design. For finer-grained ablations on individual components of the
prompt, please see Appendix K.

4.3.3                  I MPACT OF LLM V ERSION AND T EMPERATURE PARAMETER
Previous work has shown that the temperature parameter of LLMs has an unignorable influence
on evolutionary outcomes, with higher temperatures tending to yield better results (Pluhacek et al.,
2024). However, we observe a reverse effect where a lower temperature turns out slightly more fa-
vorable (Figure 5(b)). We suspect that this is partly due to the complexity within VSR design, which
necessitates precise extrapolation from an ascending sequence of solutions. Any deviation could
lead to substantial performance drops, outweighing the benefits of random exploration. Meanwhile,
we note that the ablation studies with temperature as 1.5 fail similarity checks only about 70% as
often as when temperature equals 0.7. In words, higher temperatures would lead to greater but inef-
fective variability in candidate solutions so that they could bypass diversity reflection. These results
suggest that lower output temperatures are required for our approach to work better. Additionally,
we observe the same improvement resulted from more up-to-date LLMs as in past literature (Fig-
ure 5(c)). This shows promise of robot design automation directly benefiting from better language
models, which puts us in a strategic position to ride the wave of rapidly progressing LLMs.
Maximal Fitness


                                                       Maximal Fitness


                                                                                                        Maximal Fitness
                  10                                                     10                                               10


                   8                                                      8   LASeR                                        8
                           LASeR                                              LASeR (temperature=1)                                 LASeR
                           LASeR (w/o task metadata)                          LASeR (temperature=1.5)                               LASeR (GPT-3.5)

                   0     250 500 750 1000                                 0
                                                                      250 500 750 1000                                     0    250 500 750 1000
                      Number of Evaluations                         Number of Evaluations                                     Number of Evaluations
                  (a) Impact of task metadata                 (b) Impact of LLM temperature                               (c) Impact of LLM version
Figure 5: Additional ablation studies on Carrier-v0. The results of the ablated versions are averaged
across three repeated runs.

5                  C ONCLUDING R EMARKS
We present LASeR – Large Language Model-Aided Evolutionary Search for Robot Design Au-
tomation. With a novel diversity-oriented reflection mechanism termed DiRect, we elicit intelligent
exploratory behaviors from LLMs that reshape the exploration-exploitation tradeoff with dual im-
provements in optimization efficiency and diversity. We additionally propose to ground robot design
on rich task-related metadata and uncover the intriguing inter-task reasoning capabilities of LLMs to
foster generalizable design processes across different applications. Our experiments with simulated
voxel-based soft robots demonstrate superior performances of our approach compared to competi-
tive baselines. Scaling up LASeR for multi-task optimization would hopefully further harness the
inter-task reasoning abilities of LLMs to boost sample efficiency. It is also interesting to investigate
how LLM-aided control strategies (Wang et al., 2023a) could be integrated into our framework, so
that LLMs are not only responsible for action planning, but also enabled to design their own em-
bodiments, hence exploiting the synergy between design and control. We leave these for our future
work. For a more detailed discussion of limitations and open problems, please refer to Appendix N.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.72371241), the MOE
Project of Key Research Institute of Humanities and Social Sciences (22JJD110001), and Zhiqiang
Foundation. The authors would like to thank all the anonymous reviewers for their valuable com-
ments.


                                                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS S TATEMENT

This work uses simulated task environments which have been commonly used in previous research
of robot design automation and should not be regarded controversial. Our use of Large Language
Models is strictly confined to simulated robot design generation without real-world deployment, and
therefore does not involve any safety risks.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Our code is readily available on GitHub. This work uses GPT-3-turbo and GPT-4o-mini, whose APIs
are publicly accessible. However, due to the uncontrollable random generator seeds behind closed-
source LLMs, experiments involving these models generally suffer from limited reproducibility
(Huang et al., 2024a). Developing reproducible methods for API calls would significantly improve
the replicability of research outcomes involving Large Language Models.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Jagdeep Bhatia, Holly Jackson, Yunsheng Tian, Jie Xu, and Wojciech Matusik. Evolution gym:
  A large-scale benchmark for evolving soft robots. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:2201–2214, 2021.
Shuvayan Brahmachary, Subodh M Joshi, Aniruddha Panda, Kaushik Koneripalli, Arun Ku-
  mar Sagotra, Harshil Patel, Ankush Sharma, Ameya D Jagtap, and Kaushic Kalyanaraman.
  Large language model-based evolutionary optimizer: Reasoning with elitism. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.02054, 2024.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choroman-
  ski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
Chi-Lam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Ya Jing, Tao Kong, Hang Li, Yifeng Li, Yuxiao Liu, Hongtao
  Wu, Jiafeng Xu, Yichu Yang, et al. Gr-2: A generative video-language-action model with web-
  scale knowledge for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06158, 2024.
Nick Cheney, Robert MacCurdy, Jeff Clune, and Hod Lipson. Unshackling evolution: evolving soft
  robots with multiple materials and a powerful generative encoding. ACM SIGEVOlution, 7(1):
  11–23, 2014.
Olivier Chocron and Philippe Bidaud. Evolutionary algorithms in kinematic design of robotic sys-
  tems. In Proceedings of the 1997 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robot and
  Systems. Innovative Robotics for Real-World Applications. IROS’97, volume 2, pp. 1111–1117.
  IEEE, 1997.
François Cochevelou, David Bonner, and Martin-Pierre Schmidt. Differentiable soft-robot gener-
  ation. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 129–137,
  2023.
Heng Dong, Junyu Zhang, and Chongjie Zhang. Leveraging hyperbolic embeddings for coarse-to-
  fine robot design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00462, 2023.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian,
  and Yujiu Yang. Connecting large language models with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful
  prompt optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08532, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jonathan Hiller and Hod Lipson. Automatic design and manufacture of soft robots. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Robotics, 28(2):457–466, 2011.

Jiaheng Hu, Julian Whitman, Matthew Travers, and Howie Choset. Modular robot design optimiza-
   tion with generative adversarial networks. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and
   Automation (ICRA), pp. 4282–4288. IEEE, 2022.

Jiaheng Hu, Julian Whitman, and Howie Choset. Glso: Grammar-guided latent space optimization
   for sample-efficient robot design automation. In Karen Liu, Dana Kulic, and Jeff Ichnowski (eds.),
   Proceedings of The 6th Conference on Robot Learning, volume 205 of Proceedings of Machine
   Learning Research, pp. 1321–1331. PMLR, 14–18 Dec 2023. URL https://proceedings.
   mlr.press/v205/hu23c.html.

Beichen Huang, Xingyu Wu, Yu Zhou, Jibin Wu, Liang Feng, Ran Cheng, and Kay Chen Tan.
  Exploring the true potential: Evaluating the black-box optimization capability of large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06290, 2024a.

Sen Huang, Kaixiang Yang, Sheng Qi, and Rui Wang. When large language model meets optimiza-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.10098, 2024b.

Diederik P Kingma. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

Sam Kriegman, Douglas Blackiston, Michael Levin, and Josh Bongard. A scalable pipeline for
  designing reconfigurable organisms. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(4):
  1853–1859, 2020a.

Sam Kriegman, Amir Mohammadi Nasab, Dylan Shah, Hannah Steele, Gabrielle Branin, Michael
  Levin, Josh Bongard, and Rebecca Kramer-Bottiglio. Scalable sim-to-real transfer of soft robot
  designs. In 2020 3rd IEEE international conference on soft robotics (RoboSoft), pp. 359–366.
  IEEE, 2020b.

Sam Kriegman, Douglas Blackiston, Michael Levin, and Josh Bongard. Kinematic self-replication
  in reconfigurable organisms. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(49):
  e2112672118, 2021.

Harold J Kushner. A new method of locating the maximum point of an arbitrary multipeak curve in
  the presence of noise. 1964.

Robert Lange, Yingtao Tian, and Yujin Tang. Large language models as evolution strategies. In
  Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion, pp. 579–582,
  2024.

Chris Leger. Darwin2K: An evolutionary approach to automated design for robotics, volume 574.
  Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.

Julie Legrand, Seppe Terryn, Ellen Roels, and Bram Vanderborght. Reconfigurable, multi-material,
  voxel-based soft robots. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 8(3):1255–1262, 2023.

Joel Lehman, Jonathan Gordon, Shawn Jain, Kamal Ndousse, Cathy Yeh, and Kenneth O Stanley.
  Evolution through large models. In Handbook of Evolutionary Machine Learning, pp. 331–366.
  Springer, 2023.

Bryan Lim, Manon Flageat, and Antoine Cully. Large language models as in-context ai generators
  for quality-diversity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15794, 2024.

Shengcai Liu, Caishun Chen, Xinghua Qu, Ke Tang, and Yew-Soon Ong. Large language models as
  evolutionary optimizers. In 2024 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), pp. 1–8.
  IEEE, 2024a.

Tennison Liu, Nicolás Astorga, Nabeel Seedat, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Large language models
  to enhance bayesian optimization. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2024b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=OOxotBmGol.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yang Liu, Weixing Chen, Yongjie Bai, Jingzhou Luo, Xinshuai Song, Kaixuan Jiang, Zhida Li,
  Ganlong Zhao, Junyi Lin, Guanbin Li, et al. Aligning cyber space with physical world: A com-
  prehensive survey on embodied ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06886, 2024c.
Pingchuan Ma, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Minghao Guo, Zhiqing Sun, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Daniela Rus,
  Chuang Gan, and Wojciech Matusik. Llm and simulation as bilevel optimizers: A new paradigm
  to advance physical scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.09783, 2024.
Eric Medvet, Alberto Bartoli, Federico Pigozzi, and Marco Rochelli. Biodiversity in evolved voxel-
  based soft robots. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp.
  129–137, 2021.
Elliot Meyerson, Mark J Nelson, Herbie Bradley, Adam Gaier, Arash Moradi, Amy K Hoover, and
  Joel Lehman. Language model crossover: Variation through few-shot prompting. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.12170, 2023.
Zbigniew Michalewicz. Genetic algorithms+ data structures= evolution programs. Springer Sci-
  ence & Business Media, 2013.
Suvir Mirchandani, Fei Xia, Pete Florence, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Montserrat Gonzalez Are-
  nas, Kanishka Rao, Dorsa Sadigh, and Andy Zeng. Large language models as general pattern
  machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04721, 2023.
Jonas Mockus. On bayesian methods for seeking the extremum. In Proceedings of the IFIP Techni-
  cal Conference, pp. 400–404, 1974.
Clint Morris, Michael Jurado, and Jason Zutty. Llm guided evolution-the automation of models
  advancing models. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp.
  377–384, 2024.
Michal Pluhacek, Jozef Kovac, Peter Janku, Tomas Kadavy, Roman Senkerik, and Adam Viktorin.
 A critical examination of large language model capabilities in iteratively refining differential evo-
 lution algorithm. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Com-
 panion, pp. 1855–1862, 2024.
Kevin Qiu, Krzysztof Ciebiera, Paweł Fijałkowski, Marek Cygan, and Łukasz Kuciński.
  Robomorph: Evolving robot morphology using large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.08626, 2024.
Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog,
  M Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco JR Ruiz, Jordan S Ellenberg, Pengming Wang,
  Omar Fawzi, et al. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models.
  Nature, 625(7995):468–475, 2024.
Nicholas Roy, Ingmar Posner, Tim Barfoot, Philippe Beaudoin, Yoshua Bengio, Jeannette Bohg,
  Oliver Brock, Isabelle Depatie, Dieter Fox, Dan Koditschek, et al. From machine learn-
  ing to robotics: Challenges and opportunities for embodied intelligence. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.15245, 2021.
Takumi Saito and Mizuki Oka. Effective design and interpretation in voxel-based soft robotics: A
  part assembly approach with bayesian optimization. In Artificial Life Conference Proceedings
  36, volume 2024, pp. 26. MIT Press One Rogers Street, Cambridge, MA 02142-1209, USA
  journals-info . . . , 2024.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Dylan S Shah, Joshua P Powers, Liana G Tilton, Sam Kriegman, Josh Bongard, and Rebecca
  Kramer-Bottiglio. A soft robot that adapts to environments through shape change. Nature Ma-
  chine Intelligence, 3(1):51–59, 2021.
Karl Sims. Evolving virtual creatures. In Proceedings of the 21st annual conference on Computer
  graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 15–22, 1994.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Junru Song, Yang Yang, Wei Peng, Weien Zhou, Feifei Wang, and Wen Yao. Morphvae: Advancing
  morphological design of voxel-based soft robots with variational autoencoders. In Proceedings
  of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 10368–10376, 2024a.
Xingyou Song, Yingtao Tian, Robert Tjarko Lange, Chansoo Lee, Yujin Tang, and Yutian Chen.
  Position: Leverage foundational models for black-box optimization. In Forty-first International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024b.
Francesco Stella, Cosimo Della Santina, and Josie Hughes. How can llms transform the robotic
  design process? Nature machine intelligence, 5(6):561–564, 2023.
Luke Strgar, David Matthews, Tyler Hummer, and Sam Kriegman. Evolution and learning in differ-
  entiable robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14712, 2024.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu,
  Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly
  capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
InternLM Team. Internlm: A multilingual language model with progressively enhanced capabilities,
   2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Thanh VT Tran and Truong Son Hy. Protein design by directed evolution guided by large language
  models. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 2024.
Tingwu Wang, Yuhao Zhou, Sanja Fidler, and Jimmy Ba. Neural graph evolution: Towards efficient
  automatic robot design. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05370, 2019.
Yen-Jen Wang, Bike Zhang, Jianyu Chen, and Koushil Sreenath. Prompt a robot to walk with large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.09969, 2023a.
Yuxing Wang, Shuang Wu, Tiantian Zhang, Yongzhe Chang, Haobo Fu, Qiang Fu, and Xueqian
  Wang. Preco: Enhancing generalization in co-design of modular soft robots via brain-body pre-
  training. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 478–498. PMLR, 2023b.
Xingyu Wu, Sheng-hao Wu, Jibin Wu, Liang Feng, and Kay Chen Tan. Evolutionary computation
  in the era of large language model: Survey and roadmap. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10034, 2024.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V. Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun
  Chen. Large language models as optimizers, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.
  03409.
Haoran Ye, Jiarui Wang, Zhiguang Cao, Federico Berto, Chuanbo Hua, Haeyeon Kim, Jinkyoo Park,
  and Guojie Song. Large language models as hyper-heuristics for combinatorial optimization,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01145.
Lechen Zhang. Cuda-accelerated soft robot neural evolution with large language model supervision.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00698, 2024.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A     F ULL P ROMPTS
A.1   S YSTEM P ROMPT FOR G ENERATING O FFSPRING ROBOT D ESIGNS

 Now you will serve as an intelligent search operator in an Evolutionary Algorithm. In each generation
 you are given a number of evaluated solutions in the format of numpy array, together with their fitness
 scores. Each solution and its fitness score are separated by a comma. Different solutions are separated
 by semicolons. The solutions are sorted according to their fitness scores in ascending order. Higher
 fitness scores are better. Your job is to output a new solution that meets a desired fitness. Please
 try your best to logically analyze the relationship between the evaluated solutions and their fitness
 scores, and adhere to this information while proposing the new solution. A solution is a 5 times 5 matrix,
 where each entry is an integer between zero and four. Please begin the new solution with <solution>
 and end it with </solution>. The new solution should be formatted in numpy array fashion. The new solution
 must be distinct from the evaluated solutions. Only generate the new solution. No explanation.


A.2   U SER P ROMPT FOR G ENERATING O FFSPRING ROBOT D ESIGNS (C ARRIER - V 0 AS AN
      EXAMPLE )


 ## Description of VSRs
 We are going to design the structure of a two-dimensional voxel-based soft robot (VSR) in a simulation
 environment. VSRs are composed of square-shaped voxels of different types, aligned into a 5 * 5 matrix.
 Adjacent voxels (that is, in either the same row or the same column) are connected together; Voxels
 located in diagonal positions are not connected together. The robot is subject to gravity, and the bottom
 row touches the ground. There are 5 types of voxels available, including soft voxels (for which elastic
 deformation is possible), rigid voxels (which can not deform), horizontal and vertical actuators (which
 can change their sizes horizontally or vertically), and empty voxels (which basically mean that the
 corresponding position is empty). Empty voxels, rigid voxels, soft voxels, horizontal actuators and
 vertical actuators are represented as 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively.

 ## Description of simulation environment
 The simulation represents objects and their environment as a 2D mass-spring system in a grid-like layout,
 where objects are initialized as a set of non-overlapping, connected voxels. The simulation converts
 all objects into a set of point masses and springs by turning each voxel into a cross-braced square,
 which may undergo deformation as the simulation progresses. The springs obey Hooke's law. Note that
 adjacent voxels share point masses and springs on their common edge. All point masses in the simulation
 have the same mass and the equilibrium lengths of axis-aligned and diagonal springs are constants for
 simplicity. However, the spring constants assigned vary based on voxel material-type, with ties broken
 in favor of the more-rigid spring. The actuators undergo gradual expansion/contraction either
 horizontally or vertically according to action signals, by changing the lengths of the corresponding
 springs.

 ## Task description
 Your job is to propose robot designs suitable for completing the following task. A three-voxel wide
 box is initialized right above the robot, and the robot is required to keep the box on top of its head
 stably without letting it slip off, while locomoting rightwards as quickly as possible.

 ## Constraints
 There are two constraints to VSR designs: 1. all voxels must form an entirety and should not fall apart;
 That is, the four voxels, if any, above, below, to the left and to the right of a non-empty voxel mustn't
 be    empty   at   the    same   time.    An    example    that   violates    such   a    constraint   is
 [[2,2,2,2,2],[1,0,1,0,1],[0,4,3,4,0],[1,3,1,0,1],[0,4,2,4,0]], in which the voxel '1' in the fourth
 row and fifth column would fall off because it is not connected to any non-empty voxel; (2) there must
 be at least one actuator (that is, either 3 or 4), so that the robot could interact with the environment.

 ## Additional requirements
 Please carefully analyze the relationship between evaluated solutions and their fitness scores, and
 make use of this information to propose the new solution. Please make use of empty voxels cleverly so
 that complex functional substructures could be produced to fulfill the purposes of both carrying and
 locomoting. Note that a high-performing robot design is not necessarily symmetric.
                                                   15
 (elite design-fitness pairs omitted, sorted in ascending order)
 ## Constraints
 There are two constraints to VSR designs: 1. all voxels must form an entirety and should not fall apart;
 That is, the four voxels, if any, above, below, to the left and to the right of a non-empty voxel mustn't
Published
 be        as a at
       empty    conference
                    the     paper time.
                           same   at ICLRAn2025example that violates such a constraint is
 [[2,2,2,2,2],[1,0,1,0,1],[0,4,3,4,0],[1,3,1,0,1],[0,4,2,4,0]], in which the voxel '1' in the fourth
 row and fifth column would fall off because it is not connected to any non-empty voxel; (2) there must
 be at least one actuator (that is, either 3 or 4), so that the robot could interact with the environment.

  ## Additional requirements
  Please carefully analyze the relationship between evaluated solutions and their fitness scores, and
  make use of this information to propose the new solution. Please make use of empty voxels cleverly so
  that complex functional substructures could be produced to fulfill the purposes of both carrying and
  locomoting. Note that a high-performing robot design is not necessarily symmetric.

  (elite design-fitness pairs omitted, sorted in ascending order)

  ## “Just-ask” query
  Now please generate a new robot design that has a fitness of {str(1.2*current_max_fitness)}.


A.3    U SER P ROMPT OF D I R ECT

 The solution that you just generated is too similar with an existing one. It needs further modification
 to improve diversity. Please decide which voxels in the solution can be replaced by other types of materials,
 without harming its fitness score. Change no more than 3 voxels. Please base your analysis on the
 characteristics of the evaluated solutions given to you. Meanwhile, make sure that the modification
 does not violate the constraints of VSRs. Now please tell me which voxels exactly do you think can be
 alterted, and explain the reason.

 (LLM suggesting modifications)

 Based on your analysis above, please generate the resulting solution. The number of voxels changed should
 not exceed three. Do not provide further texual explanation.


A.4    U SER P ROMPT FOR I NTER -TASK K NOWLEDGE T RANSFER (WALKER - V 0 →
       B RIDGE WALKER - V 0 AS AN EXAMPLE )

 (Descriptions of VSRs, simulation environment and constraints are same as those in A.1 and therefore
 omitted. )

 We already have some high-performing robot designs from a task named 'Walker', where the robot is required
 to locomote rightwards as quickly as possible on rigid flat terrain. The robot designs are as follows:

 (Elite Walker-v0 designs omitted. )

 Now your job is to propose ten high-performing robot designs for another task named 'BridgeWalker',
 where the robot is required to locomote rightwards as quickly as possible on a soft rope-bridge rather
 than rigid flat terrain. Please analyze the potential correlation between the two tasks, identify the
 knowledge that can be transferred from Walker to BridgeWalker, and give ten robot designs that are suitable
 for BridgeWalker. Give your answer in numpy array fashion. Enclose each design between <Solution> and
 </Solution>.


B     I NTRODUCTION TO TASK I NSTANCES
In this section, we briefly introduce the tasks we adopted for benchmarking in Evolution Gym. This
introduction is heavily borrowed from their original paper (Bhatia et al. 2021).
We first define some notations that would be used later.

       • Position: Denote with po the position of the center of mass of an object o, which consists
         of two components pox and poy , i.e., the positions on x and y axis. po is derived by averaging
         the positions of all the point-masses that make up object o;
       • Velocity: Denote with v o the velocities of the center of mass of an object o, which consists
         of two components vxo and vyo , i.e., the velocity on x and y axis. v o is computed by averaging
         the velocities of all point masses that make up object o;


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • Orientation: Denote with θo , a vector of length one, the orientation of an object o. Denote
         the position of point mass i of object o as pi , and θo is computed by averaging over all i
         the angle between the vector pi − po at current time and the initial state. This average is
         weighted by ||pi − po || in the initial state.
       • Other observations: Let co be a vector of length 2n that describes the relative positions
         of all n point masses of object o to the center of mass. Let hob (d) characterize the terrain
         information around a robot below its center of mass. More specifically, for some integer
         x ≤ d, the corresponding entry in vector hob (d) will be the highest point of the terrain which
         is lower than poy between a range of [x, x + 1] voxels from pox in the x-direction.
       • Besides, we would denote the robot as object r, the box that it is trying to manipulate as
         object b, the number of point masses in r as n, the observation vector as S, and the reward
         function as R.

B.1   WALKER - V 0


                                          Figure 6: Walker-v0

In this task, the robot is required to walk as far as possible on flat terrain. S ∈ Rn+2 consists of v r
and cr with lengths 2 and n. R = ∆prx rewards the robot for moving in the positive x-direction. The
robot is also given a one-time reward of 1 for reaching the end of the terrain.

B.2   C ARRIER - V 0


                                          Figure 7: Carrier-v0

In this task, the robot is required to catch a box initialized above it and carries it as far as possible.
S ∈ Rn+6 consists of v b , pb − pr , v r and cr with lengths 2, n, 2 and 2 respectively. R = R1 + R2 ,
where R1 = 0.5 · ∆prx + 0.5 · ∆pbx rewards the robot and the box for moving in the positive x-
direction, and R2 = 0 if pby ≥ ty and otherwise 10 · ∆pby penalizes the robot for dropping the box
below a threshold height ty . The robot is also given a one-time reward of 1 for reaching the end of
the terrain.

B.3   P USHER - V 0


                                          Figure 8: Pusher-v0

In this task, the robot is required to push a box initialized in front of it. S ∈ Rn+6 consists of
v b , pb − pr , vr and cr with lengths 2, n, 2 and 2 respectively. R = R1 + R2 , where R1 =
0.5 · ∆prx + 0.75 · ∆pbx rewards the robot and the box for moving in the positive x-direction, and
R2 = −∆|pbx − prx | penalizes the robot and the box for separating in the x-direction. The robot is
also given a one-time reward of 1 for reaching the end of the terrain.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.4   C ATCHER - V 0


                                         Figure 9: Catcher-v0


In this task, the robot is required to catch a fast-moving and rotating box. The observation space
S ∈ Rn+7 consists of pb − pr , v r , v b , θb and cr , with lengths 2, 2, 2, 1 and n, respectively. The
reward R = R1 + R2 , where R1 = −∆|pbx − prx | rewards the robot for approaching the box in the
x-direction, and R2 = 0 if pby ≥ ty and 10 · ∆pby otherwise penalizes the robot for dropping the box
below a threshold height ty .


B.5   B RIDGE WALKER - V 0


                                     Figure 10: BridgeWalker-v0


In this task, the robot is required to walk as far as possible on a soft rope-bridge. S ∈ Rn+3 consists
of v r , θr and cr with lengths 2, 1 and n respectively. R = ∆prx rewards the robot for moving in
the positive x-direction. The robot is also given a one-time reward of 1 for reaching the end of the
terrain.


B.6   U P S TEPPER - V 0


                                      Figure 11: UpStepper-v0


In this task, the robot is required to mount stairs of varying lengths. S ∈ Rn+14 consists of v r , θr ,
cr and hrb (5) with lengths 2, 1, n and 11, respectively. R = ∆prx rewards the robot for moving in the
positive x-direction. The robot is given a one-time reward of 2 for reaching the end of the terrain,
and a one-time penalty of -3 for rotating more than 75 degrees from its original orientation in either
direction (after which the environment is reset).


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS

                                   Table 3: Hyperparameter settings
                         hyperparameter                                  value
                                                  LASeR
                   robot size (height × width)                            5×5
                 upper limit of LLM interactions                            200
             probability of similarity check in DiRect                      0.4
                  similarity threshold in DiRect             no more than 20 identical voxels
            percentage of survivors in natural selection   linearly decreasing from 60% to 8%
                                           PPO Policy Training
               number of parallel sampling processes                       4
                number of time steps in each process                      128
                            learning rate                             2.5 × 10−4
                   ϵ in the clip function of PPO                          0.1
                        number of iterations                             1000
                  number of epochs per iteration                           4
                 number of mini-batches per epoch                          4
           λ in generalized advantage estimation (GAE)                    0.95



D    R ESULTS OF S IGNIFICANCE T ESTS
We conduct significance tests between LASeR and LLM-Tuner, the most competitive baseline.
Since in this work we have chose a sufficiently large number of robot evaluations (i.e., 1000) to
give ample opportunity to all algorithms to converge, it becomes more relevant to compare the con-
vergence speed rather than entire fitness curves. To this end, we first average the eventual fitness
values obtained by all repeated experiments (denoted as f ) within a given task, and then record the
number of evaluations that each experiment took to reach this average fitness (denoted as n). For
those that did not reach f , n is simply recorded as 1000. We then conduct a two-tailed t-test to
compare the n’s of different algorithms. For Carrier-v0, f is 10.69, and n is on average 719.2 and
979 for LASeR and LLM-Tuner, respectively (p =0.029). For Pusher-v0, f is 12.95, and n is on
average 528 and 888.6 with p =0.054. For Walker-v0, since none of the experiments of LLM-Tuner
reach f =10.65, we instead compare the eventual fitness values achieved by LASeR and LLM-Tuner,
which are on average 10.67 and 10.63, with p <0.001. For Catcher-v0, the eventual fitness values
of LASeR and LLM-Tuner are 0.816 and 0.802, with p=0.08.

E    C OMPARISON OF D I R ECT AND R ANDOM VOXEL E DITING
To further showcase the effectiveness of our diversity reflection mechanism (DiRect), we re-
implemented our experiments with DiRect replaced by random voxel mutations. Specifically, we
implemented random editing by substituting the diversity reflection (DiRect) mechanism with ran-
dom voxel mutation, which is supported by a built-in function of EvoGym. Specifically, we found
that the number of voxels edited by DiRect in each design is about 2.61 on average. Thus, for ran-
dom mutation, we set the mutation rate to be 0.1, i.e., each voxel will, with a probability of 0.1,
be randomly replaced by a different material. Given that a robot design consists of 25 voxels, this
results in 2.5 voxels being edited on average, which we believe is reasonably close to DiRect editing.
We conducted a paired two-tailed Student’s t-test, and found that the fitnesses of randomly mutated
robot designs are significantly lower than their pre-editing counterparts (p < 0.001). In contrast,
the fitnesses of robot designs before and after DiRect modification show no significant difference
(p = 0.19). These results suggest that stochastic exploratory behaviors would disrupt essential
functional structures, whereas LLM-aided diversity reflection holds a distinct “informed” nature.
Specifically, it builds on successful designs discovered along the evolutionary trajectory, and pro-
motes exploration without compromising functionality.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For illustrative purposes, here we present two examples of diversity reflection, including both the
pre- and post-editing morphologies, along with explanations provided by the LLM for its modifica-
tions. It can be seen from Figure 12 that the LLM is indeed able to identify critical substructures
within robot designs, and modifies only the voxel placements that do not affect functionality, yet
promote diversity. These results provide sound evidence that DiRect is reliably functioning as an
intelligent mutation operator.


                         (a) An example of DiRect modifications on Walker-v0


                         (b) An example of DiRect modifications on Pusher-v0

Figure 12: Illustrative examples of DiRect modifications. Each example includes the pre- (left) and
post- (right) editing designs, together with the modifications and justifications provided by an LLM
to enhance morphological diversity.


F    C OMPARISON WITH T WO A DDITIONAL BASELINES
We conducted comparative studies between LASeR and two additional baseline algorithms. The first
one is OPRO (Yang et al., 2024), another evolutionary strategy that uses LLMs as search operators,
which we adapted for voxel-based soft robot (VSR) design. The second one is MorphVAE (Song
et al., 2024a), a state-of-the-art co-design algorithm that does not employ LLMs but is also developed
on the EvoGym platform.
As shown in Figure 13, LASeR consistently outperforms the two baselines in terms of optimization
efficiency, reflected by its steeper fitness curves. Here we would like to clarify that we have delib-
erately chosen a sufficiently large number of robot evaluations to hopefully allow all algorithms


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to converge for fair comparison. This explains why different algorithms end up with rather similar
fitness levels. However, in the context of robot design automation, the convergence rate is an im-
portant aspect for evaluating design algorithms, as the evaluation of robot designs usually involves
computationally expensive control learning, let alone the manufacturing costs of physical robots
when deployed in real-world application. In this regard, LASeR exhibits considerable performance
gains.

                             10.70                                                                                 12


                             10.65                                                                                 10
           Maximal Fitness


                                                                                                 Maximal Fitness
                             10.60                                                                                  8


                             10.55                                                                                  6


                             10.50                                                                                  4
                                      0   200   400      600      800      1000                                         0    200   400      600      800   1000
                                             Number of Evaluations                                                              Number of Evaluations

                                            (a) Walker-v0                                                                        (b) Carrier-v0


                                                                                                 0.8
                             12
                                                                               Maximal Fitness
           Maximal Fitness


                                                                                                 0.7
                             10

                                                                                                 0.6
                              8

                                                                                                 0.5
                                  0       250     500       750         1000                                       0        200   400      600      800    1000
                                           Number of Evaluations                                                               Number of Evaluations

                                           (c) Pusher-v0                                                                       (d) Catcher-v0



Figure 13: Comparison between LASeR (red), MorphVAE (blue) and OPRO (green) in terms of
optimization efficiency. In the original paper of MorphVAE (Song et al., 2024a), two variants are
proposed that focus on either optimization efficiency or diversity. We conduct three repeated trials
for each of them and take an average to reflect the overall performance of MorphVAE. This is also
the case for diversity calculation.

Furthermore, as demonstrated in Table 4, LASeR achieves the highest diversity in two out of four
tasks, while MorphVAE is dominant in the remaining two tasks. Despite the competitive perfor-
mance of MorphVAE, we note that LASeR holds distinct advantages: (a) with the novel diversity
reflection mechanism, LASeR is capable of achieving a more favorable trade-off between opti-
mization efficiency and diversity, whereas MorphVAE proposes two variants, each of which focuses
on one aspect and compromises the other; (b) MorphVAE leverages a variational autoencoder to
approximate the high-performing robot distribution and generate offspring solutions, which lacks
interpretability. On the contrary, LASeR can instruct an LLM to explicitly explain its design choices
and thus provide valuable insights for robot design (see Appendix H). LASeR is also capable of more
intelligent knowledge transfer across different tasks, utilizing the reasoning capabilities of LLMs.
Furthermore, the inferior diversity outcomes of OPRO once again reveal the inefficiency of LLMs
to balance exploitation with exploration on their own without diversity reflection.

G    E VALUATION ON 10 X 10 WALKER - V 0
In this work, we adhered to the standard setup used in previous VSR studies, specifically a 5x5
body size with five different materials, as this configuration is proven already expressive enough for
complex and diverse morphological structures to emerge (Song et al., 2024a; Saito & Oka, 2024;


                                                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Table 4: Comparison between LASeR, MorphVAE and OPRO in terms of diversity.
                                              Walker-v0       Carrier-v0      Pusher-v0      Catcher-v0
              MorphVAE                       16.20 (N/A)    33.16 (16.59)   18.18 (12.48)    11.00 (3.09)
              OPRO                           18.95 (4.19)     6.01 (2.41)     9.42 (2.08)     6.41 (1.48)
              LASeR (ours)                   23.09 (5.33)    20.87 (4.27)    20.91 (8.85)     8.07 (2.48)


Dong et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a;b). Nevertheless, to evaluate the scalability of our approach
to larger design spaces, we tested both LASeR and LLM-Tuner on Walker-v0 with a 10x10 body
size. Our findings, as presented in Figure 14, demonstrate that LASeR continues to outperform
the baseline in terms of optimization efficiency, even in this larger design space. We attribute this
success to the unique advantage of LLMs. Specifically, LLMs leverage their reasoning capabilities
to identify favorable voxel assembly patterns within high-performing designs, instead of relying
on random mutations (as seen in genetic algorithms and other heuristics), to generate offspring
solutions. This is also demonstrated in Appendix E and H, where we show that LLMs are able to
provide justifications for their decision making when generating offspring solutions and carrying
out diversity reflection. It is worth noting that the 10x10 configuration results in a design space
that is 2.65 × 1052 times larger than the 5x5 case, due to combinatorial explosion. Therefore, the
promising results indicate a remarkable potential of LLM-based evolutionary strategies to scale to
even larger and more complex robot design problems.

                                           10.42

                                           10.40
                         Maximal Fitness


                                           10.38

                                           10.36

                                           10.34

                                           10.32

                                           10.30
                                                   0   200   400      600      800    1000
                                                          Number of Evaluations


Figure 14: Comparison of LASeR (red) and LLM-Tuner (purple) on 10x10 Walker-v0. The results
are averaged across four independent runs.



H    LLM’ S I NTERPRETATION OF ROBOT D ESIGN

In our preliminary experiments, we included explicit LLM reasoning, where the LLM was prompted
to explain its design choices (similar to chain-of-thought). However, we observed no significant per-
formances gains by doing so, and therefore opted to remove the reasoning process to speed up
evolution and save API costs. Nevertheless, we would like to clarify that our approach is capable
of affording higher interpretability. This can readily be achieved by explicitly instructing the LLM
to explain its decision-making process, rather than serving as a black box. We provide in Figure
15 the output generated by GPT-4o-mini after receiving a collection of high-performing Catcher-v0
designs and instructed to generate a new one with higher performance. The explanations provided
are insightful and reasonable, revealing the advantageous structures present in high-performing de-
signs. This suggests that LLMs are indeed able to align specific voxel assembly patterns with high
performance, and leverage these principles to generate improved offspring solutions.


                                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: The LLM-generated output on Catcher-v0. In this example, the LLM is prompted to
explain its decision-making process when generating a new robot design.


I   V ISUALIZATION OF E VOLVED ROBOT D ESIGNS

Here we provide visualizations of robot designs evolved by LASeR and baseline algorithms. We take
Pusher-v0 as an example, and randomly select five high-performing robot designs obtained by each
algorithm in a single run of experiment. It can be seen from Figure 16 that the robot designs evolved
by LASeR seem to exhibit the highest level of variability. However, we would like to make two notes
here. First, as we are only able to display a small fraction of robot designs, this visualization could
only serve as a qualitative and intuitive verification of results presented in Section 4.2.1, rather than
a valid means of evaluation on its own. Second, as we would detail in Appendix J, the number of
evolved high-performing designs should also be taken into account when measuring morphological


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


diversity. To this end, we believe the quantitative results reported in Section 4.2.1 still serve as the
most comprehensive and reliable evaluation of diversity.


Figure 16: Visualizations of evolved high-performing robot designs on Pusher-v0. For each algo-
rithm, five designs are randomly chosen for display. Annotated on the right are total numbers of
high-performing designs obtained. The result of RoboGAN is absent because it fails to obtain robot
designs that surpass the fitness threshold (i.e., the 90% quantile of fitnesses achieved by all algo-
rithms).



J   F URTHER D ISCUSSION ON D IVERSITY M EASUREMENT

Diversity is an important aspect for evaluating robotic systems and, in turn, the performance of robot
design algorithms, as diversified design alternatives are crucial for handling dynamic environments
and increasing robustness of robotic systems. To our knowledge, previous studies have predomi-
nantly employed two methods for quantifying diversity: (a) averaged measures of distinctiveness
within a group of robots, such as per-voxel entropy (Song et al., 2024a) and pair-wise edit distance
(Saito & Oka, 2024); (b) manual categorization of robot designs into distinct classes, followed by
the calculation of the Simpson index, which is analogous to an entropy measure of class distribution
(Medvet et al., 2021). The latter method becomes impractical when dealing with more abstract mor-
phologies without clear subpopulations. The former, on the other hand, presents a paradox (Figure
17): including a new robot design into an existing collection can reduce diversity, even if the new
design is distinct, provided that it falls within the distribution of this collection. Here, by “falling
within the distribution” we mean that the distance between the new design and existing ones is on
average smaller than that within the original collection.
To address the above issue, we incorporate the number of distinct robot designs into our measure-
ment as a correction. Thus, our two measures – edit distance (measuring the distinctiveness of
evolved designs) and the number of distinct designs – complement each other, providing a more
comprehensive and reasonable characterization of diversity. However, we acknowledge that the
weights assigned to these quantities (1.0 and 0.1) are somewhat expedient and primarily intended
to bring them onto the same scale. This is based on our preliminary experiments where we found
that the number of distinct high-performing designs obtained in a single run of experiment typi-
cally ranged from several dozens to around two hundred, while the edit distance is defined to range
between 0 and 25. Given the lack of universally accepted metrics for measuring morphological di-
versity, we hope we could inspire future work to devise even more reasonable and comprehensive
approaches.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 17: A paradox with diversity measurement. The inclusion of a new, distinct robot design
decreases, rather than increases, the diversity when solely measured as the edit distance. This is
counter-intuitive as the addition of a distinct alternative should benefit diversity.



We additionally provide the two separate measures of diversity before being weighted averaged (Ta-
ble 5 and 6). Our finding suggests that LASeR has more of a advantage in discovering distinct
high-performers than achieving high averaged edit distance. We cannot actually state which ap-
proach is more favorable, as both benefit diversity in their own way. However, combining the results
of optimization efficiency (i.e., the fitness curves), it is clear that LASeR better balances exploration
with exploitation.
Meanwhile, as we pointed out above, we believe that the results in Table 6 are somewhat misleading,
because edit distance in itself does not suffice as a valid diversity metric. Even if a group of robot
designs has another group as its subset, the former might still have a lower edit distance (even much
lower, due to the paradox in Figure 17). The comparative results in Table 6 might not be in our favor,
but we choose to display them to reveal an open problem regarding diversity measurement and
hopefully inspire future work to investigate further.


         Table 5: Comparative results of the number of distinct high-performing designs.
                             Walker-v0           Carrier-v0        Pusher-v0        Catcher-v0
          BO                    N/A             22.00 (6.38)      13.33 (3.86)      3.67 (1.25)
          SE                13.25 (3.03)       34.40 (26.62)       6.00 (3.85)      7.00 (2.83)
          RoboGAN               N/A              3.00 (N/A)           N/A           3.00 (0.82)
          LLM-Tuner        33.75 (41.54)       55.00 (67.02)     46.25 (70.90)      5.67 (1.70)
          MorphVAE           2.00 (N/A)       241.17 (179.83)   101.50 (133.73)    11.00 (10.18)
          OPRO             138.00 (31.73)      17.75 (16.04)     53.25 (20.58)      9.50 (2.29)
          LASeR(ours)      165.80 (53.09)     162.00 (43.23)     158.40 (88.68)    28.00 (23.69)


                       Table 6: Comparative results of average edit distance.
                                 Walker-v0       Carrier-v0      Pusher-v0     Catcher-v0
                BO                  N/A          9.68 (2.25)    12.35 (2.48)   19.39 (0.98)
                SE              3.92 (0.46)     11.82 (2.66)     6.66 (4.03)   13.21 (2.01)
                RoboGAN             N/A         10.64 (N/A)         N/A        17.97 (1.5)
                LLM-Tuner       8.23 (1.79)     12.76 (1.69)     9.54 (3.42)   13.33 (7.21)
                MorphVAE        16.00 (N/A)      9.04 (3.36)     8.03 (3.72)   9.90 (4.00)
                OPRO            5.15 (1.02)      4.24 (1.46)     4.10 (0.39)   5.46 (1.30)
                LASeR(ours)     6.51 (0.09)      4.67 (0.34)     5.07 (0.43)   5.27 (0.31)


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K    F INER -G RAINED A BLATION ON P ROMPT D ESIGN
The prompt used in our study consists of three major components: task-related metadata, elite
design-fitness pairs, and target fitness.

       • The task-related metadata primarily includes descriptions of task objectives and the sim-
         ulation environment. This component is largely derived from the official documents of
         EvoGym (Bhatia et al., 2021), with minimal modifications. This metadata, which is often
         overlooked in previous works on LLM-aided robot design, serves two main purposes: to
         ground the evolutionary process in the specific context of the problem, and to facilitate the
         transfer of knowledge between different tasks.
       • The second component consists of elite design-fitness pairs previously evaluated, where
         the designs are sorted according to their fitness in ascending order. This sorting is intended
         to leverage the pattern-completion capabilities of LLMs, a technique shown to be effective
         in prior research (Lange et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024).
       • The third component, the target fitness (also referred to as the “just-ask query” in Lim
         et al. (2024)), is introduced as a means of aligning the LLM’s outputs with our desired
         results.

We have demonstrated the indispensability of task-related metadata in Section 4.3.2. To further jus-
tify our prompt design and to complement the intuitive explanations provided above, we conducted
finer-grained ablation studies and the results are reported in Figure 18. Specifically, we remove the
following components one at a time: (a) the description of the simulation engine; (b) the description
of task objectives; (c) the just-ask query (or target fitness); in this case, the LLM is simply prompted
to generated robot designs with higher fitness; and (d) the ascending ordering of elite design-fitness
pairs according to fitness. Our findings suggest that removing any of these components leads to
performance drops. The just-ask query is proven the most essential, while simulation description
and ordering play less important roles.

                                           10.675

                                           10.650

                                           10.625
                         Maximal Fitness


                                           10.600

                                           10.575
                                                                            complete prompt
                                           10.550                           w/o simulation description
                                                                            w/o task description
                                           10.525                           w/o just-ask query
                                                                            w/o ordering
                                           10.500
                                                    0   200     400       600       800          1000
                                                              Number of Evaluations


                    Figure 18: Finer-grained ablation studies on prompt design.

We would like to note that the phrasing of these components is intentionally left simple and intu-
itive, without applying special techniques of prompt engineering. As such, our experimental results
possess a certain level of robustness and do not hinge on the specifics of prompt designs. However,
it would be a promising direction to integrate various prompting techniques into our framework for
better performances.

L    F URTHER D ISCUSSION ON THE S IMILARITY T HRESHOLD
In our diversity reflection mechanism (DiRect), a similarity threshold is needed to decide whether
a newly generated robot design is overly similar to existing ones and therefore should undergo
modifications by diversity reflection. This threshold is indeed a crucial hyper-parameter that controls
the performance of LASeR. The choice of this threshold reflects the extent of diversity that one
expects to see in the evolved solutions, and hence should be driven by the user’s specific preferences.


                                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For instance, setting it as 20 (as we did in our experiments) means that if a newly generated design
shares more than 20 identical voxels with any existing solution, it will be modified by DiRect to
introduce more variability.
Here, we present some general principles for choosing this parameter. These principles are sup-
ported by our additional experiments with several different values of threshold (as shown in Figure
19). High similarity thresholds, like 23, are generally not recommended, as they would hinder the
beneficial exploration enabled by LLMs. Conversely, excessively low thresholds (such as 15) might
increase diversity but also risk overly aggressive exploration that compromises functionality and, in
turn, harms optimization efficiency. We believe this is due to the poor extrapolation performance of
LLMs when required to propose robot designs that are much different from given examples. Any
moderate values in the middle should lead to desirable performances. In fact, our findings suggest
that a threshold of 18 leads to further performance gains beyond 20. However, we note that lower
thresholds also more frequently trigger DiRect, which means more LLM API calls. Hence, the
threshold choice also involves a trade-off between evolutionary performance (including both opti-
mization efficiency and diversity) and computational costs, and should be considered case by case.
We believe adaptive threshold scheduling, based on problem specifics and evolutionary outcomes,
could be a promising direction for future research.


                                            10.70


                                            10.65
                          Maximal Fitness


                                            10.60

                                                                   similarity threshold
                                            10.55                       23             18
                                                                        20             15
                                            10.50
                                                    0   250     500       750        1000
                                                         Number of Evaluations

Figure 19: Additional experiments with several different similarity thresholds. The diversity results
of these experiments are N/A, 28.51, 23.09, and 13.46 in the order of 15, 18, 20 and 23. The diversity
is not available for 15 because the corresponding experiment failed to generate more than one high-
performing robot designs.


M     G ENERALIZATION ACROSS D IFFERENT TASKS

In Section 4.2.2, we focused on transferring design experience between task instances that are in-
tuitively similar (i.e., Walker-v0, BridgeWalker-v0 and UpStepper-v0). These experimental designs
are largely based on the structural similarities between tasks as revealed in Wang et al. (2023b). Here
we demonstrate that this prior knowledge of task relationships is not strictly necessary for success-
ful inter-task generalization. Specifically, we performed an additional zero-shot design experiment
(Figure 20) where the LLM was given elite samples of Walker-v0, but instructed to propose designs
for a significantly different task, Jumper-v0, in which the robot is required to jump as high as possi-
ble. Despite the discrepancy between task objectives, we find that the LLM is able to dig deeper into
the underlying inter-task associations and identify rather general, low-level design principles that are
still relevant to the new task. Moreover, the zero-shot designs generated by LLM still outperform
randomly sampled ones. See Figure 21 for visualizations of some elite Walker-v0 designs, together
with a Jumper-v0 design generated by LLM. These findings suggest that LLMs possess substantial
potential for generalizing experience across seemingly different optimization problems, as long as
they are not completely irrelevant to one other.


                                                              27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 20: Additional zero-shot design experiment on Jumper-v0. The zero-shot performance is
averaged over 10 robot designs for both random sampling and LLM proposals. Despite the task
discrepancy, the LLM is still able to identify general principles, such as the importance of actuators
for shape change and rigid voxels for stability, to transfer to the new task.


Figure 21: A visualization of some elite Walker-v0 designs (left), and the Jumper-v0 design gen-
erated by LLM (right). The Jumper-v0 design seems different than its Walker-v0 counterparts, but
they still share some basic design principles, such as rigid voxels in the bottom row, soft voxels in
the middle rows and well-distributed mass. These features largely mirror the analysis by LLM in
Figure 20.


N    F URTHER D ISCUSSION ON L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

Here we expand the discussion of limitations within this work, and outline several open problems
that we find promising for future research.

       • In this work, we developed our approach on voxel-based soft robots (VSRs), and adhered
         to the 5x5 body size commonly adopted in previous VSR studies. However, we would like
         to note that our approach is conceptually adaptable to larger design spaces (as verified in
         Appendix G) and potentially other types of robots. We look forward to seeing our LLM-
         based evolutionary framework evaluated in more extensive and complex design problems.
       • Regarding inter-task generalization, we focused on intuitively similar tasks in our paper.
         However, we proved that this prior knowledge of task relationships is not necessary for
         successful transfer of design experience (as demonstrated in Appendix M). It would be
         promising to investigate how this inter-task reasoning capability of LLMs could be lever-
         aged in a broader range of optimization problems.
       • Currently, we employed LLMs in the most cost-effective way for robot design automation,
         that is, through in-context learning. It remains to be studied whether fine-tuning LLMs
         could lead to further performance gains. To our knowledge, fine-tuning Large Language
         Models typically involves substantially higher costs, both in terms of computational re-
         sources and the need of a sufficiently large and carefully curated dataset. However, perfor-
         mance might not be guaranteed due to issues like overfitting and catastrophic forgetting.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Nevertheless, the prospect of a general-purpose LLM fine-tuned for various combinatorial
         optimization problems is intriguing, and represents an open problem for future research.
      • In this work, we followed the standard control learning approach used in previous EvoGym-
        based studies, i.e., PPO algorithm with MLPs serving as control networks. Since our pri-
        mary focus is on the evolutionary capabilities of LLMs, we chose this simple yet effective
        approach for fitness evaluation. That being said, a broad range of alternatives, such as
        value-based methods and differential simulations (Strgar et al., 2024; Cochevelou et al.,
        2023), could be tried out, with their impact on LLM-aided evolution examined. We also
        find it an interesting direction to integrate LLM-aided control strategies (such as those in
        Wang et al. (2023a), Brohan et al. (2023) and Cheang et al. (2024)) into our framework, so
        that LLMs are capable of both designing and controlling their own embodiments.
      • Morphological diversity is an important aspect for evaluating robot design algorithms, as
        diversified designs are crucial for ensuring the robustness of robotic systems in highly
        volatile environments. We pointed out the limitations of previous diversity measures in
        Appendix J and proposed to make a correction by taking both distinctiveness and the num-
        ber of distinct designs into account. We hope our work could inspire future work to develop
        even more reasonable and hopefully universally acceptable metrics for diversity.
      • Last but not least, while our work is based on simulation, we note that there is ongoing
        research on the realization of soft robotics in the physical world, using polymers with pneu-
        matic chambers (Kriegman et al., 2020b; Legrand et al., 2023) or even self-replicating cells
        (Kriegman et al., 2020a; 2021) and continually narrowing the sim-to-real gap. We believe
        that with the collective efforts of material scientists, computer scientists, (bio)mechanical
        engineers, etc., soft robotics would see rapid advances and finds its way to everyday life in
        the near future.

O    A N A NALYSIS OF C OMPUTATIONAL E FFICIENCY
According to the data released on LLM Leaderboard (https://artificialanalysis.ai/leaderboards/models),
for GPT-4o-mini, the median rate of output token generation is 99.8 tokens per second, and the
latency (i.e., time to first token) is reported as 0.5 seconds. Given that LASeR makes an average of
130 API calls per generation, with each call involving approximately 180 output tokens (here we
assume the worst case where each newly generated robot design triggers DiRect), this results in an
overhead of around 5 minutes per generation, or 5 hours in total.
The latency issue could be mitigated with locally deployed LLMs, which are less affected by net-
work delays and request queuing. However, we believe it is more pertinent to compare the overall
running time of different methods, with optimization efficiency taken into account. Specifically,
by checking the log messages of our programs, we find that, for Carrier-v0, in order to reach the
same level of fitness, LASeR requires 7 hours, in contrast to the most competitive baseline, LLM-
Tuner, which takes 15 hours. For Pusher-v0, the difference is greater: LASeR requires 11 hours,
whereas LLM-Tuner takes 46 hours. On Walker-v0, LASeR is even capable of reaching a fitness
unattainable by baselines. Hence, the rapid convergence enabled by LLMs outweighs the addi-
tional computation overhead, rendering the latter perfectly worthwhile.

P   P SEUDO C ODE OF LAS E R


                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: LASeR: LLM-Aided Evolutionary Search for Robot Design Automation
Input: A task instance T , maximum number of evaluations M , population size N , survival
 rate r, maximum number of LLM interactions in each generation L, probability of similarity
 check p, similarity threshold s.
Output: M robot designs together with their fitness scores.
Randomly initialize a population P.              //Or initialize with zero-shot proposals from LLM
S←P                              //S keeps all the evaluated robot designs and their fitness scores
Warm start with several generations of a traditional EA.
while |S| < M do
    attempts ← 0                                            //Track the number of LLM interactions
    P ← the top N × r robot designs among P; survivors ← P                          //Natural selection
    while |P| < N and attempts < L do
        target f itness ← max fitness(S)×1.2 //Calculate target fitness as 1.2 × current max
        prompt ← {metadata of task T , survivors in ascending order, target f itness}
        robot ← LLM(prompt)                           //Query the LLM for a new offspring solution
        attempts ← attempts + 1
        u ∼ U(0, 1)
        if u < p then
            //Enter similarity check with probability p
            Check the similarity rate s′ of robot to existing robot designs.
            if s′ < s thenS
                 P ← P {robot}                                              //Pass the similarity check
            else
                 robot ←DiRect(robot)               //Modify with Diversity Reflection Mechanism
                 Check the similarity rate s′ of robot to existing robot designs.
                 if s′ < s then
                              S
                      P ← P {robot}                    //Pass the similarity check after modification

    if |P| < N then
         //LLM has not generated enough robots
         Generate the remaining offspring with the traditional EA.
    for robot in P do
         //Control optimization and fitness evaluation
         if robot not in survivors then
             OptimizeSa controller for robot. Evaluate the cumulative reward as its fitness f .
               S ← S {(robot, f )}

Return: S


                                                    30
