Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DYNAMIC CONTRASTIVE SKILL LEARNING
WITH STATE-TRANSITION BASED SKILL
CLUSTERING AND DYNAMIC LENGTH AD-
JUSTMENT
 Jinwoo Choi, Seung-Woo Seo∗
 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
 Seoul National University
 Seoul, South Korea
 {wlsdn9350,sseo}@snu.ac.kr



                                               A BSTRACT
             Reinforcement learning (RL) has made significant progress in various domains,
             but scaling it to long-horizon tasks with complex decision-making remains chal-
             lenging. Skill learning attempts to address this by abstracting actions into higher-
             level behaviors. However, current approaches often fail to recognize semantically
             similar behaviors as the same skill and use fixed skill lengths, limiting flexibil-
             ity and generalization. To address this, we propose Dynamic Contrastive Skill
             Learning (DCSL), a novel framework that redefines skill representation and learn-
             ing. DCSL introduces three key ideas: state-transition based skill representation,
             skill similarity function learning, and dynamic skill length adjustment. By fo-
             cusing on state transitions and leveraging contrastive learning, DCSL effectively
             captures the semantic context of behaviors and adapts skill lengths to match the
             appropriate temporal extent of behaviors. Our approach enables more flexible and
             adaptive skill extraction, particularly in complex or noisy datasets, and demon-
             strates competitive performance compared to existing methods in task completion
             and efficiency.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) has advanced significantly in various domains (Vinyals et al. (2019),
Silver et al. (2016)), yet scaling it to long-horizon tasks with complex decision-making remains
challenging (Dulac-Arnold et al. (2019)). Skill learning from datasets ((Lynch et al. (2020), Sharma
et al. (2019), Freed et al. (2023), Shi et al. (2022), Hao et al. (2024)) addresses these challenges by
abstracting action sequences into higher-level behaviors, simplifying decision-making, and improv-
ing efficiency in long-horizon tasks.
Despite its potential, prior supervised skill-learning methods (Freed et al. (2023), Shi et al. (2022))
face significant limitations. First, action sequence encoding methods often struggle to identify se-
mantically similar behaviors as the same skill when there are variations in the action sequences.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the actions required for ‘grabbing the object’ differ based on the object’s
position, leading to the learning of these behaviors as distinct skills. This limitation requires a large
skill dimension space to accommodate various skills (Pertsch et al. (2021)), which in turn creates
inefficiency when searching for the optimal combination of skills for new tasks. Since skills are
stored without considering their semantic context, if a small skill dimension space is given, a di-
mensional collapse (Jing et al. (2021)) may occur where different behaviors are mapped to similar
representations in the skill space.
Second, fixed skill lengths fail to reflect the varying durations of real-world behaviors. For instance,
in pick-drop and pick-move data, if the length of the ‘pick’ behavior is shorter than the fixed skill
length, the model fails to learn pick, drop, and move as individual skills, as humans would. While
    ∗
        Corresponding author


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Illustration of DCSL’s key ideas. Previous methods recognized ‘grab object’ as different
skills based on object position, while DCSL clusters these into a unified skill using learned skill
similarity. DCSL overcomes the limitation of fixed-length skills by dynamically adjusting skill
lengths, enabling the recognition of shorter actions like ‘Pick up’ as independent skills.


fixed skill lengths have limitations, prior research using datasets of task-agnostic but meaningful be-
haviors has shown that learned skills can still retain some semantic content. However, this approach
struggles with more complex or noisy data, where irrelevant or meaningless actions are included. In
such scenarios, the ability to adapt skill lengths becomes crucial.
To address these challenges, we propose Dynamic Contrastive Skill Learning (DCSL), a novel
framework that offers a new perspective on skill representation. DCSL introduces three key ideas:
state-transition based skill representation, skill similarity function learning, and dynamic skill length
adjustment. Unlike traditional methods that define skills based on action sequences, DCSL focuses
on state transitions, enabling a more effective capture of the semantic context of behaviors. Through
contrastive learning (Oord et al. (2018)), DCSL learns a skill similarity function that clusters se-
mantically similar behaviors into the same skill, promoting more meaningful skill representations.
DCSL leverages this function to dynamically adjust skill lengths based on observed state transitions,
allowing for more flexible and adaptive skill extraction, particularly in noisy datasets. By combin-
ing these approaches, DCSL overcomes the limitations of existing methods, enabling effective skill
learning that adapts to diverse environments and task structures.
In summary, our framework redefines skill representation and learning through three key contribu-
tions:

       • We propose a state-transition based skill representation that captures the semantic context
         of behaviors more effectively than action sequence encoding. This approach enables the
         identification of similar skills even when the underlying action sequences differ.
       • We introduce a skill similarity function learned through contrastive learning, which clusters
         semantically similar behaviors into the similar skill embeddings. This method effectively
         differentiates between states belonging to the same skill and those that do not.
       • We develop a dynamic skill length adjustment method based on observed state transitions.
         Using the learned skill similarity function, our approach identifies high-similarity state tran-
         sitions within the dataset and relabels skill lengths accordingly, allowing for more flexible
         and adaptive skill extraction in complex or noisy datasets.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Skill Learning from Dataset Skill learning from datasets has emerged as a promising approach
to improve efficiency and generalization in long-horizon reinforcement learning tasks. Foundational
works like Pertsch et al. (2021) learned latent skill spaces from offline datasets, showing signifi-
cant improvements in guiding exploration and task completion in novel environments. Lynch et al.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(2020) leveraged unlabeled play data to learn goal-conditioned policies in a latent plan space, while
Pertsch et al. (2022) explored cross-domain skill transfer. In multi-task learning, Yoo et al. (2022)
applied skill regularization and data augmentation to handle diverse offline datasets. Model-based
approaches (Shi et al. (2022), Freed et al. (2023)) integrated skill dynamics with planning to im-
prove long-term task planning without additional interaction. Existing skill learning methods lack
flexibility due to their use of fixed-length action sequences, and struggle to recognize semantically
similar behaviors. To address these limitations, our framework leverages contrastive learning to
define skills based on state transitions and introduces a technique for dynamically adjusting skill
lengths, enabling more flexible and adaptive skill extraction.
Contrastive Learning in Reinforcement Learning Contrastive learning has gained significant
traction in RL for enhancing state representations and improving sample efficiency. These methods
typically employ contrastive losses to prioritize task-relevant features while disregarding irrelevant
details. In the context of general state representation learning, Laskin et al. (2020) incorporated con-
trastive learning with off-policy RL algorithms, leveraging data augmentation and contrastive losses
to extract meaningful representations from raw pixel inputs. For goal-conditioned RL, several works
(Eysenbach et al. (2020), Eysenbach et al. (2022), Zheng et al. (2023)) have reframed goal achieve-
ment as a density estimation problem, using classifiers to predict future state distributions without
explicit reward functions. In the domain of unsupervised skill discovery, Yang et al. (2023) applied
multi-view contrastive learning to foster greater similarity within the same skill while maintaining
diversity across different skills. Our DCSL framework builds upon these ideas by applying con-
trastive learning specifically to skill extraction from datasets. Unlike previous methods, we uniquely
integrate dynamic skill length adjustment using learned contrastive representations, addressing the
limitations of fixed-length approaches and enhancing adaptability across diverse tasks.
Dynamic Length Adjustment in Temporal Abstractions Dynamic length adjustment in tem-
poral abstractions enhances RL by enabling more flexible and hierarchical decision-making across
variable time scales. The Options framework (Sutton et al. (1999)) laid the groundwork for tem-
poral abstraction in reinforcement learning. Building on this, Bacon et al. (2017) proposed the
Option-Critic architecture, which learns options end-to-end with differentiable option policies and
termination functions. Shankar & Gupta (2020) introduced a method using temporal variational
inference to discover skills from demonstrations in an unsupervised manner. Further contributions
include the Harutyunyan et al. (2019), which learns option termination conditions, and the Jiang
et al. (2022), which addresses the underspecification problem in skill learning by combining maxi-
mum likelihood objectives with a penalty on skill description length. While these approaches have
significantly advanced temporal abstraction in RL, DCSL introduces a novel perspective. Instead of
relying on learned termination functions, DCSL employs a skill similarity measure to dynamically
adjust skill lengths. This approach allows DCSL to capture more meaningful and adaptable skill
representations.

3     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION AND P RELIMINARIES

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

In this work, we consider skill learning from unlabeled offline data, where the agent has access to
a large, task-agnostic dataset D = {τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τN }. Each trajectory τi = {(st , at )}Tt=1 consists
of sequences of states st ∈ S and actions at ∈ A, without any task-specific reward labels. We
define a skill as a latent vector z ∈ Z that encodes a temporally extended behavior, capable of
generating a sequence of actions given an initial state. Our aim is to learn skills that encapsulate
diverse behaviors, which can later be adapted to solve new tasks efficiently. Each task is modeled
as a Markov decision process (MDP) defined by the tuple {S, A, P, r, ρ, γ}, representing states,
actions, transition probabilities, rewards, initial state distribution, and discount factor.

3.2   S KILL - BASED RL

Skill-based RL aims to improve sample efficiency and generalization in long-horizon tasks by ab-
stracting low-level actions into higher-level skills. SPiRL (Pertsch et al. (2021)) is a framework that
leverages prior data to learn a skill embedding space and a skill prior. SPiRL consists of three main
components: a skill encoder q(z|a), a skill decoder π(a|s, z), and a skill prior pa (z|s). Here, bolded


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a denotes a sequence of actions {a0 , · · · , aH−1 }, where H is a skill length. The skill encoder and
skill decoder are trained through a Variational Autoencoder (VAE), while the skill prior is learned by
modeling the distribution of z from the data. During downstream task learning, the skill prior guides
exploration by regularizing the policy towards skills that are likely under the prior with a weighting
coefficient α:
                                           " T                                            #
                                            X
                  ∗
                π (z|s) = arg max Eπ              r(st , at ) − α · DKL (π(z|s)∥pa (z|s)) .              (1)
                                   π
                                            t=0

This approach enables efficient learning of complex behaviors by leveraging the structure of previ-
ously seen tasks encoded in the skill prior.

3.3   C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING FOR R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

Contrastive learning is a self-supervised technique that learns discriminative representations by con-
trasting positive and negative sample pairs. Initially developed for computer vision (Chen et al.
(2020), He et al. (2020)) and natural language processing (Radford et al. (2021)), it has gained trac-
tion in RL for its ability to extract useful features from unlabeled data (Eysenbach et al. (2022)),
Zheng et al. (2023)). The objective is to learn representations that bring positive (similar) samples
closer together and push negative (dissimilar) samples apart.
In this framework, given two inputs, u (anchor) and v (positive or negative), the model maximizes
the similarity between u and positive samples v + while minimizing the similarity with negative
samples v − . The contrastive loss function (Ma & Collins (2018)) is:

             Lcontrastive = E(u,v+ ) log σ(f (u, v + )) + E(u,v− ) log(1 − σ(f (u, v − ))) ,

                                                                                                         (2)

where f (u, v) is a similarity function, and σ(·) is the sigmoid function. Positive pairs (u, v + ) are
drawn from the joint distribution, while negative pairs (u, v − ) are sampled from the product of
marginals.

4     P ROPOSED M ETHOD
This section introduces the Dynamic Contrastive Skill Learning (DCSL) framework, explaining its
architecture and core components. DCSL aims to cluster semantically similar behaviors as the same
skill and adjust skill lengths dynamically. The framework consists of three main components: skill
learning through contrastive learning, skill length relabeling, and downstream task learning. An
overview of the entire DCSL framework is presented in Fig. 2. The following subsections explore
each component in depth.

4.1   E XTRACTING S KILLS WITH C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING

This section explains the process of skill learning using contrastive learning. Our goal is to learn
skills such that similar behaviors are clustered into a single skill. First, we label an initial skill length
Ht for each {(st , at )}Tt=1 in the given dataset D. This is defined as the length of the skill when the
initial state of the skill is st . The initial skill lengths are set to the same value.
Skill Embedding We select four key states from each skill duration: the initial state st , the
terminal state st+Ht −1 , and two randomly sampled intermediate states st+a and st+b (where
t < t + a < t + b < t + Ht − 1). This approach provides a snapshot of the skill’s progres-
sion in a unified representation, enabling a more effective representation of the overall trajectory
and behavioral context. The selected states ⃗st = {st , st+a , st+b , st+Ht −1 } are encoded into a skill
embedding zt using an LSTM-based encoder qθq (z|⃗s). The loss function for skill embedding is:


          Lembedding = E(⃗s,⃗a)∼D [Eqθq (z|⃗s)[λBC · log πθπ (⃗a|⃗s, z)] − β · DKL (qθq (z|⃗s)|p(z))
                                               + λSP · DKL (sg(qθq (z|⃗s))|pθp (z|s))].                  (3)


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: The overall architecture of our framework, including skill extraction, skill length relabel-
ing, and the application of skills to downstream tasks. Our method samples four states to encode
skills, with red-bordered states representing negative samples. In the relabeling process, green bor-
ders indicate the skill initial state, and yellow borders denote the skill terminate state. The learned
skills are then utilized in downstream RL tasks.


Here, ⃗a represents the actions corresponding to ⃗s, while λBC , λSP , and β are weighting coeffi-
cients, and θq , θπ , and θp are trainable parameters. Additionally, sg denotes the stop gradient oper-
ator. The prior p(z) is defined as a tanh-transformed standard Gaussian distribution, represented as
tanh(N (0, 1)). The skill decoder π(⃗a|⃗s, z) reconstructs these actions using behavior cloning loss.
The skill prior p(z|st ) captures the distribution of likely skills for a given state.
Contrastive Learning for Skill Discrimination Our main goal is to cluster similar behaviors
into the same skill. To achieve this, we introduce a skill similarity function fθf (s, z, s′ ) =
⟨ϕθϕ (s, z), ψθψ (s′ )⟩. Here, ϕθϕ (s, z) is a skill-conditioned state representation, and ψθψ (s′ ) is a
state representation, both of which are trainable networks (Eysenbach et al. (2022)). Our core as-
sumption is that semantically similar behaviors will display similar state change patterns after ap-
plying a skill. To train the skill similarity function, we need both positive and negative samples.
Positive samples pair the initial state st with the skill zt and an intermediate state st+b , chosen to
capture long-term skill effects. Negative samples are states s− that are unreachable from st given
the skill zt , sampled from different skill trajectories. This can be expressed as:

                          s− ∼ Uniform({s ∈ D|∃z ′ ̸= z, s ∈ τ skill (z ′ )}),                          (4)

where τ skill (z) = {st , . . . , st+Ht −1 } represents the set of states belonging to the trajectory of
skill z. For simplicity, we denote this distribution as p(s|z ′ ̸= z). We use the Noise Contrastive
Estimation (NCE) binary loss function (Ma & Collins (2018)) to train the skill similarity function.
Here, σ(·) denotes the sigmoid function, while λCL represents the weighting coefficient, and θf
denotes the trainable parameter. The contrastive loss is as follows (a detailed analysis can be found
in Appendix A.1.):

                                   h           h
    Lcontrastive = λCL · E(⃗s,⃗a)∼D Eqθq (z|⃗s) − log σ(fθf (s, z, sb ))
                                                                                                 ii
                                                 − Es− ∼p(s|z′ ̸=z) log(1 − σ(fθf (s, z, s− )))

                                                                                                    .   (5)

Skill Terminate State Predictor For downstream task learning, determining the point to start the
next skill is crucial due to the variable lengths of skills in our method. Inspired by SkiMo (Shi et al.
(2022)), we repurposed their dynamics module to function as a skill target state predictor specifically
for use in downstream tasks. This predictor is capable of handling these variable skill lengths. Our
approach predicts the skill target state st+Ht , which is the state after the skill has been executed
from the initial state st . When the skill target state is reached during downstream task execution, the
skill is considered complete, allowing the next skill to proceed.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We use a state encoder EθE (st ) and observation decoder OθO (EθE (st )) to map raw observations to
a latent state space and ensure accurate state representations by reconstructing the original observa-
tions. The loss function for the skill target state predictor TθT (·) is as follows:

                     X        h                 h
         Ltarget =       E⃗s∼D Ezt ∼qθq (zt |⃗s) λRE ∥st − OθO (EθE (st ))∥2
                     t
                                                                                             ii
                                                 + λST ∥TθT (EθE (st ), zt ) − EθE (st+Ht )∥2 .       (6)

Here, λRE and λST represent the weighting coefficients, and θO , θE , θT are the trainable parameters.
This loss includes the observation reconstruction term ∥st − OθO (EθE (st ))∥2 and the skill target
state prediction term ∥TθT (EθE (st ), zt ) − EθE (st+Ht )∥2 .
Objective Function The total objective function for the model is a combination of the skill em-
bedding, contrastive learning, and skill target state predictor losses:

                                Ltotal = Lembedding + Lcontrastive + Ltarget .                        (7)

4.2   S KILL L ENGTH R ELABELING

We introduce a dynamic skill length relabeling process based on the learned skill similarity function
fθf (s, z, s′ ). Starting from each skill’s initial state st in the dataset, we obtain zt using the pre-
relabeling skill length Ht . We then compute similarity values for subsequent states st+α (α > 0) and
define the new skill length as the maximum number of consecutive time steps where the similarity
remains above a threshold ϵ:

                              Ht′ = 1 + max        α fθf (st , zt , st+α ) > ϵ .                      (8)

This approach allows for dynamic adjustment of skill lengths based on observed state transitions,
ensuring that each skill’s duration accurately reflects the temporal extent of its effect. To ensure
stable learning, relabeling is performed every Trelabel training steps. Additionally, constraints on
skill length (δmin ≤ Ht ≤ δmax ) are applied to prevent abrupt changes. A detailed convergence
analysis and theoretical justification are provided in Appendix A.2.

4.3   D OWNSTREAM TASKS L EARNING

The learned skills can be applied to downstream tasks using both model-free and model-based ap-
proaches. As our research focuses on skill extraction and representation, we utilized previous ap-
proaches such as SPiRL (Pertsch et al. (2021)) and SkiMo (Shi et al. (2022)) for downstream learn-
ing. In the model-free setting, Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al. (2018)) is used to train a
high-level policy that selects skills based on the current state. Meanwhile, in the model-based set-
ting, skill target state prediction is combined with the Cross-Entropy Method (CEM) (Rubinstein
(1997)) to enable long-horizon planning through skill simulations.
A key feature of our framework in downstream learning is the dynamic adjustment of skill durations
during execution. Unlike previous methods with fixed-length skills, our approach uses a skill target
state predictor to adapt skill execution. Skills are continued to execute until the predicted target state
is reached or until a certain number of timesteps, at which point the high-level policy selects the
next skill. Detailed explanations of the model-free and model-based implementations are provided
in Appendix B.2.

5     E XPERIMENTS

We designed our experiments to answer the following three key questions: (1) Can the skills learned
through DCSL capture meaningful behaviors that enable efficient performance on new tasks in both


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


navigation and manipulation domains? (2) Is DCSL able to extract meaningful and common be-
haviors through skill length adjustment even in more complex or noisy data that include irrelevant
or meaningless actions? (3) Are similar behaviors effectively clustered into similar skills, resulting
in an efficiently learned skill representation space? Our experimental results provide compelling
evidence to address these questions, demonstrating the effectiveness of DCSL across various envi-
ronments and data conditions.

5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We conducted experiments in the antmaze, kitchen, and pick-and-place environments (Fig.6).
Antmaze is a long-horizon navigation task, where the goal is for an Ant agent to reach a designated
goal. We employed two variants, Antmaze-Medium and Antmaze-Large. For each environment,
we used the ‘antmaze-medium-diverse’ and ‘antmaze-large-diverse’ datasets provided by D4RL (Fu
et al. (2020)). In the Kitchen environment, the agent is tasked with completing four independent sub-
tasks. We utilized the ‘kitchen-mixed’ dataset from D4RL for this environment. In the Meta-world
Pick-and-Place environment (Yu et al. (2020)), we used datasets provided by Yoo et al. (2022) con-
taining varying levels of noise. These datasets are ordered from least to most noisy: Medium-Expert
(ME), Medium-Replay (MR), and Replay (RP).
Baselines To assess the effectiveness of our framework, we compared it with several well-
established baselines. First, to evaluate the utility of the skills learned by DCSL, we used two
skill learning comparison groups: SPiRL (Pertsch et al. (2021)) and SkiMo (Shi et al. (2022)).
SPiRL employs a learned skill prior to guide exploration, while SkiMo integrates skill dynamics
with model-based planning. Both methods defined skills as fixed-length action sequences. We eval-
uated SkiMo in two variants: SkiMo-SAC and SkiMo-CEM, using the SAC algorithm and CEM
respectively. Our research focuses primarily on the skill extraction process. To evaluate our ex-
tracted skills, we applied existing methods for downstream task learning, testing two versions of
our DCSL framework: Ours-SAC and Ours-CEM. In all experimental environments, the prede-
fined skill length for the baseline methods and the initial skill length for DCSL were set to 10. To
constrain the skill space, we set the skill dimension to 5 for Antmaze and Kitchen environments,
and 2 for Pick-and-Place. To further evaluate DCSL’s effectiveness in utilizing offline datasets for
task performance, we included additional baselines. We compared against Behavioral Cloning (BC)
(Pomerleau (1988)), which learns policies directly from demonstration data, and Conservative Q-
Learning (CQL) (Kumar et al. (2020)), an offline RL method that ensures policy actions remain
within the data distribution. We also included CQL+Off-DADS (Sharma et al. (2020)), which learns
skills by maximizing mutual information between skills and trajectories, and CQL+OPAL (Ajay
et al. (2020)), which uses unsupervised learning to discover skills that reduce temporal abstraction.
While CQL+Off-DADS and CQL+OPAL also learn skills, they differ from DCSL in their use of
CQL for high-level policy learning.

5.2   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

Fig. 3 and Table 1 present the results for each environment through learning graphs and success
rates, while Table 2 shows the number of timesteps required to complete the tasks. These results
demonstrate the performance and efficiency of our DCSL framework across various environments
and task complexities.
Antmaze-medium The Antmaze environment is a sparse reward task where the agent only re-
ceives a reward upon reaching the goal. As a result, it requires extensive maze exploration, with
skill learning efficiency dependent on the clustering of similar behaviors. Effective clustering of-
fers useful skill representation, redundancy reduction, and improved generalization. Results from
Antmaze-Medium and Antmaze-Large demonstrate DCSL’s effective skill clustering and represen-
tation capabilities. In Antmaze-Medium, Ours-SAC outperformed SkiMo-SAC, suggesting DCSL
generated more accurate skill representations, leading to improved exploration efficiency. SkiMo-
CEM showed high success rates in this environment, while Ours-CEM struggled to achieve sig-
nificant performance. This discrepancy can be attributed to DCSL’s variable skill lengths, which
destabilize CEM’s planning horizon. The inconsistent time scales hinder CEM’s effectiveness in
long-horizon tasks, exacerbating cumulative errors. Comparing with other baselines utilizing of-
fline datasets, we observe that BC and CQL, which do not employ skill learning, struggle to reach


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison of success rates. Boxes containing ‘-’ denote results that could not be obtained
due to the unavailability of a public implementation code.

                                                           Method
 Environment       BC               CQL                 CQL+Off-DADS    CQL+OPAL         Ours-SAC
 Ant-Medium        0.0              53.7 ± 6.1          59.6 ± 2.9      81.1 ± 3.1       68.0 ± 36.9
 Ant-Large         0.0              14.9 ± 3.2          -               70.3 ± 2.9       73.7 ± 5.9
 Kitchen           47.5             52.4 ± 2.5          -               69.3 ± 2.7       94.7 ± 1.5


the goal. While DCSL outperforms CQL+Off-DADS, CQL+OPAL achieves the highest success
rate. This performance difference can be attributed to the varying approaches in learning high-level
policies, similar to what we observed with SkiMo-CEM.
Antmaze-large In Antmaze-Large, Ours-SAC significantly outperformed all other methods,
demonstrating DCSL’s generalization ability in more complex environments. The performance gap
with SkiMo-SAC implies DCSL better addresses the sparse reward problem. CEM-based methods’
performance degradation highlights DCSL’s superior skill representation space learning in chal-
lenging environments. These results prove DCSL enhanced exploration efficiency and generaliza-
tion ability across various environmental scales through effective skill clustering and representation.
In comparison to other offline dataset baselines, BC and CQL face learning difficulties similar to
those in Antmaze-medium. Although CQL+OPAL demonstrates high performance, DCSL achieves
a higher success rate due to its superior exploration efficiency. This highlights DCSL’s ability to
effectively navigate more complex environments.
Kitchen Unlike the Antmaze environment, the Kitchen environment demands precise object ma-
nipulation skills. DCSL’s performance here demonstrates its flexibility and adaptability. Ours-SAC
successfully completed almost all four subtasks, indicating DCSL’s effectiveness in tasks requiring
delicate action sequences, despite using state-based skill embeddings. Our approach performed sim-
ilarly or better than action sequence-based methods, suggesting DCSL better captures task essences
by focusing on state transitions. While Ours-SAC and SkiMo-CEM completed a similar number of
subtasks, our method required fewer timesteps to accomplish the tasks, as shown in Table 2. This
efficiency highlights the effectiveness of the skills that DCSL has learned. Although Ours-CEM
showed slightly lower performance, the overall results of DCSL are promising, particularly consid-
ering its ability to generalize across different task types. This underscores DCSL’s strength in learn-
ing transferable skills that are effective in both exploration-centric tasks and those requiring precise
manipulation, demonstrating robust performance across diverse environments. When compared to
other offline dataset baselines, DCSL significantly outperforms its counterparts. The superior per-
formance in this manipulation task, which requires precise control, demonstrates the effectiveness of
state-transition based skills in capturing intricate action sequences. This result underscores DCSL’s
adaptability to tasks demanding detailed object manipulation.
Pick-and-Place The Pick-and-Place environment evaluates the impact of data quality on skill
learning, showcasing the importance of DCSL’s skill length adjustment. In the high-quality ME
dataset, all methods achieved similar success rates. However, performance differences became more
pronounced in the lower-quality MR dataset, with DCSL showing improved performance. In the
noisy RP dataset, Ours-SAC outperformed all other variants, demonstrating DCSL’s effectiveness
in handling data with high noise and irrelevant actions. These results show that DCSL maintains
strong performance across datasets of varying quality, with its importance becoming more evident
as data quality decreases. In the MR and RP datasets, our method not only achieved high success
rates but also required the least number of timesteps to complete the tasks.

5.3   A BLATION S TUDY

The ablation study (Fig. 4) conducted in the Pick-and-Place environment utilized three datasets (ME,
MR, and RP) to evaluate the impact of the similarity function and skill length readjustment process
in the DCSL framework. In the ME dataset, all methods achieved similarly high success rates,
suggesting that skill length readjustment has relatively little impact on high-quality data. However,
without a similarity function, efficient skills cannot be effectively learned, resulting in the high-level
policy requiring more training steps to converge. The benefits of skill length readjustment became


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    SPiRL             SkiMo-CEM         SkiMo-SAC           Ours-CEM            Ours-SAC


             (a) Antmaze-Medium                     (b) Antmaze-Large                    (c) Kitchen-Mixed


            (d) Pick-and-Place (ME)               (e) Pick-and-Place (MR)              (f) Pick-and-Place (RP)


Figure 3: Performance comparison across Antmaze-Medium, Antmaze-Large, Kitchen, and Pick-
and-Place environments (with 5 different random seeds). Results demonstrate the adaptability and
effectiveness of DCSL in handling diverse and long-horizon tasks. Dark lines represent the average
returns, and shaded areas represent standard deviations. A single training step was conducted after
rolling out one episode.
Table 2: Comparison of the number of timesteps required to complete tasks across different envi-
ronments and algorithms.

                                                                   Method
 Environment         SPiRL                SkiMo-CEM             SkiMo-SAC         Ours-CEM               Ours-SAC
 Ant-Medium          988.5 ± 19.8         311.2 ± 95.7          833.7 ± 288.0     1000.0 ± 0.0           453.6 ± 143.7
 Ant-Large           990.2 ± 19.5         993.5 ± 13.9          881.5 ± 164.9     1000.0 ± 0.0           672.2 ± 72.9
 Kitchen             276.6 ± 5.9          205.8 ± 29.0          251.3 ± 23.7      262.0 ± 20.1           165.1 ± 4.4
 PP (ME)             87.8 ± 65.0          54.1 ± 21.3           58.0 ± 6.8        76.0 ± 15.8            80.1 ± 13.7
 PP (MR)             138.0 ± 63.2         184.8 ± 24.0          87.3 ± 57.6       62.9 ± 5.8             56.1 ± 5.1
 PP (RP)             130.6 ± 69.4         193.2 ± 13.5          200.0 ± 0.0       85.1 ± 22.3            64.4 ± 16.3


more apparent in the MR dataset. Ours-CEM outperformed ‘w/o relabel (CEM)’, indicating that skill
length readjustment enhances the noise handling capability of CEM-based methods. The importance
of skill length readjustment was most pronounced in the RP dataset. Ours-SAC achieved the highest
success rate, while ‘w/o relabel (CEM)’ and ‘w/o sim’ showed significantly lower success rates.
These results demonstrate that the similarity function and skill length readjustment process in DCSL
plays a crucial role in maintaining consistently strong performance across datasets of varying quality.


5.4   Q UALITATIVE E VALUATION OF S KILL C LUSTERING

We conducted a qualitative evaluation (Fig. 5) to assess whether DCSL effectively clustered similar
behaviors into the same skill, thus efficiently learning the skill representation space. For this purpose,
we modified the Antmaze environment by removing all obstacles except the borders and placing
the Ant agent at the center of the maze. We sampled 50 random skills and visualized the Ant’s
movements during the execution of each skill.
The results show that for SPiRL and SkiMo, similar behavior patterns repeatedly appeared across
multiple random skills. This suggests that these methods are experiencing a dimensional collapse,
where similar behaviors are learned as different skills. In contrast, DCSL exhibited a wide range
of behavior patterns, including movements in various directions. This demonstrates that DCSL
effectively clustered similar behaviors, leading to an efficient learning of the skill representation


                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        w/o sim (SAC)       w/o sim (CEM)   w/o relabel (SAC)     w/o relabel (CEM)    Ours-CEM        Ours-SAC


       (a) Pick-and-Place (ME)               (b) Pick-and-Place (MR)                  (c) Pick-and-Place (RP)


Figure 4: Ablation study results in the Pick-and-Place environment across the ME, MR, and RP
datasets, comparing the impact of the similarity function and skill length relabeling in our frame-
work. These results highlight the significance of these techniques in maintaining performance ro-
bustness in suboptimal and noisy environments.


              (a) SPiRL                             (b) SkiMo                          (c) DCSL (Ours)

Figure 5: Comparison of execution results for 50 randomly sampled skills in the Antmaze environ-
ment. Each colored line represents the trajectory of the Ant agent during the execution of a single
skill. While SPiRL and SkiMo show similar behavior patterns repeating across multiple skills,
DCSL demonstrates movements in various directions and patterns. This suggests that DCSL has
learned a more efficient skill representation space by effectively clustering similar behaviors.

space. These findings indicate that DCSL can learn a more diverse and meaningful set of skills
compared to existing methods.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduced Dynamic Contrastive Skill Learning (DCSL), a novel framework that
addresses challenges in long-horizon reinforcement learning tasks by focusing on state-transition
rather than fixed action sequences. DCSL makes two key contributions: it uses contrastive learning
to cluster semantically similar behaviors, enabling more effective skill extraction, and it dynami-
cally adjusts skill lengths based on a learned similarity function. Our experiments in navigation
and manipulation tasks demonstrated DCSL’s ability to extract useful skills from diverse datasets,
including those containing a mix of relevant behaviors and irrelevant or random actions, enhancing
generalization and adaptability across various environments and showing competitive performance
compared to existing methods in task completion and efficiency.
Looking ahead, we envision several promising directions for future work. First, we aim to extend
the use of the learned similarity function beyond skill learning and length adjustment to downstream
task learning, potentially improving task performance by leveraging the semantic understanding
of skills during execution. Second, we plan to explore the integration of language instructions
with skill learning using contrastive methods, enabling agents to follow natural language commands
and generate relevant skills, thus expanding the framework’s potential in interactive environments.
Lastly, we intend to investigate the application of DCSL in multi-agent systems and dynamic task
structures, further testing its adaptability and scalability. These extensions would not only enhance
the capabilities of DCSL but also bridge the gap between skill learning, language understanding,
and task execution in reinforcement learning.


                                                         10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

We implemented all learning models using PyTorch. The experiments were conducted in environ-
ments provided by D4RL (Fu et al. (2020)) and Metaworld (Yu et al. (2020). A detailed explanation
of our framework’s overall algorithm, model implementation details, and environment configura-
tions are provided in Appendix B and Appendix C.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research was supported by the Challengeable Future Defense Technology Research and De-
velopment Program through the Agency For Defense Development(ADD) funded by the Defense
Acquisition Program Administration(DAPA) in 2024(No.915108201)

R EFERENCES
Anurag Ajay, Aviral Kumar, Pulkit Agrawal, Sergey Levine, and Ofir Nachum. Opal: Offline prim-
  itive discovery for accelerating offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.13611,
  2020.

Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 31, 2017.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.

Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Daniel Mankowitz, and Todd Hester. Challenges of real-world reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12901, 2019.

Benjamin Eysenbach, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. C-learning: Learning to achieve
  goals via recursive classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.08909, 2020.

Benjamin Eysenbach, Tianjun Zhang, Sergey Levine, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. Contrastive learn-
  ing as goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 35:35603–35620, 2022.

Benjamin Freed, Siddarth Venkatraman, Guillaume Adrien Sartoretti, Jeff Schneider, and Howie
  Choset. Learning temporally abstractworld models without online experimentation. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10338–10356. PMLR, 2023.

Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and appli-
  cations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.

Ce Hao, Catherine Weaver, Chen Tang, Kenta Kawamoto, Masayoshi Tomizuka, and Wei Zhan.
  Skill-critic: Refining learned skills for hierarchical reinforcement learning. IEEE Robotics and
  Automation Letters, 2024.

Anna Harutyunyan, Will Dabney, Diana Borsa, Nicolas Heess, Remi Munos, and Doina Precup.
  The termination critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.09996, 2019.

Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.

Yiding Jiang, Evan Liu, Benjamin Eysenbach, J Zico Kolter, and Chelsea Finn. Learning options
  via compression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21184–21199, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Li Jing, Pascal Vincent, Yann LeCun, and Yuandong Tian. Understanding dimensional collapse in
  contrastive self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.09348, 2021.

Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1179–1191,
  2020.

Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised representa-
 tions for reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5639–
 5650. PMLR, 2020.

Corey Lynch, Mohi Khansari, Ted Xiao, Vikash Kumar, Jonathan Tompson, Sergey Levine, and
  Pierre Sermanet. Learning latent plans from play. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1113–
  1132. PMLR, 2020.

Zhuang Ma and Michael Collins. Noise contrastive estimation and negative sampling for conditional
  models: Consistency and statistical efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.01812, 2018.

Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.

Karl Pertsch, Youngwoon Lee, and Joseph Lim. Accelerating reinforcement learning with learned
  skill priors. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 188–204. PMLR, 2021.

Karl Pertsch, Ruta Desai, Vikash Kumar, Franziska Meier, Joseph J Lim, Dhruv Batra, and Akshara
  Rai. Cross-domain transfer via semantic skill imitation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07407, 2022.

Dean A Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 1, 1988.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Reuven Y Rubinstein. Optimization of computer simulation models with rare events. European
  Journal of Operational Research, 99(1):89–112, 1997.

Tanmay Shankar and Abhinav Gupta. Learning robot skills with temporal variational inference. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8624–8633. PMLR, 2020.

Archit Sharma, Shixiang Gu, Sergey Levine, Vikash Kumar, and Karol Hausman. Dynamics-aware
  unsupervised discovery of skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.01657, 2019.

Archit Sharma, Michael Ahn, Sergey Levine, Vikash Kumar, Karol Hausman, and Shixiang Gu.
  Emergent real-world robotic skills via unsupervised off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2004.12974, 2020.

Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Joseph J Lim, and Youngwoon Lee. Skill-based model-based reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.07560, 2022.

David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.

Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A frame-
  work for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 112(1-2):181–
  211, 1999.

Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rushuai Yang, Chenjia Bai, Hongyi Guo, Siyuan Li, Bin Zhao, Zhen Wang, Peng Liu, and Xuelong
  Li. Behavior contrastive learning for unsupervised skill discovery. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 39183–39204. PMLR, 2023.
Minjong Yoo, Sangwoo Cho, and Honguk Woo. Skills regularized task decomposition for multi-
 task offline reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
 37432–37444, 2022.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020.
Chongyi Zheng, Benjamin Eysenbach, Homer Walke, Patrick Yin, Kuan Fang, Ruslan Salakhutdi-
  nov, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing contrastive rl: Techniques for robotic goal reaching from
  offline data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03346, 2023.


A     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
A.1     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING FOR S KILL D ISCRIMINATION

This section provides a rigorous theoretical foundation for understanding how contrastive learning
enables effective skill clustering in DCSL. We present two key theorems that demonstrate the rela-
tionship between our contrastive learning objective and mutual information maximization, as well
as its connection to true skill discrimination.

A.1.1    C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING O BJECTIVE AND M UTUAL I NFORMATION M AXIMIZATION
The contrastive learning objective used in DCSL is defined as:

                                   h           h
    Lcontrastive = λCL · E(⃗s,⃗a)∼D Eqθq (z|⃗s) − log σ(fθf (s, z, sb ))
                                                                                                 ii
                                                 − Es− ∼p(s|z′ ̸=z) log(1 − σ(fθf (s, z, s− )))

                                                                                                    .   (9)

where fθf (s, z, s′ ) = ⟨ϕθϕ (s, z), ψθψ (s′ )⟩ is the skill similarity function.
Theorem 1. Assuming an optimal discriminator, the contrastive learning objective maximizes the
mutual information between skills and state transitions.

Proof. The optimal solution for the inner expectation of the contrastive loss is achieved when:
                                                                p(s′ |s, z)
                                  σ(fθf (s, z, s′ )) =
                                                           p(s′ |s, z) + p(s′ )

Substituting this into the contrastive loss and simplifying:

                                                                p(s′ |s, z)

                  L∗contrastive = −E(s,z,s′ )∼p(s,z,s′ )    log               = −I(Z; S ′ |S)
                                                                  p(s′ )
Where I(Z; S ′ |S) is the conditional mutual information between skills Z and future states S ′ given
the current state S.

This result demonstrates that minimizing the contrastive loss is equivalent to maximizing the mutual
information between skills and state transitions, leading to more discriminative skill representations.
As a corollary, maximizing this mutual information promotes improved skill clustering. Intuitively,
this can be explained by three key points: First, higher mutual information indicates that skills are
more predictive of future states. Second, similar state transitions will be associated with similar skill
representations to maximize this predictiveness. Finally, this similarity in skill representations for
similar behaviors naturally leads to clustering in the skill space.


                                                       13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.1.2    L OWER B OUND ON S KILL D ISCRIMINATION

Theorem 2. The contrastive learning objective provides a lower bound on the true skill discrimi-
nation task.

Proof. Let C(s, z, s′ ) be a binary random variable indicating whether s′ is reachable from s using
skill z. The true skill discrimination task can be formulated as maximizing:

        E(s,z,s′ )∼p(s,z,s′ ) [log p(C = 1|s, z, s′ )] + E(s,z)∼p(s,z),s′ ∼p(s′ ) [log p(C = 0|s, z, s′ )]

It can be shown that our contrastive loss provides a lower bound on this objective:

Lcontrastive ≤ E(s,z,s′ )∼p(s,z,s′ ) [log p(C = 1|s, z, s′ )] + E(s,z)∼p(s,z),s′ ∼p(s′ ) [log p(C = 0|s, z, s′ )]


This theorem demonstrates that by optimizing our contrastive loss, we are effectively learning to
discriminate between reachable and unreachable states given a skill, which is crucial for meaningful
skill clustering.

A.1.3    C ONCLUSION

These theoretical results provide a rigorous foundation for understanding why contrastive learning
leads to effective skill clustering in DCSL. By maximizing the mutual information between skills
and state transitions, and providing a lower bound on the true skill discrimination task, our method
naturally groups similar behaviors into coherent skill representations.

A.2     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF S KILL L ENGTH R ELABELING

This section provides an intuitive explanation and brief analysis illustrating how constraining skill
lengths and performing periodic relabeling contribute to stabilizing the training process.

A.2.1    R EDUCING T RAINING I NSTABILITY BY L IMITING S KILL L ENGTH VARIATIONS

By enforcing constraints on skill lengths (δmin ≤ Ht ≤ δmax ), we prevent the skill duration Ht
from changing abruptly during the relabeling process. Skills group the data into distinct behavioral
categories, allowing the model to handle each category with specialized representations. Sudden
large changes in skill lengths can cause abrupt shifts in the data distribution, potentially leading
to unstable training dynamics. By limiting the variation in Ht , we ensure that changes in the data
distribution occur gradually, allowing the model to adapt more smoothly.
Additionally, small changes in Ht lead to gradual transitions in the loss landscape, resulting in more
consistent gradient updates during backpropagation. This consistency helps stabilize the learning
process by preventing drastic fluctuations in gradients.

A NALYSIS : B OUNDING C HANGES IN L OSS AND G RADIENTS

When the change in skill length ∆Ht = Ht′ − Ht is limited by |∆Ht |≤ δmax − δmin , the variations
in the loss function Ltotal and its gradients with respect to model parameters are expected to be
bounded. While exact mathematical bounds depend on the specific properties of the loss function
and model architecture, constraining skill lengths reduces the potential for large fluctuations in loss
and gradients, thereby contributing to training stability.

A.2.2    M ODEL A DAPTATION THROUGH P ERIODIC R ELABELING

Performing skill length relabeling every T training steps allows the model sufficient time to adapt
to the current skill assignments before they are updated again. Reducing the frequency of relabeling
prevents the model from continuously adjusting to new skill assignments, minimizing potential dis-
ruptions during training. This periodic approach enables the model parameters to be updated based
on a consistent set of skills over multiple iterations, facilitating more stable convergence.


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A NALYSIS : R EDUCING G RADIENT VARIANCE

By maintaining consistent skill assignments over T training steps, the variability in parameter up-
dates can be reduced. While we do not assume that gradients are independent or identically dis-
tributed across steps, the consistent skill assignments help in smoothing out fluctuations in the train-
ing process. Averaging updates over multiple steps with stable skill assignments contributes to more
consistent gradient directions and magnitudes, aiding in stable learning.

A.2.3    E NSURING S TABILITY THROUGH THE C OMBINATION OF C ONSTRAINTS AND
         P ERIODICITY

Combining constraints on skill lengths with periodic updates ensures that changes to the model’s
input distribution and internal representations occur gradually. This gradual evolution minimizes
abrupt shifts that could destabilize training. Stable skill lengths and periodic updates enable the
model to effectively learn skill embeddings that capture semantically similar state transitions, en-
hancing representation learning.

A NALYSIS : S MOOTHING THE O PTIMIZATION L ANDSCAPE

Constraining skill lengths and performing periodic relabeling help smooth the optimization land-
scape by preventing sudden changes in the loss function with respect to model parameters. This
smoothing effect reduces the likelihood of encountering sharp gradients or irregularities that can
hinder optimization. While we do not make specific assumptions about the second derivatives (Hes-
sian) of the loss function, the general effect of these techniques is to promote a smoother loss surface,
facilitating more reliable convergence of optimization algorithms.


B     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

This section describes the implementation details of our framework.

B.1     A LGORITHM

Algorithms 1 and 2 describe, respectively, the method for extracting skills from datasets and the
process of relabeling skill lengths in our framework.

B.2     D OWNSTREAM RL

Here, we outline the algorithm used to train downstream tasks. Rather than developing a novel
approach for efficiently searching through skill combinations, our focus was on refining the skills
themselves. To showcase the effectiveness of these learned skills, we used the same method for
combining skills as in previous work, drawing on established approaches such as SPiRL (Pertsch
et al. (2021)) and SkiMo (Shi et al. (2022)). A brief overview of each method is provided below,
with further details available in the corresponding papers.
Model-Free Approach For the model-free setting, we employ the SPiRLPertsch et al. (2021)
framework, which introduces a skill prior to guide exploration in the skill space. This approach
leverages a learned skill prior pa (z|st ), which captures which skills are most relevant given the
current state, reducing exploration inefficiencies.
The high-level policy πθ (z|st ) selects skill embeddings zt that are decoded into action sequences.
To encourage the exploration of meaningful skills, we regularize the policy with the learned skill
prior using the following objective:

                                                                                 
                                      T /H
                                        X
                      LSPiRL = Eπ            (rt − αDKL (πθ (zt |st )∥pa (z|st )))                (10)
                                        t=0



                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Skill Extraction with Contrastive Learning
Require: Unlabeled offline dataset D = {τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τN }, where each τi = {(st , at )}Tt=1 , Relabel-
    ing interval Trelabel
Ensure: Learned skill embeddings z ∈ Z
 1: Initialize skill encoder qθq , skill decoder πθπ , skill prior pθp
 2: Initialize skill similarity function fθf
 3: Initialize state encoder EθE , observation decoder OθO , skill termination predictor TθT
 4: Initialize skill length Ht for each (st , at ) in D
 5: for each training iteration i do
 6:     Sample batch of skill trajectories {τiskill }B  i=1 from D
 7:     for each τiskill in batch do
 8:          Select key states ⃗st = {st , st+a , st+b , st+Ht −1 } from τiskill = {st , . . . , st+Ht −1 }
 9:          Encode skill: z ∼ qθq (z|⃗st )
10:          Decode actions: â = πθπ (a|⃗st , z)
11:          Compute prior: pθp (z|st )
12:          Compute Lembedding using Eq.3
13:          Sample negative state s− from a different skill trajectory τjskill ̸= τiskill
14:          Compute similarity: fθf (st , z, st+b ) and fθf (st , z, s− )
15:          Compute Lcontrastive using Eq.5
16:          Encode states: ht = EθE (st ), ht+Ht = EθE (st+Ht )
17:          Predict target state: ĥt+Ht = TθT (ht , z)
18:          Decode observation: ŝt = OθO (ht )
19:          Compute Ltarget using Eq.6
20:     end for
21:     Compute total loss: Ltotal = Lembedding + Lcontrastive + Ltarget
22:     Update model parameters θq , θπ , θp , θf , θE , θO , and θT to minimize Ltotal
23:     if i mod Trelabel == 0 then
24:          Perform skill length relabeling (Algorithm 2)
25:     end if
26: end for


Algorithm 2 Skill Length Relabeling
Require: Dataset D, Similarity function f , Threshold ϵ, Min/max skill length δmin , δmax
 1: Sample Nsample states from D
 2: for each sampled state st do
 3:     Retrieve corresponding episode τepisode
 4:     Encode skill: zt ← qθq (st , st+a , st+b , st+Ht −1 )
 5:     for α = 1 to len(τepisode ) − t do
 6:         Compute similarity: sim ← fθf (st , zt , st+α )
 7:         if sim ≤ ϵ then
 8:              break
 9:         end if
10:     end for
11:     Relabel the skill duration: Ht′ ← α + 1
12:     Constrain skill length: Ht′ ← max(δmin , min(Ht′ , δmax ))
13: end for


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Here, rt is the cumulative reward over H -step action sequences, and the KL divergence ensures
that the policy samples skills aligned with the learned prior. This improves exploration efficiency by
focusing on promising skills, rather than exploring uniformly.
The Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) algorithm is extended to handle skill embeddings instead of primitive
actions. The critic updates the Q-values for the selected skills, incorporating the learned skill prior
to regularize the policy:

                          Qϕ (st , zt ) = rt + γQϕ (st+H , πθ (zt+H |st+H ))                         (11)
The learned skill prior pω (z|st ) plays a crucial role in guiding the policy toward effective skills
during both training and execution, significantly accelerating downstream task learning.
Model-Based Approach In the model-based reinforcement learning setting, we leverage the Skill
Dynamics Model from SKiMo (Shi et al. (2022)) to perform efficient long-horizon planning in
the skill space. Given an initial state st and a skill embedding zt , the skill dynamics model Dθ
predicts the latent state after the skill has been executed for H steps, as ht+H = Tθ (ht , zt ), where
ht = Eθ (st ) is the latent state produced by the state encoder.
In addition to skill dynamics, the model includes reward prediction and value estimation for each
skill. The reward model Rϕ (ht , zt ) predicts the cumulative reward rt over the skill’s duration,
while the Q-value model Qϕ (ht , zt ) estimates the expected return from executing the skill. These
predictions are used both for planning and for policy optimization, with the Q-value computed as:

                          Qϕ (ht , zt ) = rt + γQϕ (ht+H , πθ (zt+H |ht+H ))                         (12)
Temporal Difference Model Predictive Control (TD-MPC) is used for planning. This method lever-
ages skill dynamics and reward models to simulate long-term trajectories, optimizing skill sequences
over a defined planning horizon. The Cross-Entropy Method (CEM) is employed to search for the
optimal sequence of skills, and the first skill in the sequence is then executed in the environment.
The planning step selects skills by maximizing predicted Q-values over the horizon:

                                                     K
                                                     X
                           Plan(st ) = arg max             [Qθ (ht+kH , zt+kH )]                     (13)
                                            zt:t+K
                                                     k=0

where K represents the planning horizon. This method allows for efficient skill-based planning by
minimizing the number of predictions required, reducing cumulative prediction errors.
The model is trained using a combination of losses, including latent state consistency, reward pre-
diction, and value prediction:


 Lmodel-based = E λL ∥Tθ (ht , zt ) − ht+H ∥2 +λR ∥rt − Rϕ (ht , zt )∥2 +λV ∥Qθ (ht , zt ) − Qtarget ∥2

                                                                                                      (14)
where Qtarget is the target Q-value computed from future predictions. By using TD-MPC with skill
dynamics, reward, and value predictions, this approach enables efficient long-horizon planning in
the skill space, improving sample efficiency for reinforcement learning in complex tasks.

B.3   M ODEL I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

The key models we need to train include the skill encoder qθq , skill decoder πθπ , skill prior pθp ,
skill-conditioned state representation ϕθϕ , state representation ψθψ , state encoder EθE , observation
decoder OθO , and skill termination predictor TθT . Each of these models is implemented as a neural
network. The skill encoder qθq , skill decoder πθπ , skill prior pθp , observation decoder OθO , and
skill termination predictor TθT are all 4-layer MLPs with a hidden dimension of 256, using the ELU
activation function. The skill-conditioned state representation ϕθϕ and the state representation ψθψ
are 2-layer MLPs with a hidden dimension of 128 and employ the ReLU activation function. ϕθϕ
and ψθψ output the input values to a representation dimension of 16. Additionally, the state encoder
EθE is an LSTM with a hidden dimension of 128. The learning rate for all models was set to 0.0003.


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Environments from left-to-right: Antmaze, a long-horizon navigation task with two vari-
ants (Antmaze-Medium and Antmaze-Large); Kitchen, where the agent is tasked to complete four
independent subtasks; and Meta-world Pick-and-Place, where the goal is to pick up an object and
place it at a target location.


C     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
C.1   E NVIRONMENTS

In this section, we provide a more detailed description of the experimental environments.
The goal of the antmaze task is to guide the ant agent to the goal position within the maze. The
observation space has 29 dimensions, capturing the agent’s position and joint information. The
action space consists of 8 dimensions, corresponding to the control of the agent’s 8 joints. In this
environment, we set the skill dimension to 5 for all baselines. As mentioned earlier, our framework
needs to determine whether the pblueicted skill termination state has been reached. This is assessed
using the ant robot’s x and y position, the z-coordinate of the torso, its orientation (quaternion x, y,
z, w), and the hip joint angles of the 4 legs (1 per leg), resulting in a total of 14 dimensions. The
achievement of the skill target state is determined by the L2 distance between the pblueicted state
and the current state. The success threshold is set at a distance of 0.5.
In the Kitchen environment, the objective is to manipulate various objects to achieve desiblue states.
We used the ’mixed-v0’ dataset, where subtasks are presented in a disjoint manner, requiring the
agent to generalize across non-sequential task executions. Similar to antmaze, we set the skill di-
mension to 5 for all baselines. The observation space is 30-dimensional, representing the robot’s
joint states, while the action space contains 9 dimensions for controlling its joints. Skill termination
is determined based on the robot’s 9 joint positions and velocities (18 dimensions), with a success
threshold distance of 0.1.
For Meta-World’s pick-and-place task, the goal is to place an object at a target location. We used
datasets that include both successful and failed task executions, as provided by Yoo et al. (2022).
The datasets consist of three types: Medium-Replay (MR) with 150 trajectories from intermediate
policy stages, Replay (RP) with 100 trajectories spanning the entire learning process (including
relevant and irrelevant behaviors), and Medium-Expert (ME) with 50 expert-level trajectories. The
observation space is 18-dimensional, representing the robot’s joint positions, velocities, and the
object’s position, while the action space has 4 dimensions. In this environment, the skill dimension
is set to 2 for all baselines. The skill termination is evaluated based on the robot’s 3D end-effector
position and the open/closed state of the gripper (4 dimensions), with a success threshold distance
of 0.02.

C.2   H YPERPARAMETERS

D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
D.1   R ESULTS IN A DDITIONAL E NVIRONMENTS

We conducted additional experiments in an environment that, like Pick-and-Place, allows us to com-
pare results based on data quality. Peg-Insert-Side (Yu et al. (2020)) uses the same robot as Pick-and-
Place, but the task involves inserting a peg into a hole in a box. While both tasks involve grasping
and moving objects, there are two significant differences between these environments.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Table 3: DCSL hyperparameters.

          Hyperparameter                                        AntMaze         Kitchen      PickPlace
          Batch Size (skill extraction)                         256             256          128
          Batch Size (Downstream learning)                      256             256          128
          Max Global Step (skill extraction)                                    100,000
          Max Global Step (Downstream learning)                                 4,000
          Weighting coefficient λBC                                             2
          Weighting coefficient λSP                                             1
          Weighting coefficient λCL                                             1
          Weighting coefficient λRE                                             1
          Weighting coefficient λST                                             2
          Skill Dimension                                       5               5            2
          Initial Skill Length H                                                10
          Relabeling Interval T                                                 20,000
          Relabeling Threshold ϵ                                                0
          Length Constraint δmin                                                4
          Length Constraint δmax                                                30
          Distance Threshold                                    0.5             0.1          0.02


                SPiRL             SkiMo-CEM          SkiMo-SAC               Ours-CEM             Ours-SAC


       (a) Peg-Insert-Side (ME)               (b) Peg-Insert-Side (MR)                  (c) Peg-Insert-Side (RP)


Figure 8: Performance comparison of various methods in the Peg-Insert-Side task across different
dataset qualities (ME, MR, RP). All methods demonstrate high success rates, highlighting the task’s
relative ease compared to Pick-and-Place.



First, there’s a difference in the size of the object the
robot needs to grasp. In Pick-and-Place, the object is very
small, so even a slight misalignment of the robot’s grip-
per can result in a failed grasp. In contrast, the peg in
Peg-Insert-Side is longer, making it easier for the robot to
grasp.
The second difference is that in Peg-Insert-Side, the robot
can use the box as a guide when positioning the object.
By moving the peg along the box’s surface, the robot can
more easily find the hole. Pick-and-Place doesn’t offer
such guidance, making it a more challenging environment
for the robot to complete its task.
These differences are reflected in the experimental re-                  Figure 7: Peg-Insert-Side task: The
sults. Regardless of the dataset quality and the method                  robot must grasp a long object and in-
used for finding downstream tasks, all methods showed                    sert it into a hole in the box.
high success rates in Peg-Insert-Side. This confirms that
one of our framework’s major strengths - skill length ad-
justment - becomes more pronounced as the task diffi-
culty increases.


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      (a) SPiRL                                     (b) DCSL (Ours)

Figure 9: Visualization of skill usage in the pick-and-place task. The x-axis represents the skills
reduced through PCA analysis, while the y-axis indicates the timesteps at which the high-level
policy operates.


Figure 10: Distribution of relabeled skill lengths across various environments using our framework.
These results emphasize the adaptability of DCSL in tailoring skill lengths to the specific demands
of each task, improving flexibility and generalization in long-horizon RL tasks.


D.2   V ISUALIZATION OF S KILL S ELECTION

We visualized how skills are utilized in the pick-and-place task to verify whether DCSL effectively
clusters similar behaviors into similar skills. Using PCA analysis, we reduced the dimensionality of
the skills selected by the high-level policy to one dimension. In each episode, the initial and target
positions of the object varied. For a more precise analysis, we configured DCSL’s high-level policy
to sustain a selected skill for the duration of 10 low-level actions, matching the behavior of SPiRL.
The results are presented in Fig. 9. These figures illustrate that, despite variations in the object’s
initial and target positions, the patterns of skill usage in DCSL remain consistent across different
scenarios. This consistency suggests that our method captures some level of semantic context in skill
utilization, even though further analysis is required for explicit interpretability. In contrast, SPiRL
also exhibits instances of selecting similar skills in certain segments. For example, at timestep 2,
the skills selected are closely clustered, likely corresponding to the robot arm’s gripper performing
the action of grasping the object. As previously mentioned, SPiRL embeds action sequences as
skills, which explains why similar skills are selected in segments where the gripper’s movements
are identical. However, outside of these segments, SPiRL demonstrates less consistent patterns of
skill usage compared to DCSL.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Figure 11: The ablation study on the number of key states for the Kitchen task.


D.3     S KILL L ENGTH A NALYSIS

We analyzed the distribution of relabeled skill lengths produced by the DCSL framework across dif-
ferent environments using violin plots (Fig. 10). These plots reveal that skill durations were dynam-
ically adjusted according to state transitions and task complexity, rather than relying on the initial
lengths. In the antmaze-medium environment, skill lengths primarily ranged from 10 to 15 steps,
reflecting medium-length behaviors suitable for the task. In contrast, skills in the antmaze-large
environment were generally shorter, supporting the need for more frequent and precise decision-
making. For more complex environments, such as the kitchen and pick-and-place tasks (ME, MR,
RP datasets), the skill length distribution was more diverse, indicating that DCSL effectively cap-
tured both short and long action sequences necessary to handle varied behaviors. This adaptability
highlights the framework’s ability to tailor skill durations to the specific demands of each task, en-
hancing its flexibility and generalization in long-horizon reinforcement learning scenarios.

D.4     A DDITIONAL A BLATION S TUDIES

D.4.1    NUMBER OF KEY STATES

To address the impact of the number of key states on DCSL’s performance, we conducted an ablation
study in the Kitchen environment. This study explores the relationship between the number of key
states and the minimum skill length, which are interconnected parameters in our framework. We
compared three configurations: (1) 4 key states with a minimum skill length of 5, (2) 4 key states
with a minimum skill length of 10, and (3) 10 key states with a minimum skill length of 10. The
results, presented in Fig. 11, show that using 4 key states with a minimum skill length of 5 achieved
the highest average return. The superior performance of the 4 key states (min length 5) configu-
ration suggests that allowing for shorter skills can capture more fine-grained behaviors, which is
particularly beneficial in manipulation tasks like those in the Kitchen environment. Interestingly,
increasing the number of key states from 4 to 10 while maintaining a minimum skill length of 10
showed only a slight improvement in performance. The minimal difference in performance between
the configurations with 4 key states (min length 10) and 10 key states (min length 10) can be at-
tributed to the effectiveness of the similarity function in DCSL. This similarity function, learned
through contrastive learning, allows the model to capture the semantic context of behaviors regard-
less of the number of key states used. By focusing on state transitions, DCSL can effectively cluster
similar behaviors into coherent skills, even with fewer key states.

D.4.2    A BLATION ON SIMILARITY THRESHOLD ϵ
To evaluate the sensitivity of our DCSL framework to the similarity threshold ϵ, we conducted a
comprehensive analysis in the pick-and-place environment using the Replay (RP) dataset (Fig. 12.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Figure 12: The ablation study on the similarity threshold ϵ for the pick-and-place task.

        Table 4: Comparison of the number of timesteps required to complete pick-and-place.

 Task                      w/o Relabeling                                 with Relabeling
 PP(ME)                     75.1 ± 16.9                                    80.1 ± 13.7
 PP(MR)                      77.8 ± 8.1                                     56.1 ± 5.1
 PP(RP)                     98.9 ± 10.8                                    64.4 ± 16.3


We tested five different ϵ values: -30, -5, 0, 5, and 30. Our results demonstrated that the framework
achieved high success rates across all threshold settings, indicating robustness to this parameter.
However, we observed that setting ϵ to 30 led to a slight increase in the number of training steps
required for convergence compared to other values. This can be attributed to the stricter criterion
imposed by a higher ϵ value for considering state transitions as part of the same skill during the
length relabeling process. Consequently, this stricter threshold tends to generate shorter skills, which
in turn necessitates more training steps for the high-level policy to learn effectively. This analysis
provides valuable insights into the trade-off between skill granularity and learning efficiency in our
framework, demonstrating its adaptability across different threshold values while highlighting the
impact of skill length on downstream task learning.

D.4.3     C OMPARISON OF TASK L EARNING E FFICIENCY WITH AND WITHOUT R ELABELING
We conducted a comparison of the timesteps required for task completion across different datasets
with skill length adjustment (Table 4). Interestingly, the results revealed that skills extracted from
suboptimal datasets enabled tasks to be completed more efficiently compared to those extracted
from the high-quality PP(ME) dataset. This finding suggests that, despite containing more irrele-
vant actions, suboptimal datasets allow DCSL to capture a greater diversity of behaviors as skills,
ultimately contributing to more efficient task completion.

E    L IMITATIONS

While DCSL demonstrates promising results across various environments, it also has several limi-
tations that warrant further investigation. First, DCSL shows limited performance with CEM-based
planning. Our experiments reveal that the variable skill lengths in DCSL can destabilize the plan-
ning horizon in Cross-Entropy Method (CEM)-based approaches. This inconsistency in time scales
reduces CEM’s effectiveness, particularly in long-horizon tasks, leading to suboptimal performance
compared to SAC-based methods. Second, DCSL’s generalization to novel tasks remains limited.
Although it performs well within the distribution of the training dataset, its ability to transfer learned
skills to entirely new tasks or significantly different environments is constrained. This highlights the
need for further research into more robust mechanisms for skill transfer. Additionally, combining our


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


approach with intrinsic rewards that aid exploration could be a viable method for learning new skills
through online interaction. Third, DCSL heavily depends on the diversity of the training dataset. Its
skill learning is restricted to the behaviors present in the offline dataset, making it incapable of learn-
ing skills that are not represented in the training data. This limitation suggests potential future work
in incorporating online interaction through exploration rewards to enable the learning of new skills
beyond the initial dataset. Fourth, the computational complexity of DCSL is another challenge. The
processes of dynamic skill length adjustment and contrastive learning introduce additional computa-
tional overhead compared to fixed-length skill learning methods, which could limit its applicability
in resource-constrained environments or real-time applications. Finally, there is an issue with the
interpretability of the learned skills. While DCSL effectively clusters similar behaviors, the seman-
tic meaning of these clustered skills is not always clear or interpretable. This lack of interpretability
could pose challenges in applications where explainability is crucial. Addressing these limitations
offers exciting opportunities for future research. Potential directions include developing more robust
planning methods compatible with variable-length skills, enhancing skill transfer capabilities, and
exploring hybrid offline-online learning approaches to broaden the range of learnable skills.


                                                    23
