Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O PTIMAL S TRONG R EGRET AND V IOLATION IN
C ONSTRAINED MDP S VIA P OLICY O PTIMIZATION
 Francesco Emanuele Stradi                               Matteo Castiglioni
 Politecnico di Milano                                   Politecnico di Milano
 francescoemanuele.stradi@polimi.it                      matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it

 Alberto Marchesi                                       Nicola Gatti
 Politecnico di Milano                                  Politecnico di Milano
 alberto.marchesi@polimi.it                             nicola.gatti@polimi.it



                                            A BSTRACT

         We study online learning in constrained MDPs (CMDPs), focusing on the goal
         of attaining sublinear strong regret and strong cumulative constraint violation.
         Differently from their standard (weak) counterparts, these metrics do not allow
         negative terms to compensate positive ones, raising considerable additional chal-
         lenges. Efroni et al. (2020) were the first to propose an algorithm with sublinear
         strong regret and strong violation, by exploiting linear programming. Thus, their
         algorithm is highly inefficient, leaving as an open problem achieving sublinear
         bounds by means of policy optimization methods, which are much more efficient
         in practice. Very recently, Mu╠łller et al. (2024) have partially addressed this prob-
         lem by proposing a policy optimization method that allows to attain O(T     e 0.93 )
         strong regret/violation. This still leaves open the question of whether optimal
         bounds are achievable by using an approach of this kind. We answer such a ques-
         tionŌłÜaffirmatively, by providing an efficient policy optimization algorithm with
         O(
          e T ) strong regret/violation. Our algorithm implements a primal-dual scheme
         that employs a state-of-the-art policy optimization approach for adversarial (un-
         constrained) MDPs as primal algorithm, and a UCB-like update for dual variables.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Puterman, 2014) have emerged as the most natural way of mod-
eling learning problems in which an agent sequentially interacts with an (unknown) environment. In
MDPs, the goal is to learn an action-selection policy that maximizes learnerŌĆÖs cumulative rewards.
However, in many real-world applications of interest, there are some additional requirements that the
learner has to meet while learning. For instance, in autonomous driving one has to avoid colliding
with obstacles (Wen et al., 2020; Isele et al., 2018), in ad auctions the allocated budget must not be
depleted (Wu et al., 2018; He et al., 2021), while in recommendation system offending items should
not be presented to users (Singh et al., 2020). In order to capture requirements of this kind, con-
strained MDPs (CMDPs) have been introduced (Altman, 1999). These models augment classical
MDPs by adding agentŌĆÖs costs that the learner is constrained to keep below some given thresholds.
In this paper, we study online learning problems in finite-horizon episodic CMDPs. In such settings,
the learnerŌĆÖs goal is twofold. On the one hand, they aim at minimizing their cumulative regret, which
measures how much they lose over the episodes compared to always playing an optimal (i.e., reward-
maximizing) policy that satisfies the constraint. On the other hand, the learner also wants to ensure
that cost constrains are satisfied during learning. This is measured by means of the cumulative
constraint violation (or simply violation for short), which measures by how much agentŌĆÖs costs
exceed their respective thresholds, cumulatively over the episodes. Ideally, the learner would like
that both regret and violation grow sublinearly in the number of episodes T of the CMDP.
The classical notions of regret and violation are usually called weak, due to the fact that they allow
for negative terms to cancel out positive ones. In CMDPs, this means that the (weak) regret can


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


be easily controlled by using policies achieving large rewards without satisfying the constraints.
Similarly, the (weak) violation can be controlled by adopting policies satisfying cost constraints by
a large margin. However, this behavior is most of the times unacceptable in real-world applications.
For instance, in autonomous driving, the learner does not have the option of being overly safe in
some episodes so as to compensate for crashes occurred in previous episodes.
The strong regret and the strong constraint violation are much more reasonable metrics compared to
their weak counterparts, as they do not allow negative terms to cancel out positive ones. However,
achieving sublinear strong regret/violation in CMDPs is much more challenging.
                                                                                           ŌłÜ
Efroni et al. (2020) were the first to provide a learning algorithm with (optimal) O(   e T ) strong
regret/violation in general CMDPs. However, their algorithm works by solving linear programs de-
fined over the space of occupancy measures, a task that is highly inefficient in practice. Ideally, one
would like learning algorithms that avoid dealing with occupancy measures, by directly optimizing
over the policy space. Such policy optimization algorithms are much more efficient and desirable in
practice. By leveraging a primal-dual scheme, Efroni et al. (2020) designed a first policy optimiza-
tion algorithm for CMDPs, though it can only achieve sublinear weak regret and weak violation,
leaving as an open problem whether an analogous result is achievable for the strong metrics.
Very recently, (Mu╠łller et al., 2024) partially addressed this problem by proposing a primal-dual
                                          e 0.93 ) strong regret and strong violation. However, the
policy optimization algorithm attaining O(T
bounds achieved by such an algorithm remain largely suboptimal, leaving a big gap that still needs
to be closed.
In this paper, we answer the following question left open by (Efroni et al., 2020; Mu╠łller et al., 2024):
                                        ŌłÜ
    Is it possible to achieve optimal O(
                                      e T ) bounds on the strong regret and the strong constraint
          violation in CMDPs by using an efficient primal-dual policy optimization algorithm?

We answer the question above affirmatively. To do so, we design a learning algorithm that exploits
a novel primal-dual scheme. Specifically, our algorithm adopts, as primal regret minimizer, a state-
of-the-art policy optimization algorithm for adversarial (unconstrained) MDPs, while it leverages an
approach based on upper confidence bounds in order to build a dual regret minimizer. Crucially, the
updates of dual variables performed by our algorithm do not resort to optimizing over the space of
occupancy measures, making our algorithm a fully policy optimization approach, and, thus, efficient.


2     R ELATED W ORKS

Online learning (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Orabona, 2019) in MDPs has received considerable
attention over the last decade. Specifically, online MDPs have been studied both in stochastic set-
tings, namely, when the rewards are sampled from a fixed distribution (see, e.g., (Auer et al., 2008;
Even-Dar et al., 2009)) and in adversarial ones, i.e., when no statistical assumption is made on the
rewards (see, e.g., (Neu et al., 2010; Rosenberg & Mansour, 2019b;a; Jin et al., 2020)).
Online learning in CMDPs has generally been studied in settings with stochastic rewards and con-
straints. Zheng & Ratliff (2020) deal with fully-stochastic episodic CMDPs, assuming known transi-
tions. Efroni et al. (2020) propose two approaches (and four algorithms) to deal with the exploration-
exploitation trade-off in episodic CMDPs. The first approach (i.e., the first two algorithms) resorts
to a linear programming formulation of CMDPs and obtains sublinear strong regret and strong con-
straint violation. The second approach (i.e., the last two algorithms) relies on a primal-dual (or
dual) formulation of the problem, guaranteeing sublinear (weak) regret and (weak) constraint vio-
lation, i.e., allowing for cancellations. Finally, very recently Mu╠łller et al. (2024) proposed the first
primal-dual method capable of achieving sublinear strong regret and strong constraint violation.
The algorithm employs a policy optimization update and a regularized Lagrangian formulation of
CMDPs in order to attain O(T e 0.93 ) strong regret and strong violation bounds.
Finally, it is worth remarking that online CDMPs have also been addressed in adversarial settings.
Precisely, (Wei et al., 2018; Qiu et al., 2020; Stradi et al., 2024b) address CMDPs with adversarial
losses, but they only provide guarantees in terms of (weak) constraint violations, thus allowing for
cancellations. Very recently, Stradi et al. (2024a) study CMDPs with adversarial losses and provide


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


guarantees on strong constraint violation. Nevertheless, their approach is not primal-dual and their
algorithm has to (inefficiently) solve a convex program at each episode.
Due to space constraints, we refer the reader to Appendix A for further details on related works.

3       P RELIMINARIES

In this section, we introduce notation and all the definitions needed in the rest of the paper.

3.1     C ONSTRAINED M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESSES

A CMDP (Altman, 1999) is defined as a tuple (X, A, m, P, r, G, ╬▒), where:

         ŌĆó X and A are finite state and action spaces, respectively.
         ŌĆó m Ōłł N>0 is the number of constraints.
         ŌĆó P : X ├Ś A ├Ś X ŌåÆ [0, 1] is a transition function, with P (xŌĆ▓ |x, a) denoting the probability
           of going from state x Ōłł X to xŌĆ▓ Ōłł X by taking action a Ōłł A.1
         ŌĆó r Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| is a reward vector, whose component r(x, a) encodes the reward obtained
           by the learner when taking action a Ōłł A in state x Ōłł X.
         ŌĆó G Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA|├Śm is a cost matrix stacking a cost vector gi Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| for each con-
           straint i Ōłł [m].2 The component gi (x, a) of gi encodes the cost associated with the i-th
           constraint incurred by the learner when taking action a Ōłł A in state x Ōłł X.
         ŌĆó ╬▒ Ōłł [0, L]m is a threshold vector, whose component ╬▒i is for constraint i Ōłł [m].

We study CMDPs where rewards and costs are stochastic, namely, they are randomly sampled ac-
cording to some probability distributions R and Gi whose expected values are r and gi , respectively.
Specifically, a reward vector re Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| is sampled according to a probability distribution R
supported on [0, 1]|X├ŚA| with ER [e  r] = r. Similarly, for every constraint i Ōłł [m], a random cost vec-
                 |X├ŚA|
tor gei Ōłł [0, 1]       is sampled from a distribution Gi supported on [0, 1]|X├ŚA| with EGi [gei ] = gi .
The learner interacts with the CMDP by employing a policy ŽĆ : X ├Ś A ŌåÆ [0, 1], which defines
a probability distribution over actions at each state. For ease of notation, we denote by ŽĆ(┬Ę|x) the
probability distribution for a state x Ōłł X, with ŽĆ(a|x) denoting the probability of action a Ōłł A. In
the following, we denote by ╬Ā the set of all the possible policies the learner can choose from.
Algorithm 1 depicts the CMDP interaction process, when the learner uses ŽĆ : X ├Ś A ŌåÆ [0, 1] and
sampled reward and cost vectors are re Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| and gei Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| for i Ōłł [m], respectively.

Algorithm 1 Learner-Environment Interaction
Require: Policy ŽĆ : X ├Ś A ŌåÆ [0, 1], re Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| , gei Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| for i Ōłł [m]
 1: Environment initializes state to x0 Ōłł X0
 2: for k = 0, . . . , L ŌłÆ 1 do
 3:     Learner plays ak Ōł╝ ŽĆ(┬Ę|xk )
 4:     Learner gets reward re(xk , ak )
 5:     Learner incurs cost gei (xk , ak ) for i Ōłł [m]
 6:     Environment evolves to xk+1 Ōł╝ P (┬Ę|xk , ak )

Given a transition function P : X ├ŚA├ŚX ŌåÆ [0, 1], a policy ŽĆ : X ├ŚA ŌåÆ [0, 1], and a generic vector
v Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| indexed on state-action pairs, we introduce a value function V ŽĆ,P (┬Ę|v) : X ŌåÆ [0, L]
    1
      W.l.o.g., in this paper we assume to work with loop-free CMDPs. Formally, this means that X is partitioned
into L layers X0 , . . . , XL such that the first and the last layers are singletons, i.e., X0 = {x0 } and XL = {xL },
and that P (xŌĆ▓ |x, a) > 0 only if xŌĆ▓ Ōłł Xk+1 and x Ōłł Xk for some k Ōłł {0, . . . , L ŌłÆ 1}. Notice that any finite-
horizon CMDP with horizon H that is not loop-free can be cast into a loop-free one by suitably duplicating the
state space H times, i.e., a state x is mapped to a set of new states (x, k), where k Ōłł {1, . . . , H}.
    2
      In this paper, we denote with [n] := {1, . . . , n} the set of all the integers from 1 to n Ōłł N>0 .


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that is defined as follows, for every k Ōłł {0, . . . , L ŌłÆ 1} and x Ōłł Xk :
                                                 " LŌłÆ1                         #
                                                    X
                          V ŽĆ,P (x, v) := EŽĆ,P           v(xkŌĆ▓ , akŌĆ▓ ) | xk = x .
                                                  kŌĆ▓ =k

Moreover, we define V ŽĆ,P (v) := V ŽĆ,P (x0 , v). Notice that V ŽĆ,P (┬Ę|r) and V ŽĆ,P (┬Ę|gi ) encode the
value functions for the rewards r and the costs gi of some constraint i Ōłł [m], respectively. In the
following, we sometimes omit the dependency of V ŽĆ,P (┬Ę|v) on P , when this is clear from context.

3.2   O FFLINE O PTIMIZATION IN CMDP S

The goal of the learner in a CMDP is to maximize expected rewards, while at the same time ensuring
that all the constraints are satisfied, namely, expected constraint costs are below thresholds. In a
CMDP characterized by a reward vector r Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| and a cost matrix G Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA|├Śm , such
a goal can be formulated by means of the following optimization problem parametrized by r and G:
                                         maxŽĆŌłł╬Ā V ŽĆ (r)

                          OPTr,G :=                                                              (1)
                                           s.t.    V ŽĆ (gi ) Ōēż ╬▒i ŌłĆi Ōłł [m].

In this paper, we assume to work with CMDPs that satisfy the following assumption, which is
common in the literature on CMDPs (see, e.g., (Efroni et al., 2020)).
Assumption 1 (SlaterŌĆÖs condition). There exists a strictly feasible policy ŽĆ Ōŗä : X ├Ś A ŌåÆ [0, 1] such
that V ŽĆ (gi ) < ╬▒i for every constraint i Ōłł [m].

We also need to introduce the Lagrangian function of Problem (1), which is defined as follows.
Definition 1 (Lagrangian function). Given a CMDP with reward vector r Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| and cost
matrix G Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA|├Śm , the Lagrangian function Lr,G : ╬Ā ├Ś Rm    Ōēź0 ŌåÆ R of Problem (1) is defined
as follows, for every policy ŽĆ Ōłł ╬Ā and vector of Lagrange multipliers ╬╗ Ōłł Rm  Ōēź0 :
                                                    X
                           Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗) := V ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ    ╬╗i (V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ) .
                                                       iŌłł[m]


Finally, we also introduce a problem-specific parameter Žü Ōłł [0, L], strictly related to the feasibility
of Problem (1), and in particular to ŌĆ£how muchŌĆØ SlaterŌĆÖs condition is satisfied. Formally:
                                    Žü := max min (╬▒i ŌłÆ V ŽĆ (gi )) .
                                           ŽĆŌłł╬Ā iŌłł[m]

The policy leading to the value of Žü is denoted by ŽĆ ŌŚ” . Intuitively, Žü represents the ŌĆ£marginŌĆØ by which
the ŌĆ£most feasibleŌĆØ strictly feasible policy satisfies the constraints.

3.3   O NLINE L EARNING IN E PISODIC CMDP S

We study episodic CMDPs in which the interaction in Algorithm 1 is repeated over T episodes. At
each episode t Ōłł [T ], the learner chooses a policy ŽĆt : X ├Ś A ŌåÆ [0, 1], while some reward/cost
vectors rt Ōł╝ R and gt,i Ōł╝ Gi for i Ōłł [m] are sampled by the environment. Then, the interaction
goes as in Algorithm 1 with ŽĆ = ŽĆt , re = rt , and gei = gt,i for all i Ōłł [m]. We study the case
in which the learner has bandit feedback, namely, they only observe the rewards and costs for the
state-action pairs visited during the episode. Specifically, at the end of each episode t Ōłł [T ], the
learner receives as feedback from the environment the sampled rewards rt (xk , ak ) and the sampled
costs gt,i (xk , ak ), for every k Ōłł {0, . . . , L ŌłÆ 1} and i Ōłł [m]. Let us remark that the learner does not
know anything about reward/cost distributions, as well as the transition function P .
In episodic CMDPs, the performance of the learner is measured by means of the two metrics intro-
duced in the following. The (cumulative) strong regret over T episodes is defined as:
                                           T
                                           X                    +
                                              OPTr,G ŌłÆ V ŽĆt (r) ,

                                   RT :=
                                           t=1


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where [┬Ę]+ := max{0, ┬Ę}. Intuitively, the regret measures how much the learner loses with respect
to always playing an optimal policy. This is a policy solving Problem (1), and it is denoted by ŽĆ ŌłŚ .
                          ŌłŚ                                      PT   ŌłŚ                     +
Thus, since OPTr,G = V ŽĆ (r), we can write the regret as RT = t=1 V ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ V ŽĆt (r) .
The (cumulative) strong constraint violation over T episodes is defined as:
                                                      T
                                                      X                     +
                                    VT := max               [V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ] .
                                              iŌłł[m]
                                                      t=1

Intuitively, it measures how much the constraints are violated during the learning process.
The goal of the learner is to select policies ŽĆt : X ├Ś A ŌåÆ [0, 1], for each t Ōłł [T ], so that both RT
and VT grow sublinearly in the number of episodes T , namely, RT = o(T ) and VT = o(T ).

4     PARAMETERS E STIMATION
Let Nt (x, a) be thePnumber of episodes up to t Ōłł [T ] in which the pair (x, a) Ōłł X ├Ś A is visited.
                           rŽä (x,a)1Žä (x,a)
                       Ōłł[t]
Then, rbt (x, a) := Žämax{1,N    t (x,a)}
                                         , with 1Žä (x, a) Ōłł {0, 1} being equal to 1 if and only if (x, a)
is visited in episode Žä , is an unbiased estimator of the expected reward r(x, a). This immediately
follows from the fact that rbt (x, a) is defined as the empirical mean of observed rewards for the
state-action pair (x, a). Thus, by applying HoeffdingŌĆÖs inequality, the following lemma holds.
Lemma 1. Given a confidence parameter ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1), with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤, the following
holds for every episode t Ōłł [T ] and state-action pair (x, a) Ōłł X ├Ś A:
                                                                   n q                   o
                                                                       4 ln(T |X||A|/╬┤)
           rbt (x, a) ŌłÆ r(x, a) Ōēż ŽĢt (x, a), where ŽĢt (x, a) := min 1, max{1,N  t (x,a)}
                                                                                          .

                                  gŽä,i (x,a)1Žä {x,a}
                          P
Similarly, gbt,i (x, a) := Žä Ōłł[t]
                             max{1,Nt (x,a)}  is clearly an unbiased estimator of the expected cost
gi (x, a). Thus, by applying HoeffdingŌĆÖs inequality, it is possible to show the following lemma.
Lemma 2. Given a confidence parameter ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1), with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤, the following
holds for every i Ōłł [m], episode t Ōłł [T ], and state-action pair (x, a) Ōłł X ├Ś A:
                                                                     n q                      o
                                                                            ln(T |X||A|m/╬┤)
         gbt,i (x, a) ŌłÆ gi (x, a) Ōēż ╬Št (x, a), where ╬Št (x, a) := min 1, 4max{1,N    t (x,a)}
                                                                                               .

Moreover, by letting Mt (x, a, xŌĆ▓ ) be the total number of episodes up to t Ōłł [T ] in which the state-
action pair (x, a) Ōłł X ├Ś A is visited and the environment evolves to the new state xŌĆ▓ Ōłł X, the
                                                                                    Mt (x,a,xŌĆ▓ )
estimated transition probability for the triplet (x, a, xŌĆ▓ ) is Pbt (xŌĆ▓ |x, a) := max{1,N t (x,a)}
                                                                                                   . We refer
to Appendix D.2 for additional details and results related to transition probabilities estimation.

Compact notation We introduce rbt Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| to denote the vector whose components are the
estimated rewards rbt (x, a). Moreover, we denote by ŽĢt Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| the vector whose entries are
the bounds ŽĢt (x, a). Similarly, we introduce gbt,i Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| to denote the vector of estimated
costs gbt,i (x, a), while we denote by ╬Št Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| the vector of the bounds ╬Št (x, a). Finally, we
let rt := rbt + ŽĢt , rt := rbt ŌłÆ ŽĢt , g t,i := gbt,i + ╬Št , and g t,i := gbt,i ŌłÆ ╬Št .


5     A N OVEL P RIMAL -D UAL A LGORITHM
Next, we introduce a novel primal-dual algorithm, called
                                                      ŌłÜ constrained primal-dual policy optimiza-
tion (CPD-PO), which allows to efficiently achieve O(
                                                   e T ) strong regret and strong violation.

5.1   T HE CPD-PO A LGORITHM

Algorithm 2 shows the pseudocode of CPD-PO. It employs an instance of the policy optimization
with dilated bonus (PO-DB) algorithm by Luo et al. (2021), which is the state-of-the-art algorithm


                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Constrained Primal-Dual Policy Optimization (CPD-PO)
Require: number of rounds T Ōłł N>0 , problem-specific parameter Žü Ōłł [0, L], confidence ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1)
 1: ŽĆ1 ŌåÉ first policy prescribed by PO-DB
 2: Initialize all the estimators, counters, and bounds
 3: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 4:       Interact as in Algorithm 1 with ŽĆ = ŽĆt , re = rt , and gei = gt,i for i Ōłł [m]
 5:       Observe (xk , ak ), rt (xk , ak ), and gt,i (xk , ak ) for every k Ōłł {0, . . . , K ŌłÆ 1} and i Ōłł [m],
    ..... as feedback from the interaction in Algorithm 1
 6:       Build estimators rbt , gbt,i , ŽĢt , ╬Š t , and Pbt as prescribed
                                                                       in Section 4
 7:     ╬╗t,i ŌåÉ arg max╬╗Ōłł{0, L+1 } ╬╗ V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i         ŌłĆi Ōłł [m]
                                                b
                                  Žü
 8:     Build artificial loss for every pair (xk , ak ) received as feedback:
                                             ’Ż«                                                  ’Ż╣
                               (L + 1)m ’Ż░                      X                            ╬▒i ’Ż╗

              Ōäōt (xk , ak ) ŌåÉ             ŌłÆ rt (xk , ak ) ŌłÆ         ╬╗t,i g t,i (xk , ak ) ŌłÆ
                                    Žü                                                       L
                                                               iŌłł[m]


        Update policy ŽĆt+1 ŌåÉPO-DB {(xk , ak ), Ōäōt (xk , ak )}LŌłÆ1

 9:                                                          k=0


for learning in adversarial (unconstrained) MDPs under bandit feedback. Notice that this algorithm
employs a policy optimization approach, by efficiently optimizing state by state. Thus, PO-DB does
not resort to any optimization step performed over the space of occupancy measures.
Algorithm 2 initializes an instance of PO-DB as prescribed in (Luo et al., 2021), and it immediately
uses it to get the policy ŽĆ1 to be used at t = 1. Furthermore, it initializes the estimators rbt , gbt,i
to vectors of zeros and all the counters Nt (x, a), Mt (x, a, xŌĆ▓ ) to zero (Line 2). Then, at every
episode t Ōłł [T ], the algorithm plays policy ŽĆt (Line 4) and observes the feedback associated with
the trajectory traversed during the episode (Line 5). The estimators and the confidence bounds are
then updated as shown in Section 4 (Line 6). The update of dual variables (Line 7) is performed as
a binary choice between two values, namely zero and L+1/Žü, for each i Ōłł [m]. The value zero is
selected when the optimistic estimation of the i-th constraint is not violated by the selected policy ŽĆt
(with respect to the estimated transition Pbt ). In such a case, in the next primal update, the algorithm
will not focus on minimizing that specific constraint violation. On the contrary, if the optimistic
estimation of the i-th constraint is not satisfied, then the dual update selects the value L+1/Žü. This
quantity is chosen to be large enough to guarantee that, with respect to the deterministic Lagrangian
game defined by the true reward and cost distributions, any policy cannot gain more than OPTr,G
(see Section 6.1 for further discussion on these aspects). We remark that the value of V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i )
                                                                                                   b

in Line 7 of Algorithm 2 can be efficiently computed by means of a simple dynamic programming
procedure. The primal update is performed by the policy update of PO-DB. Notice that PO-DB
is tailored for adversarial MDPs (in which no-statistical assumption is made on the loss functions)
with bandit feedback. Thus, for every t Ōłł [T ], the primal algorithm expects to receive a loss value
for any state-action traversed by the policy previously chosen (and the trajectory itself). We feed
PO-DB by building a Lagrangian loss, employing the Lagrangian vector selected in Line 7. Notice
that the estimated Lagrangian is subtracted and scaled by the state-action maximum (negative) loss
(L+1)m/Žü, since PO-DB is tailored for positive loss (see Line 8). Finally, the Lagrangian loss and
the trajectory are given to the PO-DB instance (Line 9). We remark that PO-DB minimizes the loss
function by employing state-by-state optimization updates. Thus, it is computationally much more
efficient than algorithms resorting to a projection on the occupancy measure space.

5.2   A LGORITHM C OMPARISON WITH (E FRONI ET AL ., 2020) AND (M U╠łLLER ET AL ., 2024)

In the following, we highlight the main differences between Algorithm 2 and the primal-dual for-
mulations employed by Efroni et al. (2020) and Mu╠łller et al. (2024).
Efroni et al. (2020) were the first to introduce online primal-dual methods that achieve sublinear
regret and sublinear constraint violation in CMDPs (allowing for cancellations). Mu╠łller et al. (2024)
were the first to achieve sublinear strong regret and strong violation via primal-dual methods.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Efroni et al. (2020) propose two primal-dual algorithms.3 The first algorithm (OptDual-CMDP)
performs a UCB-like primal update given an optimistic estimation of the Lagrangian func-
tion. Such estimation shares some similarities with ours. As concerns the dual update,
OptDual-CMDP performs a gradient descent update on the optimistic Lagrangian. The second
algorithm (OptPrimalDual-CMDP) employs a multiplicative-weight-kind of update for the pri-
mal update. Precisely, this update is performed in closed form given the Lagrangified action-value
function as objective. The dual update is gradient-descent-like, with the additional modification
that the Lagrangian multipliers space is bounded (similarly to our work) since the primal regret
minimizer needs the loss/reward functions to be bounded.
Mu╠łller et al. (2024) employ similar primal and dual regret minimizers as OptPrimalDual-CMDP,
namely, multiplicate weights for the primal and gradient descent for the dual. Differently
from Efroni et al. (2020), Mu╠łller et al. (2024) employ a regularized scheme to define the under-
lying Lagrangian game played by the primal and the dual regret minimizers. Indeed, the algorithm
employs a regularized Lagrangian formulation in order to make the primal objective strictly concave
(in the state-action visit distribution) and the dual one strongly convex (in the Lagrangian variable).
The strict concavity/strong convexity is necessary to converge in last-iterate to the optimal values of
the Lagrangian game and, thus, to attain sublinear strong regret and strong violation. In our work,
we do not resort to any regularization scheme, thus simply employing the standard Lagrangian for-
mulation of CMDPs. The main difference between our algorithm and those in (Efroni et al., 2020;
Mu╠łller et al., 2024) lies in the dual update. Indeed, the black-box primal update employed in our
work is multiplicative weight like as the works described above4 . Differently, in the dual update, we
use a UCB-like update, thus not resorting to any adversarial regret minimizers. The UCB-like kind
of update is performed between the minimum and the maximum reasonable value for the Lagrange
variables. This modification allows us to play the adversarial primal regret minimizer on the de-
terministic Lagrangian game (up to confidence terms factor) associated with the ŌĆØbestŌĆØ Lagrangian
variable for the violations previously attained. Moreover, notice that our algorithm, since we em-
ploy an adversarial primal regret minimizer and differently from algorithms that employ UCB-like
updates on the primal (such as OptDual-CMDP), may choose non-deterministic policies, which
are often optimal in online constrained problem.


6     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS

In the following section, we discuss the theoretical guarantees attained by Algorithm 2. Specifically,
in Section 6.1 we provide fundamental results on the Lagrangian formulation employed by CPD-PO.
In Section 6.2 we discuss the guarantees attained by the primal algorithm. Finally, in Section 6.3 we
state the regret and violations guarantees attained by Algorithm 2.

6.1   R ESULTS ON THE L AGRANGIAN F ORMULATION

In this section we state some useful preliminary results attained by Algorithm 2. Specifically, the
following results concern the primal-dual scheme employed by CPD-PO. For the related omitted
proof we refer to Appendix C.1. We start by showing that the dual variables decision space is well-
defined. Indeed, it is fundamental to show that, given any policy ŽĆt selected by the black-box primal
algorithm, the dual decision space is sufficient to upper-bound the Lagrangian function value with
the constrained optimum. This is done by means of the following lemma.
Lemma 3. Given a CMDP with reward vector r Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| and cost matrix G Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA|├Śm ,
for every policy ŽĆ Ōłł ╬Ā, the following holds:
                                            X
                     V ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ     max m         ╬╗i (V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ) Ōēż OPTr,G .
                                ╬╗Ōłł[0, L+1
                                       Žü ] iŌłł[m]

    3
      It is important to highlight that OptDual-CMDP is often referred to as a dual method since the primal
is only updated given a UCB-like procedure on the Lagrangian. Nevertheless, since the difficulty in attaining
strong regret and violation holds for dual methods, too, we will refer to this kind of algorithms as primal-dual.
    4
      Nevertheless, it is an enhanced version with exploration bonus, which allows to have independent adver-
sarial regret minimizer guarantees (see (Luo et al., 2021) for further discussion)


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As previously specified, Lemma 3 states that it is not convenient for the primal algorithm instantiated
by Algorithm 2 to play non-safe policies in order to gain more rewards than the one possibly attained
by safe policies. Again, this is true given the dual update performed by CPD-PO.
It is important to notice that Lemma 3 holds for an optimization problem where rewards, constraints
and transitions are known a-priori. Indeed, this is not the case in an online learning setting, where all
the aforementioned parameter are unknown and must be estimated in an online fashion. Specifically,
if the dual algorithm were aware of the unknown distributions mentioned above, the dual update of
Algorithm 2 combined with Lemma 3 would lead to:
                                      Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) Ōēź Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t ),                            (2)
for all t Ōłł [T ]. Equation (2) would be crucial to prove strong regret guarantees, since, it shows
that the policy chosen by the algorithm cannot outperform ŽĆ ŌłŚ , thus, making the standard regret
definition (on the Lagrangian) to collapse to the strong one. Nevertheless, as previously specified,
Equation (2) cannot be attained without complete knowledge of the environment. To overcome this
issue, we prove the Equation (2) holds up to sublinear term, which depends on the uncertainty on
the environment estimation. This is done in the following lemma.
Lemma 4. With probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤, Algorithm 2 guarantees that, for every episode t Ōłł [T ]:
                                        4Lm ŽĆt       8Lm X
   Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) Ōēź Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t ) ŌłÆ    V (╬Št ) ŌłÆ               PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) .
                                         Žü             Žü
                                                                 xŌłłX,aŌłłA


The interpretation of Lemma 4 is the following: Equation (2) holds up to two terms. The first term
4Lm/Žü ┬Ę V ŽĆt (╬Š ) encompasses the uncertainty on the constraints. Indeed, it is the expectation over
               t
policy ŽĆt and transitions of the confidence intervals on the costs. This quantity decreases as the
algorithm collects cost samples, thus it is sublinear in T when summed over the episodes (we refer
to Appendix C.2 for the concentration result). Similarly, the term
                           8Lm       X
                                 ┬Ę            PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) ,
                             Žü
                                    xŌłłX,aŌłłA

where PŽĆ,P (x, a) is the state-action visit distribution given policy ŽĆ and transition P , encompasses
the uncertainty related to the transitions. This term is sublinear in T when summed over the episode
(we refer to Appendix D.2 for the concentration result). Finally, we remark that the uncertainty
about the rewards does not affect the dual update, thus, Lemma 4 is completely independent on that.

6.2     P RIMAL A LGORITHM

In the following section we state the theoretical guarantees attained by the primal algorithm em-
ployed by Algorithm 2. Precisely we have the following guarantees.
Lemma 5. Given any ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1), the instance of PO-DB employed by Algorithm 2 guarantees that,
for every policy ŽĆ Ōłł ╬Ā, the primal regret RTL (ŽĆ) defined as:
       ’Ż«                                        ’Ż╣      ’Ż«                                         ’Ż╣
  X T               X                              XT                X
       ’Ż░V ŽĆ (rt ) ŌłÆ     ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’Ż╗ ŌłÆ     ’Ż░V ŽĆt (rt ) ŌłÆ    ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’Ż╗ ,
  t=1              iŌłł[m]                               t=1                  iŌłł[m]

is bounded as follows:
                                                 L3 m            L5 m

                                                         p
                             RTL (ŽĆ) Ōēż O
                                       e              |X| |A|T +                 ,
                                                  Žü               Žü
with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ O(╬┤).

Lemma 5 is obtained by the following considerations. First of all, the analysis employs the no-regret
guarantees of PO-DB (refer to Appendix D.1 and (Luo et al., 2021) for further discussion). Indeed,
by simple computation and using the linearity of expectation, it is possible to recover the RTL (ŽĆ)
definition by the loss function fed into PO-DB by Algorithm 2. Moreover, notice that the no-regret
property of PO-DB cannot be directly applied to our setting, since the range of the losses is clearly
different. Indeed PO-DB is tailored for standard episodic MDPs where the losses are bounded in
[0, L]. This is not true for the Lagrangified MDPs where the losses are bounded in [0, 2L(L+1)m/Žü].
Nevertheless, it is sufficient to multiply the original bound for a O(Lm/Žü) factor to obtain the result.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6.3     R EGRET AND V IOLATION

In the following section, we provide the cumulative strong regret and cumulative strong violation
guarantees attained by Algorithm 2.
                                          ŌłÜ
We start showing that a regret of order O(
                                        e T ) is attainable by employing primal-dual method which
does not optimize over the occupancy measure space. This is done in the following theorem.
Theorem 1. Given any ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1), Algorithm 2 attains:
                                           3                    5

                                       e L m |X| |A|T + L m ,
                                                   p
                               RT Ōēż O
                                           Žü                    Žü
with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ O(╬┤).

Theorem 1 is proved by combining Lemma 4 and Lemma 5. Specifically, we start from the theoret-
ical guarantees attained by PO-DB, that is, using the bound provided in Lemma 5. Next, employing
the optimism of the confidence bound, we recover the true Lagrangian function, excluding sublinear
terms. As previously specified, given Lemma 4 it is then possible to recover the cumulative strong
regret definition on the regret formulated with respect to the Lagrangian function. Finally, to get the
final bound, it is sufficient to notice that the optimal solution ŽĆ ŌłŚ is safe and that:
              X                                 4Lm X
                    ╬╗t,i (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ) Ōēź ŌłÆ                PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) .
                                                 Žü
             iŌłł[m]                                   xŌłłX,aŌłłA

We underline that, from a regret bound perspective, our result obtains the optimal regret order in T ,
while Mu╠łller et al. (2024) achieves a suboptimal T 0.93 only. Furthermore, our bound is not worse
than the one in (Mu╠łller et al., 2024) w.r.t. the dependency on Žü, m and L.
We conclude by stating
                ŌłÜ      the result related to the cumulative strong violations. Even in this case, we
show that the O(
              e T ) order is attainable.
Theorem 2. For any ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1), Algorithm 2 attains:
                                                   p
                              VT Ōēż O  e L3 m|X| |A|T + L5 m ,

with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ O(╬┤).

To prove the result, we proceed similarly to Theorem 1, namely, we employ Lemma 5 and we apply
the following equality
 X                                   L X                                   1 X h                        i+
      ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i =           ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i +      V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
                 b                                       b                             b
                                    L+1                                     Žü
iŌłł[m]                                       iŌłł[m]                                      iŌłł[m]

to retrieve the strong violation definition (up to confidence terms). Notice that, given the L/L+1 factor
which allows us to retrieve the strong violation term, it is not possible to directly apply Lemma 4
anymore. Nevertheless, it is indeed possible to prove a similar inequality. Specifically, it holds:
                                          2Lm ŽĆt           4Lm X
Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) Ōēź Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t L/L+1) ŌłÆ      V (╬Št ) ŌłÆ                   PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) .
                                           Žü                 Žü
                                                                      xŌłłX,aŌłłA

Indeed, the inequality above can be employed to bound sublinearly the following quantity:
                              T
                              X                              T
                                                             X
                                    Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t L/L+1) ŌłÆ         Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ),
                              t=1                            t=1
                                                    PT                                   +
which in turn allows to bound sublinearly Žü1 ┬Ę                                ŽĆt
                                                               P
                                                         t=1           (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ] , once excluded the
                                                                   iŌłł[m] [V
sublinear terms associated to the confidence bounds. Finally, simplifying in the PO-DB regret bound
the 1/Žü factor associated to the violation term gives the desired result.
Comparing
  ŌłÜ         our violations result with the one in Mu╠łller et al. (2024), Algorithm 2 attains the optimal
e T ) order in T , while Mu╠łller et al. (2024) achieves a suboptimal T 0.93 . For the violations, our
O(
bound is not worse than the one in (Mu╠łller et al., 2024) w.r.t. the dependency on m and L. Moreover,
we do not have the dependency on the SlaterŌĆÖs parameter Žü.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper is supported by the Italian MIUR PRIN 2022 Project ŌĆ£Targeted Learning Dynamics:
Computing Efficient and Fair Equilibria through No-Regret AlgorithmsŌĆØ, by the FAIR (Future Arti-
ficial Intelligence Research) project, funded by the NextGenerationEU program within the PNRR-
PE-AI scheme (M4C2, Investment 1.3, Line on Artificial Intelligence), and by the EU Horizon
project ELIAS (European Lighthouse of AI for Sustainability, No. 101120237).

R EFERENCES
E. Altman. Constrained Markov Decision Processes. Chapman and Hall, 1999.
Peter Auer, Thomas Jaksch, and Ronald Ortner.       Near-optimal regret bounds for re-
  inforcement learning.    In D. Koller, D. Schuurmans, Y. Bengio, and L. Bottou
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 21. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2008. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2008/file/
  e4a6222cdb5b34375400904f03d8e6a5-Paper.pdf.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Ian Osband, and Re╠ümi Munos. Minimax regret bounds for reinforce-
 ment learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 263ŌĆō272. PMLR, 2017.
Qinbo Bai, Vaneet Aggarwal, and Ather Gattami. Provably efficient model-free algorithm for mdps
  with peak constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05555, 2020.
Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi and Ga╠übor Lugosi. Prediction, learning, and games. Cambridge university
  press, 2006.
Yuhao Ding and Javad Lavaei. Provably efficient primal-dual reinforcement learning for cmdps with
  non-stationary objectives and constraints. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 7396ŌĆō7404, 2023.
Yonathan Efroni, Shie Mannor, and Matteo Pirotta. Exploration-exploitation in constrained mdps,
  2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.02189.
Eyal Even-Dar, Sham M Kakade, and Yishay Mansour. Online markov decision processes. Mathe-
  matics of Operations Research, 34(3):726ŌĆō736, 2009.
Arnob Ghosh, Xingyu Zhou, and Ness Shroff. Towards achieving sub-linear regret and hard con-
  straint violation in model-free RL. In Sanjoy Dasgupta, Stephan Mandt, and Yingzhen Li (eds.),
  Proceedings of The 27th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, vol-
  ume 238 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1054ŌĆō1062. PMLR, 02ŌĆō04 May
  2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v238/ghosh24a.html.
Yue He, Xiujun Chen, Di Wu, Junwei Pan, Qing Tan, Chuan Yu, Jian Xu, and Xiaoqiang Zhu. A
  unified solution to constrained bidding in online display advertising. In Proceedings of the 27th
  ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 2993ŌĆō3001, 2021.
David Isele, Alireza Nakhaei, and Kikuo Fujimura. Safe reinforcement learning on autonomous
  vehicles. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
  pp. 1ŌĆō6. IEEE, 2018.
Chi Jin, Tiancheng Jin, Haipeng Luo, Suvrit Sra, and Tiancheng Yu. Learning adversarial Markov
  decision processes with bandit feedback and unknown transition. In Hal Daume╠ü III and Aarti
  Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
  119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4860ŌĆō4869. PMLR, 13ŌĆō18 Jul 2020.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/jin20c.html.
Haipeng Luo, Chen-Yu Wei, and Chung-Wei Lee. Policy optimization in adversarial mdps: Im-
  proved exploration via dilated bonuses. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  22931ŌĆō22942, 2021.
Adrian Mu╠łller, Pragnya Alatur, Volkan Cevher, Giorgia Ramponi, and Niao He. Truly no-regret
  learning in constrained mdps. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gergely Neu, Andras Antos, Andra╠üs Gyo╠łrgy, and Csaba Szepesva╠üri. Online markov decision pro-
  cesses under bandit feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 23, 2010.
Francesco Orabona. A modern introduction to online learning. CoRR, abs/1912.13213, 2019. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.13213.
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Shuang Qiu, Xiaohan Wei, Zhuoran Yang, Jieping Ye, and Zhaoran Wang.                Up-
  per confidence primal-dual reinforcement learning for cmdp with adversarial loss.  In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 15277ŌĆō15287. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  ae95296e27d7f695f891cd26b4f37078-Paper.pdf.
Aviv Rosenberg and Yishay Mansour. Online stochastic shortest path with bandit feedback and un-
  known transition function. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d Alche╠ü-Buc, E. Fox,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2019a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/
  file/a0872cc5b5ca4cc25076f3d868e1bdf8-Paper.pdf.
Aviv Rosenberg and Yishay Mansour. Online convex optimization in adversarial Markov decision
  processes. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 5478ŌĆō5486. PMLR, 09ŌĆō15 Jun 2019b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v97/rosenberg19a.html.
Ashudeep Singh, Yoni Halpern, Nithum Thain, Konstantina Christakopoulou, E Chi, Jilin Chen, and
  Alex Beutel. Building healthy recommendation sequences for everyone: A safe reinforcement
  learning approach. In Proceedings of the FAccTRec Workshop, Online, pp. 26ŌĆō27, 2020.
Francesco Emanuele Stradi, Matteo Castiglioni, Alberto Marchesi, and Nicola Gatti. Learning ad-
  versarial mdps with stochastic hard constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03672, 2024a.
Francesco Emanuele Stradi, Jacopo Germano, Gianmarco Genalti, Matteo Castiglioni, Alberto
  Marchesi, and Nicola Gatti. Online learning in CMDPs: Handling stochastic and adversar-
  ial constraints. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria
  Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 46692ŌĆō46721. PMLR, 21ŌĆō27 Jul 2024b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v235/stradi24a.html.
Francesco Emanuele Stradi, Anna Lunghi, Matteo Castiglioni, Alberto Marchesi, and Nicola Gatti.
  Learning constrained markov decision processes with non-stationary rewards and constraints,
  2024c. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14372.
Honghao Wei, Arnob Ghosh, Ness Shroff, Lei Ying, and Xingyu Zhou. Provably efficient model-
  free algorithms for non-stationary cmdps. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 6527ŌĆō6570. PMLR, 2023.
Xiaohan Wei, Hao Yu, and Michael J. Neely. Online learning in weakly coupled markov decision
  processes: A convergence time study. Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., 2(1), apr 2018. doi:
  10.1145/3179415. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3179415.
Lu Wen, Jingliang Duan, Shengbo Eben Li, Shaobing Xu, and Huei Peng. Safe reinforcement
  learning for autonomous vehicles through parallel constrained policy optimization. In 2020 IEEE
  23rd International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), pp. 1ŌĆō7. IEEE, 2020.
Di Wu, Xiujun Chen, Xun Yang, Hao Wang, Qing Tan, Xiaoxun Zhang, Jian Xu, and Kun Gai.
  Budget constrained bidding by model-free reinforcement learning in display advertising. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management,
  pp. 1443ŌĆō1451, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Liyuan Zheng and Lillian Ratliff. Constrained upper confidence reinforcement learning. In Alexan-
  dre M. Bayen, Ali Jadbabaie, George Pappas, Pablo A. Parrilo, Benjamin Recht, Claire Tomlin,
  and Melanie Zeilinger (eds.), Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Learning for Dynamics and
  Control, volume 120 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 620ŌĆō629. PMLR, 10ŌĆō11
  Jun 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v120/zheng20a.html.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

The appendix is structured as follows:

       ŌĆó In Appendix A, we provide additional related works.
       ŌĆó In Appendix B, we provide the omitted proofs related to the confidence intervals.
       ŌĆó In Appendix C, we provide the omitted proofs of the theoretical guarantees attained by
         Algorithm 2. Specifically, in Appendix C.1, we provide the results which extend the strong
         duality ones in constrained Markov decision processes. In Appendix C.2, we provide the
         results related to the regret bound. In Appendix C.3, we provide the results related to the
         violations bound.
       ŌĆó In Appendix D, we provide auxiliary technical lemmas from existing works. Precisely,
         in Appendix D.1, we provide the regret bound of our primal regret minimizer and in Ap-
         pendix D.2, we further discuss the transition functions confidence intervals.


A    R ELATED WORKS

In the following section, we provide a further discussion on the works which are mainly related to
ours. Specifically, we will focus on online learning in unconstrained MDPs, on stochastic online
CMDPs and finally on adversarial online CMDPs.

Online learning in MDPs The literature on online learning problems in MDPs is wide. In such
settings, two types of feedback are usually studied: in the full feedback model, the entire reward/loss
function is observed after the learnerŌĆÖs choice, while in the bandit feedback model, the learner only
observes the reward given the chosen action. Azar et al. (2017) study the problem of optimal ex-
ploration in episodic MDPs with unknown transitions and stochasticŌłÜlossee, under bandit feedback.
The authors provide an algorithm whose regret upper bound is O(      e T ), thus matching the lower
bound for this class of MDPs and improving the previous result by Auer et al. (2008). Rosenberg &
Mansour (2019b) study the online learning problem in episodic MDPs with adversarial losses and
unknown transitions when the feedback is full information. The authors presentŌłÜan online algorithm
exploiting entropic regularization and providing a regret upper bound of O(   e T ). The same set-
ting is investigated by Rosenberg & Mansour (2019a) when the feedback is bandit. In such a case,
the authors provide a regret upper bound of the order of O(T e 3/4 ), which is improved by Jin et al.
                                                                                                 ŌłÜ
(2020) by providing an algorithm that achieves in the same setting a regret upper bound of O(  e T ).
Finally, Luo et al. (2021) provide the first policy optimization algorithm capable of matching the
result of (Jin et al., 2020), while avoiding the convex projection on the occupancy measure space.

Online learning in stochastic CMDPs For the stochastic setting, Zheng & Ratliff (2020) deal
with episodic CMDPs with stochastic losses and constraints, where the transition probabilities are
known and the feedback is bandit. The regret upper bound of their algorithm is of the order of
 e 3/4 ), while the cumulative constraint violation is guaranteed to be below a threshold with a
O(T
given probability. Bai et al. (2020) provide the first algorithm that achieves sublinear regret when
the transition probabilities are unknown, assuming that the rewards are deterministic and the con-
straints are stochastic with a particular structure. Efroni et al. (2020) propose two approaches to
deal with the exploration-exploitation dilemma in episodic CMDPs. These approaches guarantee
sublinear regret and constraint violation when transition probabilities, rewards, and constraints are
unknownŌłÜ and stochastic, while the feedback is bandit. Precisely, their LP based methods guaran-
tee O(
     e T ) cumulative strong regret and cumulative strong constraints violations. Differently, their
                                              ŌłÜ
primal-dual (or dual) algorithms attain O( e T ) weak regret and violations. Mu╠łller et al. (2024)
provide the first primal-dual procedure capable of achieving sublinear cumulative strong regret and
cumulative strong constraints violations. Finally, Ghosh et al. (2024) propose
                                                                           ŌłÜ a model-free primal-
dual algorithm for the linear MDP setting. Their algorithm attains O(   e T ) strong violation if it
is allowed to take Ōä”(dLŌłÆ1 T 1.5L log(|A|)L ) computational steps in every episode. Differently, we
focus on polynomial-time algorithms that attain strong regret and violation guarantees.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Online learning in adversarial CMDPs In the adversarial setting, Wei et al. (2018) deal with
adversarial losses and stochastic constraints, assuming the transition probabilities are known and
the feedback
       ŌłÜ       is full. The authors provide an algorithm that guarantees an upper bound of the order
of O(
    e T ) on both regret and constraint violation. Qiu et al. (2020) provide a primal-dual ap-
proach based on optimism. This work shows the effectiveness of such an approach when dealing
with episodic CMDPs with adversarial losses and stochastic constraints, achieving both sublinear
regret and constraint violation with full-information feedback. Stradi et al. (2024b) provide the first
best-of-both-worlds algorithm for CMDPs, under full feedback. Wei et al. (2023) , Ding & Lavaei
(2023) , Stradi et al. (2024c) consider the case in which rewards and constraints are non-stationary,
assuming that their variation is bounded. Precisely, all the works mentioned above focus on con-
straints violation which allows for cancellations. This is not true for Stradi et al. (2024c), where
strong constraints violation guarantees are provided. Nevertheless, their algorithm is computation-
ally more expensive than a primal-dual procedure, since a linear program must be solved at each
episode. Similarly, Stradi et al. (2024a) study the setting with adversarial losses, stochastic con-
straints and bandit feedback, achieving sublinear regret and sublinear strong constraints violations.
Again, their algorithm is less efficient than the one we propose in our work, since a convex program
must be solved for each episode.

B     C ONFIDENCE INTERVALS

In this section, we report the omitted proof related to the confidence interval employed by our
algorithm to deal with the uncertainty on the environments.
Lemma 6. Given any ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1), i Ōłł [m], t Ōłł [T ] and (x, a) Ōłł X ├Ś A, it holds, with probability at
least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤:
                                rbt (x, a) ŌłÆ r(x, a) Ōēż ╬╣t (x, a).
Similarly, with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤, it holds:

                                       gbt,i (x, a) ŌłÆ gi (x, a) Ōēż ╬╣t (x, a),
                     q
                          ln(2/╬┤)
where ╬╣t (x, a) :=       2Nt (x,a) .


Proof. Focus on specifics t Ōłł [T ] and (x, a) Ōłł X ├Ś A. By HoeffdingŌĆÖs inequality and noticing that
rewards values are bounded in [0, 1], it holds that:
                    "                                    #
                                                                        2c2

                                                   c
                   P rbt (x, a) ŌłÆ r(x, a) Ōēź                Ōēż 2 exp ŌłÆ
                                               Nt (x, a)             Nt (x, a)
                          2

Setting ╬┤ = 2 exp ŌłÆ Nt2c(x,a) and solving to find a proper value of c gives the result for the reward
function.
Focusing on specifics i Ōłł [m], t Ōłł [T ] and (x, a) Ōłł X ├Ś A and following the previous reasoning
applied to the constraints functions concludes the proof.

B.1   R EWARDS

Lemma 1. Given a confidence parameter ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1), with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤, the following
holds for every episode t Ōłł [T ] and state-action pair (x, a) Ōłł X ├Ś A:
                                                                   n q                   o
                                                                       4 ln(T |X||A|/╬┤)
           rbt (x, a) ŌłÆ r(x, a) Ōēż ŽĢt (x, a), where ŽĢt (x, a) := min 1, max{1,N  t (x,a)}
                                                                                          .

Proof. From Lemma 6, given ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ Ōłł (0, 1), we have for any t Ōłł [T ] and (x, a) Ōłł X ├Ś A:
                         "                                 #
                                P rbt (x, a) ŌłÆ r(x, a) Ōēż ╬╣t (x, a) Ōēź 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ .


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, we are interested in the intersection of the aforementioned events:
                              "                                         #
                                \ n                                    o
                            P          rbt (x, a) ŌłÆ r(x, a) Ōēż ╬╣t (x, a) .
                                   x,a,t

Thus, we have:
   "                                         #      "                                        #
      \ n                                   o         [ n                                 oc
 P         rbt (x, a) ŌłÆ r(x, a) Ōēż ╬╣t (x, a)    =1ŌłÆP       rbt (x, a) ŌłÆ r(x, a) Ōēż ╬╣t (x, a)
      x,a,t                                                     x,a,t
                                                                    "                                               #
                                                            X           n                                      oc
                                                  Ōēź1ŌłÆ               P       rbt (x, a) ŌłÆ r(x, a) Ōēż ╬╣t (x, a)
                                                            x,a,t
                                                                                                                    (3)
                                                                            ŌĆ▓
                                                  Ōēź 1 ŌłÆ |X||A|T ╬┤ ,
where Inequality (3) holds by Union Bound. Noticing that rt (x, a) Ōēż 1, substituting ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ with ╬┤ :=
╬┤ ŌĆ▓ /|X||A|T in ╬╣t (x, a) with an additional Union Bound over the possible values of Nt (x, a), and
thus obtaining ŽĢt (x, a), concludes the proof.

B.2    C OSTS

Lemma 2. Given a confidence parameter ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1), with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤, the following
holds for every i Ōłł [m], episode t Ōłł [T ], and state-action pair (x, a) Ōłł X ├Ś A:
                                                                     n q                      o
                                                                            ln(T |X||A|m/╬┤)
         gbt,i (x, a) ŌłÆ gi (x, a) Ōēż ╬Št (x, a), where ╬Št (x, a) := min 1, 4max{1,N    t (x,a)}
                                                                                               .

Proof. The proof is analogous to the one of Lemma 1, with an additional Union Bound over the m
constraints.

C     P ROOFS O MITTED FROM S ECTION 6
C.1    S TRONG D UALITY

We start by proving that, when SlaterŌĆÖs condition holds (Assumption 1), in an optimal solution the
vector of Lagrange multipliers is bounded.
Lemma 7. Given a CMDP with reward vector r Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| and cost matrix G Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA|├Śm ,
it holds:
                 min         max Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗) = max              min              Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗) = OPTr,G .
         ╬╗ŌłłRm
            + :Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 Ōłł[0, /Žü]
                        L    ŽĆŌłł╬Ā                  ŽĆŌłł╬Ā ╬╗ŌłłRm
                                                         + :Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 Ōłł[0, /Žü]
                                                                     L


Proof. We start by proving the following result:
                             min           max Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗) = min
                                                               m
                                                                 max Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗).
                       ╬╗ŌłłRm
                          + :Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 Ōłł[0, /Žü]
                                      L    ŽĆŌłł╬Ā                  ╬╗ŌłłRŌēź0 ŽĆŌłł╬Ā


To do so, let us first notice that, for every ╬╗ Ōłł Rm
                                                   Ōēź0 such that Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 > /Žü:
                                                                       L

                                                   X        ŌŚ”
           max Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗) Ōēź Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌŚ” , ╬╗) Ōēź ŌłÆ         ╬╗i V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i Ōēź Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 Žü > L,
              ŽĆŌłł╬Ā
                                                    iŌłł[m]
                         ŌŚ”
where we recall that ŽĆ := arg maxŽĆŌłł╬Ā miniŌłł[m] (╬▒i ŌłÆ V ŽĆ (gi )). Moreover:
                       min         max Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗) Ōēż max Lr,G (ŽĆ, 0) = max V ŽĆ (r) Ōēż L.
               ╬╗ŌłłRm
                  + :Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 Ōłł[0, /Žü]
                              L    ŽĆŌłł╬Ā                ŽĆŌłł╬Ā                         ŽĆŌłł╬Ā

This implies that:
                                   (                                                                                    )
 min max Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗) = min                  min       max Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗),               min        max Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗)
╬╗ŌłłRm
   Ōēź0
      ŽĆŌłł╬Ā                           ╬╗ŌłłRm
                                       + :Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 Ōłł[0, /Žü]
                                                   L    ŽĆŌłł╬Ā                     ╬╗ŌłłRm
                                                                                   + :Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 > /Žü
                                                                                            L   ŽĆŌłł╬Ā



                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           =          min          max Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗).
                               ╬╗ŌłłRm
                                  + :Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 Ōłł[0, /Žü]
                                              L    ŽĆŌłł╬Ā


In conclusion,
                                OPTr,G = max min
                                               m
                                                 Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗)
                                              ŽĆŌłł╬Ā ╬╗ŌłłRŌēź0

                                          Ōēż max            min               Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗)
                                              ŽĆŌłł╬Ā ╬╗ŌłłRm
                                                     + :Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 Ōłł[0, /Žü]
                                                                 L


                                          Ōēż         min              max Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗)
                                              ╬╗ŌłłRm
                                                 + :Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 Ōłł[0, /Žü]
                                                             L    ŽĆŌłł╬Ā

                                          = min
                                              m
                                                max Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗)
                                              ╬╗ŌłłRŌēź0 ŽĆŌłł╬Ā

                                          = OPTr,G ,
where the second inequality above holds by the max-min inequality and the last equality by strong
duality in CMDPs (refer to (Altman, 1999)). This concludes the proof.

Now we extend the result showing that, depending on whether an occupancy is safe or not, there
exist values of ╬╗ such that the optimal value of the Lagrangian coincides with the optimum of
Program (1).
Lemma 8. For every reward vector r Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| , constraint cost matrix G Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA|├Śm , and
threshold vector ╬▒ Ōłł [0, L]m and ŽĆ Ōłł ╬Ā s.t. V ŽĆ (gi ) Ōēż ╬▒i ŌłĆi Ōłł [m], it holds:
                                              Lr,G (ŽĆ, 0) Ōēż OPTr,G .

Proof. The proof directly follows from the definition of OPTr,G induced by Program (1).
Lemma 3. Given a CMDP with reward vector r Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| and cost matrix G Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA|├Śm ,
for every policy ŽĆ Ōłł ╬Ā, the following holds:
                                            X
                     V ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ     max m         ╬╗i (V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ) Ōēż OPTr,G .
                                     L+1
                                ╬╗Ōłł[0, Žü ]
                                           iŌłł[m]


Proof. We analyze separately the case in which ŽĆ satisfies the constraints (i) and the case ŽĆ is not
safe (ii).
                               ŽĆ
                     P ŽĆ s.t. V (g
(i). We start analyzing           i ) Ōēż ╬▒i for all i Ōłł [m]. In such a case, it is easy to check that
arg max╬╗Ōłł[0, L+1 ]m iŌłł[m] ╬╗i (V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ) = 0; thus, employing Lemma 8 gives the result.
                 Žü

(ii). We then consider the case ŽĆ is not safe. In such a case, ŽĆ may either partially sat-
isfy the constraints P
                     or violating all of the them. First of all we notice that, in such a scenario,
arg max╬╗Ōłł[0, L+1 ]m iŌłł[m] ╬╗i (V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ) = ╬╗╠ä where ╬╗╠ä is the Lagrangian vector composed by
                 Žü
0 values for the constraints which are violated and L+1/Žü values for the others.
Indeed, it holds:
                                            X
                     Lr,G ŽĆ, ╬╗╠ä = V ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ   ╬╗╠äi (V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i )


                                                iŌłł[m]
                                                        L+1 X                  +
                                  Ōēż max V ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ             [V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ]                           (4a)
                                      ŽĆŌłł╬Ā                Žü
                                                                   iŌłł[m]
                                                  L X                      +
                                  Ōēż max V ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ         [V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ]
                                    ŽĆŌłł╬Ā           Žü
                                                    iŌłł[m]
                                                                X                        +
                                  Ōēż max     min     V ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ        ╬╗i [V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ]
                                      ŽĆŌłł╬Ā Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 Ōłł[0,L/Žü]
                                                                           iŌłł[m]
                                                                           X                          +
                                                               ŽĆ
                                  Ōēż      min       max V (r) ŌłÆ                     ╬╗i [V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ]   (4b)
                                      Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 Ōłł[0,L/Žü] ŽĆŌłł╬Ā
                                                                           iŌłł[m]


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Ōēż      min           max Lr,G (ŽĆ, ╬╗)
                                          Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 Ōłł[0,L/Žü] ŽĆŌłł╬Ā

                                      = OPTr,G ,                                                                 (4c)
where the Inequality (4a) holds by definition of ╬╗╠ä, the Inequality (4b) holds by the max-min inequal-
ity and Inequality (4c) follows from Lemma 7. This concludes the proof.

Finally, we show that the sequence of Lagrangian vector ╬╗t selected by Algorithm 2 guarantees that
the value of the Lagrangian attained by ŽĆt is always upper bounded by the value of the Lagrangian
attained by the optimum ŽĆ ŌłŚ up to ŌĆØconfidence boundŌĆØ terms.
Lemma 4. With probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤, Algorithm 2 guarantees that, for every episode t Ōłł [T ]:
                                        4Lm ŽĆt       8Lm X
   Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) Ōēź Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t ) ŌłÆ    V (╬Št ) ŌłÆ               PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) .
                                         Žü            Žü
                                                                         xŌłłX,aŌłłA


Proof. First of all, we notice that, when ╬╗t = 0, Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) = OPTr,G by definition. Furthermore
when ╬╗t is the L+1
                 Žü vector, it holds  that Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) Ōēź OPTr,G since ŽĆ ŌłŚ is feasible. Same reasoning
                                 n        om
holds when ╬╗t is any vector in 0, L+1  Žü     . Thus, it is always the case that Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) Ōēź OPTr,G .

Thus, we proceed as follows:
Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t )
                   X
Ōēż V ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ               ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i                                                               (5a)
                   iŌłł[m]
                   X                                X
= V ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ               ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ┬▒  ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
                                                                 b

                   iŌłł[m]                                   iŌłł[m]
                   X                                          4Lm      X
Ōēż V ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ               ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i +                       PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)   (5b)
                                      b
                                                               Žü
                   iŌłł[m]                                             xŌłłX,aŌłłA
                          X
= V ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ     max m          ╬╗i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
                                          b

                     Žü }
              ╬╗Ōłł{0, L+1
                         iŌłł[m]
                                               4Lm X
                                            +                   PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)
                                                  Žü
                                                      xŌłłX,aŌłłA
                          X
Ōēż V ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ     max m          ╬╗i V ŽĆt ,Pt (gi ŌłÆ 2╬Št ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
                                          b

                     Žü }
              ╬╗Ōłł{0, L+1
                         iŌłł[m]
                                               4Lm X
                                            +                   PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)        (5c)
                                                  Žü
                                                      xŌłłX,aŌłłA
                          X
= V ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ     max m          ╬╗i V ŽĆt ,Pt (gi ŌłÆ 2╬Št ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
                                          b

              ╬╗Ōłł{0, L+1
                     Žü } iŌłł[m]
          4Lm X                                                             X
       +                 PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) ┬▒      max m            ╬╗i (V ŽĆt (gi ŌłÆ 2╬Št ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i )
            Žü                                               ╬╗Ōłł{0, Žü }
                                                                 L+1
                xŌłłX,aŌłłA                                                    iŌłł[m]
                          X
    ŽĆt                                 ŽĆt
Ōēż V (r) ŌłÆ        max m          ╬╗i (V (gi ŌłÆ 2╬Št ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i )
              ╬╗Ōłł{0, L+1
                     Žü } iŌłł[m]
                                               8Lm X
                                            +                   PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)        (5d)
                                                  Žü
                                                                   xŌłłX,aŌłłA

      ŽĆt
                                   X
                                               ŽĆt                    4Lm ŽĆt
ŌēżV         (r) ŌłÆ      max m         ╬╗i (V           (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ) +      V (╬Št )
                   ╬╗Ōłł{0, L+1
                          Žü }
                                                                      Žü
                              iŌłł[m]
                                                           8Lm       X
                                                       +                     PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)     (5e)
                                                            Žü
                                                                   xŌłłX,aŌłłA


                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            X                            4Lm ŽĆt
= V ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ       max m         ╬╗i (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ) +    V (╬Št )
                ╬╗Ōłł[0, L+1
                       Žü ]
                                                          Žü
                           iŌłł[m]
                                                 8Lm X
                                              +               PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)
                                                   Žü
                                                              xŌłłX,aŌłłA
                  4Lm ŽĆt       8Lm                X
Ōēż OPTr,G +           V (╬Št ) +                            PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) ,                       (5f)
                   Žü            Žü
                                             xŌłłX,aŌłłA

where Inequality (5a) holds with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤ by Lemma 2, Inequality (5b) holds by
Ho╠łlder inequality, Inequality (5c) holds with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤ by Lemma 2, Inequality (5d)
holds by Ho╠łlder inequality, Inequality (5e) holds by definition of ╬╗t and Inequality (5f) holds by
Lemma 3.
Thus, it holds:
   Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) Ōēź OPTr,G
                                          4Lm ŽĆt       8Lm               X
                    Ōēź Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t ) ŌłÆ      V (╬Št ) ŌłÆ                            PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) ,
                                           Žü            Žü
                                                                      xŌłłX,aŌłłA

which concludes the proof.

Lemma 9. With probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤, Algorithm 2 guarantees, for all t Ōłł [T ]:
                                              2Lm ŽĆt       4Lm                X
Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) Ōēź Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t L/L+1) ŌłÆ        V (╬Št ) ŌłÆ                           PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) .
                                               Žü            Žü
                                                                           xŌłłX,aŌłłA


Proof. Similarly to Lemma 4, we notice that Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) Ōēź OPTr,G .
Thus, following the same steps as in Lemma 4, we proceed as follows:
      Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t L/L+1)
                                  X ╬╗i L                          2Lm ŽĆt
      Ōēż V ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ       max m               (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ) +     V (╬Št )
                             Žü }
                      ╬╗Ōłł{0, L+1        L + 1                       Žü
                                 iŌłł[m]
                                                    4Lm X
                                                +                   PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)
                                                       Žü
                                                                    xŌłłX,aŌłłA
                                X ╬╗i L                       2Lm ŽĆt
           ŽĆt
      =V        (r) ŌłÆ    max m          (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ) +    V (╬Št )
                           L+1
                      ╬╗Ōłł[0, Žü ]   L + 1                       Žü
                                   iŌłł[m]
                                                              4Lm      X
                                                          +                    PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)
                                                               Žü
                                                                    xŌłłX,aŌłłA
                            X                             2Lm ŽĆt
      = V ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ max m          ╬╗i (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ) +      V (╬Št )
                 ╬╗Ōłł[0, Žü ]
                       L                                    Žü
                           Ōłł[m]
                                                      4Lm X
                                                  +                  PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)
                                                        Žü
                                                            xŌłłX,aŌłłA
            ’Ż«                                                ’Ż╣
                                    X                            2Lm ŽĆt
      Ōēż max ’Ż░V ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ max m             ╬╗i (V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i )’Ż╗ +      V (╬Št )
        ŽĆŌłł╬Ā             ╬╗Ōłł[0, Žü ]
                              L                                    Žü
                                          iŌłł[m]
                                                              4Lm      X
                                                          +                    PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)
                                                               Žü
                                                                    xŌłłX,aŌłłA
                ’Ż«                                                      ’Ż╣
                                            X                                 2Lm ŽĆt
      Ōēż max ’Ż░V ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ          max                 ╬╗i (V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i )’Ż╗ +      V (╬Št )
          ŽĆŌłł╬Ā                Ōłź╬╗Ōłź1 Ōłł[0, L
                                       Žü]
                                                                               Žü
                                            iŌłł[m]



                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                         4Lm       X
                                                     +                     PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)
                                                          Žü
                                                                 xŌłłX,aŌłłA
                      2Lm ŽĆt       4Lm             X
        Ōēż OPTr,G +       V (╬Št ) +                          PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) ,                 (6)
                       Žü            Žü
                                                 xŌłłX,aŌłłA

where Inequality (6) holds by Lemma 7.
Thus, it holds:
Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) Ōēź OPTr,G
                                          2Lm ŽĆt       4Lm              X
               Ōēź Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t L/L+1) ŌłÆ      V (╬Št ) ŌłÆ                           PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) ,
                                           Žü            Žü
                                                                     xŌłłX,aŌłłA

which concludes the proof.

C.2     R EGRET

We first show the regret bound attained by PO-DB on the Lagrangian loss built by Algorithm 2.
Precisely, it holds the following result.
Lemma 5. Given any ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1), the instance of PO-DB employed by Algorithm 2 guarantees that,
for every policy ŽĆ Ōłł ╬Ā, the primal regret RTL (ŽĆ) defined as:
       ’Ż«                                          ’Ż╣    ’Ż«                                        ’Ż╣
  X T                X                               T
                                                     X               X
       ’Ż░V ŽĆ (rt ) ŌłÆ       ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’Ż╗ ŌłÆ   ’Ż░V ŽĆt (rt ) ŌłÆ   ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’Ż╗ ,
  t=1               iŌłł[m]                                t=1                iŌłł[m]

is bounded as follows:
                                                 L3 m            L5 m

                                                         p
                               RTL (ŽĆ) Ōēż O
                                         e            |X| |A|T +                 ,
                                                  Žü               Žü
with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ O(╬┤).

Proof. We first notice that, by simple computation, it holds:
                                 ’Ż«                                            ’Ż╣
 T                       X   T
X          (L +   1)m                           X                        ╬▒
                                                                           i ’Ż╗
    V ŽĆt                 ŌłÆ       ’Ż░V ŽĆt (rt ) ŌłÆ        ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt g t,i ŌłÆ
t=1
                Žü           t=1
                                                                         L
                                               iŌłł[m]
                                                                   ’Ż«                                          ’Ż╣
                                   T                      X     T
                                 X           (L +  1)m                            X                      ╬▒
                                                                                                           i ’Ż╗
                              ŌłÆ       VŽĆ                    ŌłÆ      ’Ż░V ŽĆ (rt ) ŌłÆ        ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ g t,i ŌłÆ
                                 t=1
                                                 Žü             t=1
                                                                                                         L
                                                                                 iŌłł[m]
          ’Ż«                                           ’Ż╣         ’Ż«                                          ’Ż╣
       T                                                     T
      X
          ’Ż░V ŽĆt (rt ) ŌłÆ
                         X                      ╬▒
                                                  i ’Ż╗
                                                            X                  X                      ╬▒
                                                                                                        i ’Ż╗
=ŌłÆ                            ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt g t,i ŌłÆ         +       ’Ż░V ŽĆ (rt ) ŌłÆ        ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ g t,i ŌłÆ
      t=1
                                                 L          t=1
                                                                                                       L
                        iŌłł[m]                                                 iŌłł[m]
       ’Ż«                                          ’Ż╣          ’Ż«                                             ’Ż╣
   XT                 X                                 X T                 X
=      ’Ż░V ŽĆ (rt ) ŌłÆ       ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’Ż╗ ŌłÆ         ’Ż░V ŽĆt (rt ) ŌłÆ        ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’Ż╗ ,
   t=1               iŌłł[m]                                 t=1               iŌłł[m]

where the first step holds since (L+1)m/Žü is constant for any state-action pair and the second step
holds since V ŽĆ (╬▒i/L) = ╬▒i .
Then, we notice that, any regret minimizer algorithm A, which attains EA regret upper-bound when
the losses are bounded in [0, 1] (or in [0, L] for MDPs), may achieve C ┬ĘEA regret upper-bound when
the range of the losses is C and it is known to the algorithm. The result is intuitive, since it is always
possible to apply an affine transformation to the losses received and, thus, to scale them in [0, 1].
Then, the algorithm can be fed with the scaled loss as expected, but it will suffer a loss multiplied
by a C factor, attaining the aforementioned C ┬Ę EA bound.
Noticing that the loss vector received by PO-DB is multiplied by an additional O(Lm/Žü) factor
given by the definition of the Lagrangian variable in Algorithm 2, we can employ the standard regret


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


bound PO-DB (see Lemma 12) with the additional O(Lm/Žü) factor. Thus, it holds, with probability
at least 1 ŌłÆ O(╬┤):
     ’Ż«                                      ’Ż╣    ’Ż«                                        ’Ż╣
X T               X                            T
                                               X               X
     ’Ż░V ŽĆ (rt ) ŌłÆ   ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’Ż╗ ŌłÆ   ’Ż░V ŽĆt (rt ) ŌłÆ   ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’Ż╗
t=1             iŌłł[m]                          t=1              iŌłł[m]
                                  ’Ż«                                   ’Ż╣
   T                          T
   X           (L + 1)m       X                X                 ╬▒
                                                                   i ’Ż╗
=     V ŽĆt         ŌłÆ      ’Ż░V ŽĆt (rt ) ŌłÆ       ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt g t,i ŌłÆ
  t=1
                   Žü t=1
                                                                 L
                                        iŌłł[m]
                                                        ’Ż«                                        ’Ż╣
                        T                      X     T
                       X         (L   +  1)m                          X                     ╬▒i

                    ŌłÆ      VŽĆ                   ŌłÆ       ’Ż░V ŽĆ (rt ) ŌłÆ       ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ g t,i ŌłÆ      ’Ż╗
                       t=1
                                       Žü            t=1
                                                                                            L
                                                                     iŌłł[m]
      3              5

   e L m |X| |A|T + L m ,
            p
ŌēżO
        Žü            Žü
which concludes the proof.

Then, we show the concentration rate of the confidence intervals.
Lemma 10. With probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤, it holds:
                                   s
                   T                                                 r
                  X
                       ŽĆt                            T |X||A|               1
                      V (ŽĢt ) Ōēż 4 L|X||A|T ln                     + L 2T ln
                  t=1
                                                         ╬┤                  ╬┤

Proof. We first notice the following bound,
                                          V ŽĆt (ŽĢt ) Ōēż L.
Thus, we can employ the Azuma inequality to bound the following Martingale difference sequence
as
                     T            T X                           r
                                                                       1
                                          ŽĢt (x, a)1t {x, a} Ōēż L 2T ln ,
                   X             X
                         ŽĆt
                       V (ŽĢt ) ŌłÆ
                   t=1           t=1 x,a
                                                                       ╬┤
which holds with probability 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤. Thus we can bound the quantity of interest as follows,
      T               T X                           r
                                                             1
                              ŽĢt (x, a)1t {x, a} + L 2T ln
     X               X
           ŽĆt
         V (ŽĢt ) Ōēż
     t=1             t=1 x,a
                                                             ╬┤
                     s                    T        s                                   r
                               T |X||A| X X                   1                               1
                  = 4 ln                                                  1t {x, a} + L 2T ln
                                   ╬┤       t=1 x,a
                                                     max{1,   N t (x, a)}                     ╬┤
                      s                                           r
                                T |X||A| X p                               1
                  Ōēż 2 4 ln                         NT (x, a) + L 2T ln                          (7)
                                     ╬┤       x,a
                                                                           ╬┤
                      s                                   r
                                          T |X||A|                 1
                  Ōēż 4 L|X||A|T ln                    + L 2T ln ,                                (8)
                                              ╬┤                    ╬┤
                                  PT             ŌłÜ
where Inequality (7) holds since t=1 1t Ōēż 2 T and Inequality (8) follows from Cauchy-Schwarz
                             qP                    ŌłÜ
inequality and noticing that       x,a NT (x, a) Ōēż   LT . This concludes the proof.

Lemma 11. With probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤, it holds:
                                s
                T                                                  r
               X
                    ŽĆt                              T |X||A|m             1
                   V (╬Št ) Ōēż 4 L|X||A|T ln                      + L 2T ln
               t=1
                                                        ╬┤                 ╬┤

Proof. The proof follows the one of Lemma 10, replacing ŽĢt with ╬Št .


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We are now ready to prove the regret bound of Algorithm 2.
Theorem 1. Given any ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1), Algorithm 2 attains:
                                        3                  5

                                     e L m |X| |A|T + L m ,
                                                 p
                            RT Ōēż O
                                          Žü                Žü
with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ O(╬┤).

Proof. We first notice that, by Lemma 4, we have that:
                                      4Lm ŽĆt      8Lm             X
Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) Ōēź Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t )ŌłÆ      V (╬Št )ŌłÆ                        PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) ,          ŌłĆt Ōłł [T ],
                                       Žü           Žü
                                                            xŌłłX,aŌłłA

with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤ and where ŽĆ ŌłŚ is the optimal solution corresponding to OPTr,G . Thus,
we have that an upper bound on:
    ’Ż½                                                                                                     ’ŻČ
 T
    ’ŻŁLr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) ŌłÆ Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t ) + 4Lm V ŽĆt (╬Št ) + 8Lm
X                                                                 X
                                                                          PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) ’ŻĖ
t=1
                                           Žü                Žü
                                                                        xŌłłX,aŌłłA
                                                                                                                          (9)
enforces the same bound on
    ’Ż«                                                                                                                      ’Ż╣+
 T
    ’Ż░Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) ŌłÆ Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t ) + 4Lm V ŽĆt (╬Št ) + 8Lm
X                                                                         X
                                                                                  PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) ’Ż╗ ,
t=1
                                           Žü                Žü
                                                                       xŌłłX,aŌłłA

since the term in the summation is always non-negative.
Now, we employ Lemma 5, which implies that with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ O(╬┤), for any ŽĆ Ōłł ╬Ā:
     ’Ż½                                   ’ŻČ        ’Ż½                                         ’ŻČ
 XT               X                           XT                 X
     ’ŻŁV ŽĆ (rt ) ŌłÆ   ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (g ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ ŌłÆ        ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (rt ) ŌłÆ       ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt (g ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ
                                        t,i                                                           t,i
  t=1                iŌłł[m]                               t=1                  iŌłł[m]

                                                                      L3 m            L5 m

                                                                              p
                                                         ŌēżO
                                                          e                |X| |A|T +                 ,              (10)
                                                                       Žü               Žü
which implies the same bound for ŽĆ ŌłŚ .
We now show that the left-hand side of the aforementioned equation reduce to Equation (9) up to
sublinear terms. By Lemma 1,with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤, it holds:
                                                    r Ō¬» rt .
Thus, taking the expectation over policy and transition we obtain:
                                              V ŽĆ (r) Ōēż V ŽĆ (rt ) .
Thus, Equation (10) can be rewritten as:
   ’Ż½                                         ’ŻČ    ’Ż½                                        ’ŻČ
 T                         ŌłŚ                    T
X       ŌłŚ        X                              X               X
   ’ŻŁV ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ        ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ ŌłÆ   ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (rt ) ŌłÆ   ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ
t=1                iŌłł[m]                                t=1                   iŌłł[m]

                                                                                    L3 m            L5 m

                                                                                            p
                                                                          ŌēżO
                                                                           e             |X| |A|T +                         .
                                                                                     Žü               Žü
Similarly, it holds that rbt Ō¬» r + ŽĢt which implies:
    ’Ż½                                             ’ŻČ    ’Ż½                                   ’ŻČ
  T                             ŌłŚ                    T
 X         ŌłŚ        X                                X             X
    ’ŻŁV ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ            ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ ŌłÆ   ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ   ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt g t,i ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ
 t=1                iŌłł[m]                                t=1                  iŌłł[m]

                                                              3                                   T
                                                                           L5 m

                                                            L m    p                              X
                                                  ŌēżO
                                                   e            |X| |A|T +                   +2             V ŽĆt (ŽĢt ).
                                                             Žü              Žü                     t=1


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We apply Lemma 10 to obtain, with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ O(╬┤), by Union Bound:
    ’Ż½                                      ’ŻČ         ’Ż½                                      ’ŻČ
 T                        ŌłŚ                       T
 X       ŌłŚ     X                                 X                X
    ’ŻŁV ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ      ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ ŌłÆ       ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ      ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt g t,i ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ
 t=1                   iŌłł[m]                                  t=1                   iŌłł[m]
                                                                          3
                                                                                L5 m

                                                         L m        p
                                                              ŌēżO
                                                               e |X| |A|T +               .
                                                            Žü                     Žü
We proceed similarly for the constraints cost noticing that g t,i Ō¬» gi , and gi ŌłÆ 2╬Št Ō¬» g t,i for all
i Ōłł [m]. Thus, we have:
     ’Ż½                                      ’ŻČ        ’Ż½                                          ’ŻČ
  T                                               T
 X        ŌłŚ       X            ŌłŚ                X                  X
     ’ŻŁV ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ       ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ ŌłÆ        ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ         ╬╗t,i (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i )’ŻĖ
 t=1                   iŌłł[m]                                 t=1                   iŌłł[m]
                                                                                                            T
                                                                 L3 m            L5 m
                                                                                                            X
                                                                         p
                                                   ŌēżO
                                                    e                 |X| |A|T +                     + 2m         V ŽĆt (╬Št ).
                                                                  Žü               Žü                         t=1

Finally, employing Lemma 11, we have that the regret defined over the Lagrangian is bounded by,
      ’Ż½                                    ’ŻČ        ’Ż½                                         ’ŻČ
   T                        ŌłŚ                    T
  X        ŌłŚ       X                            X                 X
      ’ŻŁV ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ      ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ ŌłÆ       ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ        ╬╗t,i (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i )’ŻĖ
  t=1                   iŌłł[m]                                t=1                    iŌłł[m]

                                                                                        L3 m            L5 m

                                                                                                p
                                                                              ŌēżO
                                                                               e             |X| |A|T +                     .
                                                                                         Žü               Žü
Now, we notice the following inequality,
       ’Ż½                                      ’ŻČ ’Ż½                                     ’ŻČ
  T                             ŌłŚ
 X          ŌłŚ        X                                       X
       ’ŻŁV ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ        ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ ŌłÆ ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ   ╬╗t,i (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i )’ŻĖ
  t=1                     iŌłł[m]                                                   iŌłł[m]
                                       ’Ż½                                                                             ’ŻČ!
                                      4Lm ŽĆt       8Lm                 X
                                   ┬▒’ŻŁ    V (╬Št ) +                                PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) ’ŻĖ
                                       Žü            Žü
                                                                     xŌłłX,aŌłłA

                                                                         L3 m            L5 m

                                                                                 p
                                                              ŌēżO
                                                               e              |X| |A|T +                    ,
                                                                          Žü               Žü
which implies the following chain of inequalities,
         ’Ż½                                        ’ŻČ ’Ż½                                    ’ŻČ
     T                            ŌłŚ
    X          ŌłŚ       X                                        X
         ’ŻŁV ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ         ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ ŌłÆ ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ   ╬╗t,i (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i )’ŻĖ
       t=1                     iŌłł[m]                                                iŌłł[m]
                                                                                                                      !
                                         4Lm ŽĆt       8Lm              X
                                       +    V (╬Št ) +                             PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)
                                          Žü            Žü
                                                                     xŌłłX,aŌłłA
                                                       T
                      L3 m            L5 m

                              p                        X 4Lm
             ŌēżO
              e            |X| |A|T +              +                 V ŽĆt (╬Št )
                       Žü               Žü               t=1
                                                                 Žü
                                                       T
                                                       X 8Lm             X
                                                   +                               PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)
                                                       t=1
                                                                 Žü
                                                                     xŌłłX,aŌłłA

                L3 m               L5 m

                          p
             ŌēżO
              e       |X| |A|T +          ,
                   Žü                Žü
where in the last step we employed Lemma 11 and Lemma 14.
We then employ Lemma 4 to get the following bound:
    ’Ż«                                                                                                                           ’Ż╣+
 T
    ’Ż░Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) ŌłÆ Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t ) + 4Lm V ŽĆt (╬Št ) + 8Lm
X                                                                             X
                                                                                          PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) ’Ż╗
t=1
                                           Žü                Žü
                                                                          xŌłłX,aŌłłA



                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                               L3 m            L5 m

                                                                                                       p
                                                                                   ŌēżO
                                                                                    e               |X| |A|T +                   ,
                                                                                                Žü               Žü

which, since 4LmŽü V
                    ŽĆt
                       (╬Št ) and 8Lm
                                  Žü   PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) are non-negative by construction,
implies:
       ’Ż«’Ż½                                           ’ŻČ ’Ż½                                           ’ŻČ’Ż╣+
    T                              ŌłŚ
  X           ŌłŚ        X                                               X
       ’Ż░’ŻŁV ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ           ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ ŌłÆ ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ           ╬╗t,i (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i )’ŻĖ’Ż╗
   t=1                       iŌłł[m]                                                                  iŌłł[m]

                                                                                                       L3 m            L5 m

                                                                                                               p
                                                                                           ŌēżO
                                                                                            e               |X| |A|T +                   .
                                                                                                        Žü               Žü
To get the final bound, we first notice that, by definition of the constrained optimum ŽĆ ŌłŚ , the quantity
   ŌłŚ
V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i is always non-positive for every i Ōłł [m]. Moreover, by the Lagrangian update of
Algorithm 2, we have that:
     X
           ╬╗t,i (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i )
     iŌłł[m]
                        X
                  Ōēź             ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
                        iŌłł[m]
                        X                                X
                  =             ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ┬▒  ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
                                                                      b

                        iŌłł[m]                                              iŌłł[m]
                        X                                                      4Lm         X
                  Ōēź             ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ŌłÆ                                          PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)
                                             b
                                                                                Žü
                        iŌłł[m]                                                          xŌłłX,aŌłłA

                            4Lm      X
                  ŌēźŌłÆ                             PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) .
                             Žü
                                   xŌłłX,aŌłłA

Thus, following the reasoning above, we bound the positive cumulative regret as follows:
         T h                               i+
         X          ŌłŚ
RT :=           V ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ V ŽĆt (r)
         t=1
         T
               "’Ż½                                                                  ’ŻČ   ’Ż½                                                 ’ŻČ
         X              ŌłŚ          X                         ŌłŚ
                                                                                                           X
    Ōēż           ’ŻŁV ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ                 ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ ŌłÆ ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ                                    ╬╗t,i (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i )’ŻĖ
         t=1                       iŌłł[m]                                                                  iŌłł[m]
                                                                                      #+
                                        4Lm X
                                     +               PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)
                                         Žü
                                            xŌłłX,aŌłłA
        ’Ż«’Ż½                                 ’ŻČ ’Ż½                                           ’ŻČ’Ż╣+
      T                     ŌłŚ
      X      ŌłŚ      X                                        X
    Ōēż   ’Ż░’ŻŁV ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ   ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ ŌłÆ ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ         ╬╗t,i (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i )’ŻĖ’Ż╗
         t=1                      iŌłł[m]                                                                   iŌłł[m]
                                                                                   ’Ż«                                                         ’Ż╣+
                                                                          T
                                                                             ’Ż░ 4Lm
                                                                         X                       X
                                                                       +                                  PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) ’Ż╗
                                                                         t=1
                                                                                Žü
                                                                                               xŌłłX,aŌłłA
                                                                 T
               L3 m            L5 m

                       p                                         X 4Lm                 X
    ŌēżO
     e              |X| |A|T +                           +                                      PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a)
                Žü               Žü                                t=1
                                                                           Žü
                                                                                xŌłłX,aŌłłA

               L3 m            L5 m

                       p
    ŌēżO
     e              |X| |A|T +                           ,
                Žü               Žü
which holds with probability 1 ŌłÆ O(╬┤) by Lemma 14 and Union Bound. This concludes the proof.



                                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3     V IOLATIONS

Theorem 2. For any ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1), Algorithm 2 attains:
                                                p
                            VT Ōēż O e L3 m|X| |A|T + L5 m ,

with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ O(╬┤).

Proof. We first notice the following equations:
       X
           ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
                       b

        iŌłł[m]
                   L X                                      1  X
                =           ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i +           ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
                                       b                                           b
                  L+1                                     L+1
                      iŌłł[m]                                   iŌłł[m]
                   L X                                   1 X h                        i+
                =           ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i +       V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ,                (11)
                                       b                              b
                  L+1                                     Žü
                         iŌłł[m]                                   iŌłł[m]

where Equation (11) holds by definition ╬╗t .
Employing similar steps to Theorem 1, it holds, with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ O(╬┤):
     ’Ż½                                       ’ŻČ        ’Ż½                                           ’ŻČ
  T                           ŌłŚ                    T
 X        ŌłŚ       X                              X                  X
     ’ŻŁV ŽĆ (r) ŌłÆ        ╬╗t,i V ŽĆ (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ ŌłÆ        ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ        ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ
  t=1                 iŌłł[m]                             t=1                iŌłł[m]

                                                                                L3 m            L5 m

                                                                                        p
                                                                     ŌēżO
                                                                      e              |X| |A|T +             .
                                                                                 Žü               Žü
Adding and subtracting the estimated violation the following inequality holds:
                        ’Ż½                                                                           ’ŻČ
XT                    T
                      X             X                            X
    Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t )ŌłÆ   ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ      ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒ ┬▒      ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ
                                                                                  b

t=1                    t=1              iŌłł[m]                              iŌłł[m]

                                                                                L3 m            L5 m

                                                                                        p
                                                                     ŌēżO
                                                                      e              |X| |A|T +             ,
                                                                                 Žü               Žü
which by Ho╠łlder inequality and Lemma 14 implies:
                            ’Ż½                                           ’ŻČ
   XT                     T
                          X             X
       Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) ŌłÆ   ’ŻŁV ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ    ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ’ŻĖ
                                                      b

      t=1                    t=1            iŌłł[m]

                                                                         L3 m            L5 m

                                                                                 p
                                                               ŌēżO
                                                                e             |X| |A|T +            .   (12)
                                                                          Žü               Žü
Thus we substitute Equation (11) in Inequality (12) to obtain,
       T                    T
       X                    X                    L X
         Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) ŌłÆ   V ŽĆt (r) ŌłÆ             ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
                                                                b

       t=1                    t=1
                                                L+1
                                                      iŌłł[m]
                                                                                            !
                                                             1 X h ŽĆt ,Pbt               i+
                                                           ŌłÆ          V    (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
                                                             Žü
                                                               iŌłł[m]
                                                                         3
                                                                                             L5 m

                                                                        L m        p
                                                                 ŌēżO  e      |X| |A|T +              .
                                                                         Žü                    Žü
To get back to the Lagrangian function of the offline problem, we notice that:
  L X
            ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
                       b
L+1
        iŌłł[m]


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     L X
Ōēź        ╬╗t,i V ŽĆt ,Pt (gi ŌłÆ 2╬Št ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
                    b
    L+1
             iŌłł[m]
     L X                           2Lm ŽĆt       2Lm                                 X
Ōēź        ╬╗t,i (V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ) ŌłÆ    V (╬Št ) ŌłÆ                                           PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) ,
    L+1                             Žü            Žü
             iŌłł[m]                                                              xŌłłX,aŌłłA

and we employ Lemma 11 Lemma 14 to obtain:
      T                      T                            T                            i+
     X                      X                          1 X X h ŽĆt ,Pbt
         Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) ŌłÆ     Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t L/L+1) +              V    (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
     t=1                    t=1
                                                       Žü t=1
                                                             iŌłł[m]
                                                                      3
                                                                                          L5 m

                                                                      L m       p
                                                               ŌēżO e       |X| |A|T +             .
                                                                       Žü                   Žü
Thus, similarly to the steps above, we notice that:
    1 X h ŽĆt ,Pbt                  i+
             V       (g t,i ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
    Žü
      iŌłł[m]
         1 X h ŽĆt ,Pbt                        i+
       Ōēź           V         (gi ŌłÆ 2╬Št ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i
         Žü
              iŌłł[m]
         1 X                   +  2m ŽĆt        2m                               X
       Ōēź     [V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ] ŌłÆ    V (╬Št ) ŌłÆ                                       PŽĆt ,Pbt (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) .
         Žü                         Žü            Žü
              iŌłł[m]                                                        xŌłłX,aŌłłA

Employing Lemma 11 and Lemma 14 we obtain:
         T                          T                                       T
         X                          X                                    1X X                           +
               Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ) ŌłÆ         Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t L/L+1) +                     [V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ]
         t=1                        t=1
                                                                         Žü t=1
                                                                               iŌłł[m]
                                                                                 3                        5

                                                                             e L m |X| |A|T + L m ,
                                                                                            p
                                                                         ŌēżO
                                                                                   Žü                      Žü
which can be rewritten as:
         T
      1X X                    +
            [V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ]
      Žü t=1
              iŌłł[m]
                                                                   T                              T
                          L3 m            L5 m
                                                                   X                              X
                                  p
               ŌēżO
                e              |X| |A|T +                      +         Lr,G (ŽĆt , ╬╗t L/L+1) ŌłÆ         Lr,G (ŽĆ ŌłŚ , ╬╗t ).
                           Žü               Žü                       t=1                            t=1

Thus, we employ Lemma 9 with Lemma 11 and Lemma 14 to obtain:
                   T                           3
                                                              L5 m

                1X X        ŽĆt          +     L m     p
                         [V (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ] Ōēż O
                                           e      |X| |A|T +         ,
                Žü t=1                          Žü               Žü
                            iŌłł[m]

from which we obtain the final bound:
                                                       T
                                                       X                        +
                                     VT := max               [V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ]
                                               iŌłł[m]
                                                       t=1
                                               T X
                                               X                                +
                                           Ōēż               [V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ]
                                               t=1 iŌłł[m]
                                                       T
                                               1X X                           +
                                           =Žü┬Ę             [V ŽĆt (gi ) ŌłÆ ╬▒i ]
                                               Žü t=1
                                                     iŌłł[m]
                                                        p
                                            e L3 m|X| |A|T + L5 m ,
                                           ŌēżO

with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ O(╬┤), by Union Bound. This concludes the proof.


                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     T ECHNICAL LEMMAS
D.1     P OLICY OPTIMIZATION WITH D ILATED B ONUSES

In this section, we present the regret bound attained by PO-DB.
Lemma 12 (Luo et al. (2021)). For any sequence of losses Ōäōt such that Ōäōt Ōłł [0, 1]|X├ŚA| and any
valid occupancy measure ŽĆ Ōłł ╬Ā, PO-DB attains:
                       T
                       X                    T
                                            X                         p
                             V ŽĆt (Ōäōt ) ŌłÆ         V ŽĆ (Ōäōt ) Ōēż O
                                                              e L2 |X| |A|T + L4 ,
                       t=1                  t=1

with probability at least 1 ŌłÆ O(╬┤).

D.2     T RANSITION ESTIMATIONS

In the following section, we show how the estimated state action visit PŽĆt ,Pbt (┬Ę) concentrates to the
true one PŽĆt ,P (┬Ę).
To do so, we first provide some discussion on the transitions confidence set.

D.2.1    C ONFIDENCE S ET
We introduce confidence sets for the transition function of a CMDP, by exploiting suitable concen-
tration bounds for estimated transition probabilities. By letting Mt (x, a, xŌĆ▓ ) be the total number
of episodes up to t Ōłł [T ] in which the state-action pair (x, a) Ōłł X ├Ś A is visited and the en-
vironment evolves to the new state xŌĆ▓ Ōłł X, we define the estimated transition probability at t
                                                   Mt (x,a,xŌĆ▓ )
for the triplet (x, a, xŌĆ▓ ) as Pbt (xŌĆ▓ | x, a) = max{1,N t (x,a)}
                                                                  . Then, the confidence set at t Ōłł [T ] is
       T                        x,a,xŌĆ▓
Pt := (x,a,xŌĆ▓ )ŌłłX├ŚA├ŚX Pt               , where:
                              ŌĆ▓
                                   n                                               o
                       Ptx,a,x := P : P (xŌĆ▓ |x, a)ŌłÆ Pbt (xŌĆ▓ |x, a) Ōēż ŽĄt (x, a, xŌĆ▓ ) ,

with ŽĄt (x, a, xŌĆ▓ ) equal to:
                        v
                        u Pbt (xŌĆ▓ |x, a) ln T |X||A|                T |X||A|
                        u
                        t                       ╬┤           14 ln       ╬┤
                       2                               +                          ,
                              max {1, Nt (x, a) ŌłÆ 1}     3 max {1, Nt (x, a) ŌłÆ 1}
for some confidence parameter ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1).
The next lemma establishes Pt is a proper confidence set.
Lemma 13 (Jin et al. (2020)). Given a confidence parameter ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1), with probability at least
1 ŌłÆ 4╬┤, it holds that the transition function P belongs to Pt for all t Ōłł [T ].

D.2.2    C ONCENTRATION R ESULTS
Given the confidence set of the transition, it is possible to derive the following lemma.
Lemma 14 (Lemma 4,Jin et al. (2020)). With probability at least 1 ŌłÆ 6╬┤, for any collection of
transition functions {Ptx }xŌłłX such that Ptx Ōłł Pt , we have, for all x,
                                                                 s                  !
          T
         X      X                                                         T |X||A|
                       PŽĆt ,Pbx (x, a) ŌłÆ PŽĆt ,P (x, a) Ōēż O L|X| |A|T ln               .
         t=1
                              t                                               ╬┤
             xŌłłX,aŌłłA


As final remark, we underline that the empirical transition function Pbt belongs to Pt by construction.
Thus, the aforementioned lemma immidiately holds for Pbt .


                                                        26
