Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


GD RAG : T OWARDS G ENERAL -P URPOSE I NTERAC -
TIVE E DITING WITH A NTI - AMBIGUITY P OINT D IFFU -
SION

 Xiaojian Lin1∗ , Hanhui Li1,2∗, Yuhao Cheng3 , Yiqiang Yan3 , Xiaodan Liang1,2,4†
 1
   Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University
 2
   Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing 3 Lenovo Research
 4
   Peng Cheng Laboratory
 linxj68@mail2.sysu.edu.cn lihh77@mail.sysu.edu.cn
  chengyh5@lenovo.com yanyq@lenovo.com xdliang328@gmail.com



                                              A BSTRACT

             Recent interactive point-based image manipulation methods have gained consid-
             erable attention for being user-friendly. However, these methods still face two
             types of ambiguity issues that can lead to unsatisfactory outcomes, namely, in-
             tention ambiguity which misinterprets the purposes of users, and content ambi-
             guity where target image areas are distorted by distracting elements. To address
             these issues and achieve general-purpose manipulations, we propose a novel task-
             aware, training-free framework called GDrag. Specifically, GDrag defines a tax-
             onomy of atomic manipulations, which can be parameterized and combined unit-
             edly to represent complex manipulations, thereby reducing intention ambiguity.
             Furthermore, GDrag introduces two strategies to mitigate content ambiguity, in-
             cluding an anti-ambiguity dense trajectory calculation method (ADT) and a self-
             adaptive motion supervision method (SMS). Given an atomic manipulation, ADT
             converts the sparse user-defined handle points into a dense point set by select-
             ing their semantic and geometric neighbors, and calculates the trajectory of the
             point set. Unlike previous motion supervision methods relying on a single global
             scale for low-rank adaption, SMS jointly optimizes point-wise adaption scales
             and latent feature biases. These two methods allow us to model fine-grained tar-
             get contexts and generate precise trajectories. As a result, GDrag consistently
             produces precise and appealing results in different editing tasks. Extensive ex-
             periments on the challenging DragBench dataset demonstrate that GDrag outper-
             forms state-of-the-art methods significantly. The code of GDrag is available at
             https://github.com/DaDaY-coder/GDrag.



1       I NTRODUCTION

With the recent advances in generative models (Rombach et al., 2022), many notable image edit-
ing methods (Zhang et al., 2023b; Brooks et al., 2023; Kawar et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023) have
emerged, enabling users to generate or edit image content effectively. Among these methods, a new
paradigm that edits images by interactively dragging points on images (Pan et al., 2023b), provides
an intuitive and convenient way to obtain desirable images. Specifically, to edit an image, a user
places several points on the image and drags them to target positions, as shown in Figure 1. These
points are considered as handle points, and our task is to move image content along the trajectories
of handle points to seamlessly blend the dragged content into its context. To this end, methods of
this type alternatively conduct two key processes in iterations, i.e., motion supervision that mod-
ifies image content guided by tailored optimization objectives, and point tracking that adjusts the
dragging trajectories by calculating intermediate positions of handle points.

    ∗
        Both authors contributed equally.
    †
        Corresponding author.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                            Input   DragDiffusion   GDrag (Ours)
                                                                     Motion
                        Diffusion                                  Supervision
                        Inversion                   …                                            …
                                                                                                        Denoising

                                             Latent Sparse        Task-agnostic              Updated
                                          Features at a FIXED     Point Tracking              Sparse
             Input                                                                                                       Output
                                               time step                                     Features


                                                     Self-adaptive Motion Supervision
               Diffusion
                                                                                                                       Denoising
               Inversion                            …
                                                           & {          …        ;          …
                                                                                                 }             …

                                          Latent Dense Features at Low-rank              Latent             Updated
                                           RANDOM time steps Adaption Scales         Feature Biases          Dense
  Input                                                                                                                            Output
                                                                                                            Features

   Task                                                      Task-aware
 Selection                                                  Point Tracking

                      Anti-ambiguity
                     Dense Trajectories



Figure 1: Paradigm comparison between previous dragging methods (left-top) and the proposed
GDrag method (left-bottom). GDrag estimates task-aware dense trajectories and adopts more fine-
grained motion supervision. Hence, GDrag obtains smoother, more reasonable trajectories (labeled
in green) and appealing results.


Although current point-based diffusion methods (Shi et al., 2024b; Mou et al., 2024; Ling et al.,
2024) already achieve relatively good editing effects, they still face certain limitations. Specifically,
as existing methods model various editing tasks implicitly, they suffer from two types of ambigu-
ities, i.e., intention ambiguity that mixes multiple possible editing tasks into a single trajectory,
and content ambiguity that fails to identity and preserve the targets. For example, DragDiffusion
(Shi et al., 2024b) updates the positions of handle points after each optimization step regardless of
the task, which tends to yield less reasonable and drifted trajectories. FreeDrag (Ling et al., 2024)
alleviates this issue by constraining the trajectories to straight lines. However, such 2D trajectories
cannot fully represent 3D manipulations like out-of-plane rotations. Regarding content ambiguity,
most existing methods rely on a user-specific denoising time step to select latent features of han-
dle points for optimization. However, the information encoded in latent features at different time
steps varies significantly. Since different editing tasks require different levels of information, it is
impractical to generate satisfying results by exploiting latents only at one time step.
To address the above ambiguity issues in current methods, we propose to model editing tasks ex-
plicitly in this paper. Intuitively, we can divide a complex manipulation into multiple basic tasks,
each with intents that are clear and easy to perform. This paradigm not only reduces the difficulty
of editing but also provides an opportunity to optimize edited images accordingly. For example,
in a task that involves simply moving a target to another position, we can encourage the model to
preserve the target’s features as much as possible. Conversely, for tasks like target removal, it is
more reasonable to update the target features rapidly.
Therefore, we propose a novel task-aware, optimization-based framework for general-purpose in-
teractive editing, named GDrag. GDrag categorizes point-based image manipulations into three
atomic tasks: relocation, rotation (both in-plane and out-of-plane), and non-rigid transformation
(e.g., scaling, content creation/removal). Specifically, given an input image, GDrag first requires
the user to specify the task through simple interactions (e.g., a single click). We then introduce an
anti-ambiguity dense trajectory estimation method (ADT), which addresses the lack of contextual
information in the sparse handle points selected by users. Based on the specific task, ADT selects
the semantic and geometric neighbors of handle points as the context and calculates their dense
corresponding trajectories. As we will demonstrate in the following sections, our dense trajecto-
ries alleviate the ill-posedness of 2D lines in representing 3D deformations, thereby providing more
reliable guidance for subsequent optimizations. Additionally, we introduce a self-adaptive motion
supervision method (SMS) to optimize latent features based on their dense trajectories. SMS dif-
fers from previous motion supervision methods in two key aspects: First, it aims to optimize biases
for latent features randomly sampled from all denoising time steps, better exploiting the generative
capabilities of diffusion models. Second, it optimizes scaling maps that control the effects of low-
rank adaptation (Hu et al., 2021). Thus, it can preserve target contents at different granularity levels
and alleviate content ambiguities. Consequently, as shown in Figure 1, GDrag can achieve more
reasonable trajectories and higher-quality images compared to conventional methods.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:


                                                                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• We propose GDrag, the first optimization-based framework that explicitly models editing tasks to
handle ambiguities.
• Based on different task types, we propose the ADT method to construct a dense dragging point set
and calculate their trajectories, which can offer more comprehensive and reasonable prior knowledge
for image editing.
• We propose the SMS method that introduces task-aware, fine-grained optimization parameters to
refine latent features. This allows us to address content ambiguities and improve the quality of edited
images.
• By showcasing different experimental results, we demonstrate the powerful editing capabilities of
GDrag, achieving superior performance on DragBench.



2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   I MAGE E DITING

Image editing has always been a hot topic and widely applied in various fields. Previous methods
based on generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Karras et al., 2020)
already achieve considerable performance (Afifi et al., 2021; Parihar et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2020;
Zhou et al., 2022). Recently, with the rapid development of large-scale diffusion models (Rombach
et al., 2022), diffusion-based methods become the mainstream for image editing (Epstein et al.,
2023; Mao et al., 2023; Hertz et al., 2022; Tumanyan et al., 2023). Especially, text-based image
synthesis and editing (Brooks et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024a; Cheng et al., 2024;
Gao et al., 2024; Ahn et al., 2024) that exploit the learned correspondences between texts and images
from pretrained large multi-modal networks (Radford et al., 2021) provides a convenient scheme
for related tasks. For instance, Brooks et al. (2023) propose an instruction-based method, in which
editing intentions can be depicted by natural instructions. Autostudio (Cheng et al., 2024) introduces
a framework that supports multi-turn text-based editing. However, as texts are high-level summaries
of user intentions, they inevitably result in more ambiguities compared with interactive points.



2.2   I NTERACTIVE P OINT- BASED M ANIPULATION

Interactive point-based image editing allows users to easily edit images by manipulating points in
images. A pioneering method of this type is GragGAN (Pan et al., 2023a), which proposes the idea
of motion supervision and point tracking. However, due to the utilization of GANs and optimizations
on 1D latent features, the editing ability of GragGAN is limited in complex scenarios. With the
recent success of diffusion models in image generation, the quality of synthesized images generated
by dragging-based methods (Mou et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024b; Ling et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024;
Zhang et al., 2024) has been improved notably. For example, DragonDiffusion (Mou et al., 2024)
introduces a gradient-guidance-based energy function to model diffusion sampling, which can better
perverse the characteristics of targets. A similar framework is explored in DragDiffusion (Shi et al.,
2024b), which also proposes the DragBench dataset to facilitate related research. To mitigate handle
point deviations, FreeDrag (Ling et al., 2024) constrains updates of point positions to straight lines
to generate more stable editing results. DragNoise (Liu et al., 2024) utilizes feature maps from
intermediate layers of the denoising network to alleviate gradient vanishing. GoodDrag (Zhang
et al., 2024) proposes to alternate between drag and denoising steps to achieve finer controls.
Dragging-based methods can also benefit from diffusion models that can generate content beyond
images. For instance, DragAnything (Wu et al., 2024), DragNUWA (Yin et al., 2023), and Motion-
I2V (Shi et al., 2024a) exploit video generators to achieve point-based video editing. DragAPart
(Li et al., 2024b) learns motion priors in parts of 3D objects for dragging. However, as we have
emphasized, most current methods do not seek the explicit interpretation of user intentions, and
hence they still suffer from intention and content ambiguity.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Self-adaptive Motion Supervision (SMS)
                                                                                                                       Iterative
                                                                                                                      Optimization
                                                                                                                  ☉

              Diffusion                            Random                           Scaling Maps    LoRA Branch
                                      …            Sampling
              Inversion
                                                                                           ⊕                      ⊕

                           Noisy Latent Feature Maps            Latent at a                                                                      Image
                                                                                                                     Updated Features
                               of All Time Steps                 random                                                                         Decoder
                                                                                                       UNet       along Dense Trajectories
                                                                time step
      Input                                                                                                                                                  Output
                                                                                    Latent Biases

                                                Anti-ambiguity Dense Trajectory (ADT) Estimation
                                                                                                 Non-rigid
                                                   Relocation                 Rotation √       Transformation

                             GUI
                                                                                    z
                                                                                                                                            & (𝜌, 𝛽)
                                                                                     x                                                       Task-specific
                                                                              y                                                               Parameters
                                                                                                                  Task-aware Trajectories

                     Segmentation Model          Semantic Mask            Ellipsoid            Boundary Band



Figure 2: The proposed GDrag framework. The key idea of GDrag is to reduce intention and con-
tent ambiguities, which is accomplished by the proposed anti-ambiguity dense trajectory estimation
method (ADT) and the self-adaptive motion supervision method (SMS). Given user-specific sparse
handle points and the editing task, ADT selects a dense set of points that encode rich contextual
information and estimates the corresponding task-aware trajectories. Utilizing these trajectories and
a pair of task-specific parameters, the SMS method adjusts the positions and latent features of the
dense points by optimizing latent feature biases and scaling maps, thereby achieving fine-grained
editing results.


3      M ETHODOLOGY

In this section, we present the details of the proposed GDrag method. We start by introducing the
overall framework of GDrag and formulating our task. Next, we present the two core components
of GDrag, including a dense trajectory estimation method (ADT) to address intention ambiguities
and a self-adaptive motion supervision method (SMS) to solve content ambiguities.

3.1      GD RAG F RAMEWORK

Conventional dragging-based methods, which lack explicit modeling of editing intentions, inevitably
create ambiguities. These ambiguities not only increase the difficulty of editing but also reduce the
quality of the edited images. Therefore, the key idea of our GDrag method is to define a set of atomic
manipulation tasks with clear and explicit intentions. These atomic tasks should be parameterized
and guide subsequent processing, enabling us to complete diverse editing tasks within a unified
framework. To this end, we propose the GDrag framework as shown in Figure 2.
Specifically, we categorize
point-based manipulations into                                                     Table 1: Main notations within GDrag.
three types, including reloca-
tion, rotation, and non-rigid                              Symbol                                     Definition
transformation.         Relocation                            L                                 Length of a trajectory.
involves translating the target.                             N                     Number of optimizations after each movement.
Rotation includes both in-plane                               T                              Number of denoising steps.
and out-of-plane rotations,                                  zt                      Latent features at the t-th denoising step.
meaning the target rotates                                   ẑnt                           zt after n optimization steps.
within or out of the image plane.                             b                           Optimizable latent feature biases.
Non-rigid transformation com-                                 s                        Optimizable low-rank adaption scales.
prises isotropic and anisotropic                             M                                       Target mask.
scaling, as well as the removal                            P∗ & G                        Dense points and their trajectories.
or creation of content within the                           U, U ′                 UNet and its low-rank side-branch for denoising.
target. To obtain satisfying re-                            ρ, β                           Task-conditioned parameters.
sults, it is reasonable to perform
manipulations with different


                                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


degrees of freedom and calculate different point trajectories for these three tasks. For instance,
in the relocation task, we should preserve the characteristic of the target as much as possible,
while allowing flexible deformations in the non-rigid transformation task that may alter the target
significantly.
Therefore, given a target image and user-specific trajectories of handle points, we assume these tra-
jectories belong to an atomic task and manually specify its type. Note that complex manipulations
can be divided into atomic tasks (as shown in Figure 6), so we focus on a single atomic task in the
following sections. Since the trajectories of handle points are sparse and limited in representing the
context during editing, we propose the ADT method to identify the semantic and geometric neigh-
bors of dragging points to construct a dense point set and calculate their trajectories based on the
task type. Unlike previous point-tracking methods (Pan et al., 2023b; Shi et al., 2024b; Liu et al.,
2024) that update point positions by searching pre-defined neighboring areas, we move our dense
points only on their own trajectories, which is feasible as their trajectories are less ambiguous. To
generate the desired edited image, our SMS method optimizes the latent features of dense points ex-
tracted by a pretrained diffusion model during their movements. Besides, a pair of task-conditioned
parameters are used in our optimization process to balance target preservation and editing flexibility.
Discussion. Similar to our method, a few concurrent approaches (Zhang et al., 2024; Cui et al., 2024)
also mention intention ambiguities. However, they either conduct post-editing evaluations (Zhang
et al., 2024) or utilize resource-intensive large language models (Cui et al., 2024). In contrast,
our method is explicitly conditioned on tasks, which can be achieved through a few user-friendly
interactions, such as a single click on option tabs in a graphical user interface, as demonstrated in
Appendix A.9. Consequently, our method preserves the efficiency of point-based interactive editing
while significantly reducing ambiguities.

3.2   A NTI - AMBIGUITY D ENSE T RAJECTORY

The goal of our proposed ADT method is to obtain sufficient contextual information and reli-
able task-aware trajectories. Specifically, given M user-specific handle points P = {pm =
(xm , ym )|m = 0, ..., M − 1} and their corresponding end positions Q = {qm = (xm , ym )|m =
0, ..., M − 1}, we first employ the off-the-shelf promptable segmentation model (Kirillov et al.,
2023) to obtain the semantic segmentation mask of the target M. We then construct the dense point
set P ∗ and estimate point trajectories G based on the atomic task as follows:
Relocation. In the relocation task, points within the target move coherently with similar directions
and distances. Therefore, we calculate P ∗ and G by,
                                                            l
                                 P ∗ = M,  G = {gjl = pj + ∆ },
                                                            L
                                              M                                                        (1)
                                           1 X
                                        ∆=       qm − pm ,
                                           M m=1

where 0 ≤ j ≤ |P ∗ |, 0 ≤ l ≤ L − 1, and L is the number of steps that move each point to its target.
∆ denotes the mean displacement of handle points.
Rotation. Since recovering 3D rotations from 2D image-plane trajectories is ill-posed, we utilize an
ellipsoid E as the alternative tool to calculate trajectories. Specifically, as shown in Figure 2, we first
place E near the center of the target, of which the axis lengths and angles can be adjusted to coarsely
cover the target. Let Φ(E) denote the orthographic projection of the surface points of E onto the
image plane. We approximate P by finding their nearest neighbors from Φ(E) (denoted as PE ), and
then rotate E around one of its three axes so that the projection of PE are close to Q. Hereby, we
obtain P ∗ and G for the rotation task as follows,
                                           P ∗ = M ∩ Φ(E),
                                                               l                                       (2)
                                   G = {gjl = Φ(pE,j ) + Φ(dj ) },
                                                               L
where dj denotes the geographical displacement (i.e., on the ellipsoidal surface) of pE,j after the
rotation. Consequently, our generated trajectories can better represent 3D rotations compared to
those calculated directly by handle points on the image plane. Moreover, our trajectories implicitly


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


encode the geometric information, such as varying distances of surface points of the target, which
can guide subsequent optimizations.
Non-rigid transformation. To complete non-rigid transformations such as scaling, we focus on
the boundary points, as they determine the shape and pose of the target. Particularly, we extract a
boundary band from M with a fixed width of r. To minimize the influence of boundary points that
are distant from P and achieve fine-grained, local transformations, we retain only boundary points
that are among the k nearest neighbors of any point in P. Let Ωk (M) denote the set of selected
boundary points, we define P ∗ and G as follows,
                                            P ∗ = Ωk (M),
                                                                 l                              (3)
                                  G = {gjl = p∗j + (qj∗ − p∗j ) },
                                                                 L
where the starting and end positions of p∗j are set as those of its nearest handle point.
With the above definitions of task-aware dense trajectories, GDrag can clarify user intents. Figure 3
demonstrates the visual examples of our generated dense points and trajectories for different tasks.
In the next section, we optimize the features of P ∗ along trajectories G, thereby accomplishing
various manipulations within a unified framework.

3.3   S ELF - ADAPTIVE M OTION S UPERVISION

Motion supervision (Pan et al., 2023b) is the
process that optimizes contextual features of             Input        Mask / Ellipsoid   Dense Trajectory
handle points along their trajectories gradually.
In current diffusion-based methods (Liu et al.,
2024; Shi et al., 2024b; Ling et al., 2024), mo-
tion supervision requires a user-specific denois-
ing time step to choose the latent features for
optimization. However, recent studies (Choi
et al., 2022; Croitoru et al., 2023) indicate that
diffusion models tend to generate high-level
content during the early denoising steps and
finer details in the later stages. Therefore, op-
timizing latent features at a single time step
is insufficient for producing desirable content.
To address this issue, we introduce the SMS
method in this section.
Following existing methods (Shi et al., 2024b;
Mou et al., 2024), we employ DDIM inversion
(Song et al., 2021) to transform the input image
into a series of latent feature maps {zt } within
T diffusion steps, where 0 ≤ t ≤ T − 1 rep-
resents an arbitrary time step. z0 denotes the Figure 3: Visual examples of our generated dense
clean feature maps while zT −1 is the noise that trajectories for diverse tasks, including relocation
can be easily sampled from certain distributions (top), rotation (middle), and non-rigid transforma-
(e.g., N (0, 1)). This diffusion process can be tion (bottom).
formulated as,                              √       √
                                       zt = at z0 + 1 − at ϵ,                                     (4)
where αt is the Gaussian variance governing the transition probability of the Markov chain in DDIM
and ϵ ∼ N (0, 1). To recover z0 and generate the edited image, we can alter a certain latent zt and
iteratively remove noise according to Eq. (4).
The original motion supervision method assumes that the latent feature maps of the desired edited
image adhere to the same data priors as those of the input image. Therefore, it moves the handle
points step-by-step and minimizes the difference between the corresponding features of the control
point before and after a small movement. Given the dense trajectories G consisting of L steps, if we
naively run through all T denoising time steps to exploit sufficient latent features, the computational
complexity is O(T L), which is a significant burden. Hence, we propose to perform optimizations
N times (N ≪ T ) with randomly selected time steps after each movement.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Specifically, let 0 ≤ n ≤ N − 1 denote an arbitrary optimization step after a small movement on
the dense trajectories. For the concise presentation, here we ignore the indexes of movement steps
on the dense trajectories and denote the latent features at a randomly selected denoising time step t
as ẑnt . By substituting ẑnt into Eq. (4), we can obtain the optimized latent feature maps ẑn+1
                                                                                               t   as,
                                        n+1    √     n+1
                                                             √
                                      ẑt    = αt ẑ0 + 1 − αt ϵt ,                                    (5)
where ϵt is predicted by the pre-trained diffusion model. To calculate ẑn+1
                                                                         0   , we first obtain ẑ00 from
the unaltered latents as follows,
                                         1
                               ẑ00 = √
                                                    p
                                              zt+1 − 1 − at+1 ϵt+1 .                                  (6)
                                        αt+1
We then introduce the following self-adaptive scheme for updating ẑn+1
                                                                    0   :
                                      ẑn+1
                                        0   = (1 − ρ)ẑn0 + ρbn .                                     (7)
        n
Here, b denotes latent feature biases for optimization, which is initialized as z0 to ensure it follows
the same data distribution of the original image. ρ is a task-specific weighting factor, e.g., in the
relocation task, a larger ρ is preferred, as it generally leads to better preservation of the original
latents.
Additionally, it is common practice to utilize low-rank adaption (LoRA) (Shi et al., 2024b; Ling
et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024), which fine-tunes the denoising UNet of the diffusion model with a
low-rank side branch. As the bottleneck feature dimension (rank) of the LoRA branch is much
smaller than that of the original diffusion model, fine-tuning this branch reduces the feature space
of the model to be compactly around the target image, consequently helping to preserve the identity
of the target. Specifically, let U and U ′ denote the original UNet and its fine-tuned LoRA branch,
respectively. The outputs of U and U ′ are combined linearly with a single trade-off scalar, i.e.,
U(ẑtn+1 )+s·U ′ (ẑn+1
                    t   ). Nevertheless, such a global combination is insufficient to model fine-grained
and heterogeneous feature transformations. Hence, we also introduce an optimizable scaling map
sn in SMS as follows,
                                f (ẑn+1
                                     t   ) = U(ẑn+1
                                                 t   ) + sn ⊙ U ′ (ẑn+1
                                                                     t   ),                           (8)
where ⊙ denotes the (broadcast) Hadamard product and sn is of the same spatial resolution as ẑn+1
                                                                                               t   .
The desirable latents of the edited image can be obtained now by jointly optimizing b and s super-
vised by the following loss function,
                             L = (1 − β)Lalign + βLsmooth + λLmask ,                                  (9)
where the first loss term Lalign measures the discrepancy between original features and those moved
along the dense trajectories. The second term Lsmooth is calculated on the corresponding features
before and after a motion supervision step, which is introduced to encourage smooth feature trans-
formations. Finally, Lmask calculates the contextual deviations of latent feature maps within the
target mask, helping to maintain the homogeneity of the latent feature maps. β is another task-
specific parameter while λ is set the same value for all tasks. The detailed definitions of these three
terms are as follows:
                                 Lalign = fG l+1 (ẑn+1
                                                    t   ) − fG 0 (zt ) 1 ,                         (10)
where fG (z) denotes the latent features of dense points in G, retrieved from z via feature interpo-
lation, e.g., fG l+1 (ẑn+1
                        t   ) means the dense point features at the l + 1 position along the trajectories
after n + 1 optimization steps. Similarly,
                               Lsmooth = fG l+1 (ẑn+1
                                                   t   ) − fG l (ẑnt )) 1 ,                         (11)
and,
                               Lmask = (ẑn+1t  − zt ) ⊙ (1 − M) 1 .                           (12)
In practice, we find that including all intermediate features in the denoising UNet to optimize Eq.
(9) leads to better performance.
Task-aware point tracking. At last, we update the positions of the dense points after every N
motion supervision steps. Thanks to the reliability of our task-aware trajectories, for each point in
P ∗ , we determine its new position as the one on its corresponding trajectory that minimizes Eq.
(10), rather than searching the neighboring areas of the trajectories. This allows our handle points
to move along the trajectories and avoid undesirable drifts.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we provide quantitative and qualitative analysis of GDrag. Due to the page limitation,
more experimental results can be found in the Appendix.


4.1   S ETUP

Implementation details. All our experiments are conducted with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090
graphical card (24 GB). We use Stable Diffusion 1.5 (Rombach et al., 2022) as the base diffusion
model. Following (Liu et al., 2024), to ensure the consistency of image content before and after
editing, we perform LoRA fine-tuning on the input image, with 80 fine-tuning steps and the adaptor
rank is 16. SMS uses the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.01 for b and 0.02 for s, and
the parameter λ is set to 0.2. In addition, the values of parameters L, T , and N are 50, 35, and
5, respectively. We set r = 5 and k = |M|/10 to calculate the boundary band in the non-rigid
transformation task. In the relocation and in-plane rotation tasks, the value of ρ is set to 1.0, while
in the non-rigid transformation and out-of-plane rotation tasks, the value of ρ is 0.2. We calculate
the value of β adaptively based on the specific task and the details can be found in Appendix A.10.
Baselines and evaluation metrics. We compare GDrag with state-of-the-art methods on the Drag-
Bench dataset (Shi et al., 2024b) to validate its effectiveness. We select four baselines with publicly
available implementations for comparison, including DragDiffusion (Shi et al., 2024b), DragonDif-
fusion (Mou et al., 2024), FreeDrag (Ling et al., 2024), and DragNoise (Liu et al., 2024). Following
these methods, we use LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018) and mean distance (MD) as our evaluation metrics.
LPIPS is widely used to access image quality. The second metric is the average of the Euclidean
distances between the target and actual positions of handle points, which reflects how well the edited
results align with the user intents.


4.2   C OMPARISON WITH S TATE - OF - THE - ARTS

Quantitative analysis. Table 2 reports the performance of GDrag and the other baseline methods.
GDrag achieves the lowest LPIPS value (0.0915), which suggests its edited images have the best
quality. Furthermore, GDrag obtains the lowest mean distance (26.49), which we owe to our anti-
ambiguity dense trajectories.
Beyond these two objective metrics, we also
conduct a human study to further evaluate our Table 2: Quantitative comparison with state-of-
method. We invite 20 volunteers to complete the-arts on DragBench.
a questionnaire consisting of 30 questions. We
show a group of five edited images produced           Method         MD↓ LPIPS↓ User Study ↑
by GDrag and the four baselines in each ques-
tion, and ask the volunteers to select the most    DragDiffusion
                                                                     33.91 0.0940    7.83%
satisfying one. The results in Table 2 show that (Shi et al., 2024b)
most volunteers (about 60.33%) choose GDrag,      DragonDiffusion
                                                                     31.63 0.1033    10.5%
                                                 (Mou et al., 2024)
indicating the significant advantages of GDrag.
                                                         FreeDrag
                                                                         27.41   0.0996       8.67%
Qualitative analysis. Figure 4 shows several      (Ling et al., 2024)
visual examples generated by GDrag and the            DragNoise
                                                                      29.56   0.1017      12.67%
baseline methods. These results show that the      (Liu et al., 2024)
baselines still produce noticeable artifacts or         GDrag
                                                                      26.49   0.0915      60.33%
                                                        (Ours)
fail to meet the editing requirements. For in-
stance, in the rotation task, DragDiffusion and
FreeDrag struggle with large out-of-plane rota-
tions, while DragonDiffusion and DragNoise fail to preserve the targets effectively. Even in the
seemingly simple relocation task, some targets moved by the baselines lag behind the handle points.
These examples support our view that implicitly representing various editing tasks leads to severe
ambiguities and performance degradation. On the contrary, GDrag explicitly models the editing
tasks and generates more appealing images.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Input     DragDiffusion   DragonDiffusion         FreeDrag       DragNoise       GDrag (Ours)


 Rotation
 Relocation
 N.R. Transform.


Figure 4: Visual comparison between GDrag and state-of-the-art methods. Blue dots denote the
final positions of handle points. GDrag achieves more precise manipulations and satisfying results
across various editing tasks, including rotation, relocation, and non-rigid transformation.



4.3                A BLATION S TUDIES

We conduct ablation studies on the two key components of our framework, i.e., ADT and SMS.
Effects of anti-ambiguity dense trajectory.
As shown in Table 3, the mean distance                            Table 3: Effects of the proposed components.
metric of the baseline decreased by approxi-
mately 20.11%, when augmented by the pro-                         ADT     SMS        MD↓              LPIPS↓
posed ADT method. This indicates that incor-
porating the task prior and rich context (in-                                         33.91            0.0940
cluding semantic and geometric neighbors)                         ✓                   27.09            0.0948
can significantly improve the precision of ma-                    ✓        ✓       26.49±0.07      0.0915±7.33e-7
nipulations.
Effects of self-adaptive motion supervi-
sion. Table 3 shows the performance of the baseline can be further improved by the SMS method
consistently in both the mean distance and LPIPS metrics. This is reasonable, as the optimizable
latent features biases and scaling maps better represent local and fine-grained modifications. Fur-


                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Input      Baseline   Baseline + ADT   Full Model        Input   User Edit 1   User Edit 2   Output


Figure 5: Visual ablation study on the proposed Figure 6: Visual examples of combining atomic
components.                                     manipulations to achieve complex editing.


thermore, the task-aware trajectories and parameters (ρ and β) help to reduce the difficulty of op-
timizations. Figure 5 also suggests that with both ADT and SMS, our method obtains the most
appealing results.
Moreover, since we randomly select denoising time steps for optimizations in SMS, we report the
standard deviations w.r.t. the two evaluation metrics across five experiments with different random
seeds. As shown in Tables 3 & 8, and Figure 15, the overall performance of GDrag is stable and
hence our random sampling strategy is considerable.
Compositional editing. Figure 6 shows that our defined atomic manipulation tasks can be com-
bined to accomplish complex intents. This validates that GDrag is a general-purpose solution for
interactive point-based image editing.


5   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we present GDrag, a general-purpose optimization-based framework that can tackle
diverse interactive point-based image editing tasks. In contrast to conventional methods, GDrag
defines three atomic editing tasks to calculate task-aware trajectories and reduce ambiguities. Fur-
thermore, by introducing the self-adaptive motion supervision strategy, which contains optimiz-
able biases and scaling maps for randomly sampled latent features at arbitrary denoising steps, our
method better balances content consistency and editing flexibility. Our GDrag method is validated
thoroughly on the DragBench dataset and achieves state-of-the-art performance in terms of manip-
ulation precision and image quality.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by National Key Research and Development Program of
China(2024YFE0203100), National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants
No.62372482 and No.62476293, Nansha Key R&D Program under Grant No.2022ZD014, and Gen-
eral Embodied AI Center of Sun Yat-sen University.


R EFERENCES
Mahmoud Afifi, Marcus A Brubaker, and Michael S Brown. Histogan: Controlling colors of gan-
 generated and real images via color histograms. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7941–7950, 2021.


                                                         10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Namhyuk Ahn, Junsoo Lee, Chunggi Lee, Kunhee Kim, Daesik Kim, Seung-Hun Nam, and Kibeom
  Hong. Dreamstyler: Paint by style inversion with text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings
  of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 674–681, 2024.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 18392–18402, 2023.
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Jarred Barber, AJ Maschinot, José Lezama, Lu Jiang, Ming-Hsuan
  Yang, Kevin Murphy, William T Freeman, Michael Rubinstein, et al. Muse: Text-to-image gen-
  eration via masked generative transformers. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 4055–4075, 2023.
Xi Chen, Lianghua Huang, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Hengshuang Zhao. Anydoor: Zero-
  shot object-level image customization. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Junhao Cheng, Xi Lu, Hanhui Li, Khun Loun Zai, Baiqiao Yin, Yuhao Cheng, Yiqiang Yan, and Xi-
  aodan Liang. Autostudio: Crafting consistent subjects in multi-turn interactive image generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01388, 2024.
Jooyoung Choi, Jungbeom Lee, Chaehun Shin, Sungwon Kim, Hyunwoo Kim, and Sungroh Yoon.
  Perception prioritized training of diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11472–11481, 2022.
Florinel-Alin Croitoru, Vlad Hondru, Radu Tudor Ionescu, and Mubarak Shah. Diffusion models
  in vision: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(9):
  10850–10869, 2023.
Xing Cui, Peipei Li, Zekun Li, Xuannan Liu, Yueying Zou, and Zhaofeng He. Localize, understand,
  collaborate: Semantic-aware dragging via intention reasoner. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00432,
  2024.
Dave Epstein, Allan Jabri, Ben Poole, Alexei Efros, and Aleksander Holynski. Diffusion self-
  guidance for controllable image generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36:16222–16239, 2023.
Xiang Gao, Zhengbo Xu, Junhan Zhao, and Jiaying Liu. Frequency-controlled diffusion model
  for versatile text-guided image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1824–1832, 2024.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 27, 2014.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2021.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Ana-
  lyzing and improving the image quality of stylegan. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8110–8119, 2020.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6007–6017, 2023.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4015–4026, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dongxu Li, Junnan Li, and Steven Hoi. Blip-diffusion: Pre-trained subject representation for con-
  trollable text-to-image generation and editing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 36, 2024a.
Ruining Li, Chuanxia Zheng, Christian Rupprecht, and Andrea Vedaldi. Dragapart: Learning a
  part-level motion prior for articulated objects. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
  Computer Vision, 2024b.
Pengyang Ling, Lin Chen, Pan Zhang, Huaian Chen, and Yi Jin. Freedrag: Feature dragging for
  reliable point-based image editing. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Haofeng Liu, Chenshu Xu, Yifei Yang, Lihua Zeng, and Shengfeng He. Drag your noise: Interactive
  point-based editing via diffusion semantic propagation. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Jiafeng Mao, Xueting Wang, and Kiyoharu Aizawa. Guided image synthesis via initial image editing
   in diffusion model. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp.
   5321–5329, 2023.
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Jiechong Song, Ying Shan, and Jian Zhang. Dragondiffusion: Enabling
  drag-style manipulation on diffusion models. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2024.
Xingang Pan, Ayush Tewari, Thomas Leimkühler, Lingjie Liu, Abhimitra Meka, and Christian
  Theobalt. Drag your gan: Interactive point-based manipulation on the generative image mani-
  fold. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH Conference, pp. 1–11, 2023a.
Xingang Pan, Ayush Tewari, Thomas Leimkühler, Lingjie Liu, Abhimitra Meka, and Christian
  Theobalt. Drag your gan: Interactive point-based manipulation on the generative image mani-
  fold. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH Conference, pp. 1–11, 2023b.
Rishubh Parihar, Ankit Dhiman, and Tejan Karmali. Everything is there in latent space: Attribute
  editing and attribute style manipulation by stylegan latent space exploration. In Proceedings of
  the ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 1828–1836, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bjørn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Yujun Shen, Jinjin Gu, Xiaoou Tang, and Bolei Zhou. Interpreting the latent space of gans for
  semantic face editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 9243–9252, 2020.
Xiaoyu Shi, Zhaoyang Huang, Fu-Yun Wang, Weikang Bian, Dasong Li, Yi Zhang, Manyuan
  Zhang, Ka Chun Cheung, Simon See, Hongwei Qin, et al. Motion-i2v: Consistent and con-
  trollable image-to-video generation with explicit motion modeling. In Proceedings of the ACM
  SIGGRAPH Conference, pp. 1–11, 2024a.
Yujun Shi, Chuhui Xue, Jiachun Pan, Wenqing Zhang, Vincent YF Tan, and Song Bai. Dragdiffu-
  sion: Harnessing diffusion models for interactive point-based image editing. Proceedings of the
  IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024b.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1921–1930, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wejia Wu, Zhuang Li, Yuchao Gu, Rui Zhao, Yefei He, David Junhao Zhang, Mike Zheng Shou,
 Yan Li, Tingting Gao, and Di Zhang. Draganything: Motion control for anything using entity
 representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07420, 2024.
Shengming Yin, Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Jie Shi, Houqiang Li, Gong Ming, and Nan Duan. Drag-
  nuwa: Fine-grained control in video generation by integrating text, image, and trajectory. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.08089, 2023.
Chaoning Zhang, Dongshen Han, Yu Qiao, Jung Uk Kim, Sung-Ho Bae, Seungkyu Lee, and
  Choong Seon Hong. Faster segment anything: Towards lightweight sam for mobile applications.
  arXiv preprint:2306.14289, 2023a.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  3836–3847, 2023b.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
Zewei Zhang, Huan Liu, Jun Chen, and Xiangyu Xu. Gooddrag: Towards good practices for drag
  editing with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07206, 2024.
Yufan Zhou, Ruiyi Zhang, Jiuxiang Gu, Chris Tensmeyer, Tong Yu, Changyou Chen, Jinhui Xu, and
  Tong Sun. Tigan: Text-based interactive image generation and manipulation. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 3580–3588, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
The outline of the Appendix is as follows:
• More visual results compared with state-of-the-art methods in A.1;
• User study on intention understanding in A.2;
• Effects of segmentation models in A.3;
• Computational cost analysis of the proposed method in A.4;
• Ablation study on the proposed anti-ambiguity dense trajectory (ADT) calculation method in A.5;
• Ablation study on the proposed self-adaptive model supervision (SMS) strategy in A.6;
• Comparison between using random and fixed denoising time steps in A.7;
• Edited images with different random seeds in A.8;
• An example of our graphical user interface in A.9;
• Our strategy of calculating the task-related parameter β in A.10;
• Ablation Study on the task-aware parameters ρ and β in A.11.

A.1    M ORE VISUAL RESULTS

Here we provide more qualitative results of GDrag in Figure 9, which further demonstrate that
GDrag outperforms state-of-the-art methods across various editing tasks, including rotation, reloca-
tion, and non-rigid transformation.
In Figure 7, we show examples of the proposed GDrag method in completing complex manipula-
tions. Each of these manipulations involves motions of multiple joints/parts and incorporates more
than one atomic task. For example, in the first row, our goal is to transform a barking dog into a
smiling one, which requires us to first close its mouth and then lift the corners of its lips. In these
examples, we separate each manipulation into two steps and show the intermediate and final edited
images. These results demonstrate that the edited images generated by our GDrag method better
align with user intentions and have fewer artifacts compared with the baseline.
In Figure 8, we demonstrate a few failure cases of the proposed method. Although GDrag moves
handle points to their target positions more accurately compared with other methods, it generates a
few realistic but unnecessary details around the targets, e.g., the leaves on the left side of the rose in
the bottom row of Figure 8. These failure cases are mainly caused by the limited inpainting ability
of our base generator (Stable Diffusion 1.5), which can be addressed by more advanced generators.

A.2    U SER I NTENTION U NDERSTANDING

One of our key assumptions in this paper is that 2D dragging inevitably causes intention ambiguity,
which can be verified on two levels: (i) First, given a dragging-based manipulation, will most users
recognize it as the same editing task? (ii) If so, can this editing task be recognized using current
methods?
To answer these two questions, we conduct an additional user study. In this study, we invite 20
volunteers to complete a questionnaire consisting of 20 questions. In each question, we present
a sample from the DragBench dataset and ask the respondents to identify the corresponding user
intention by selecting one of the following four choices: (a) Relocation, (b) Rotation, (c) Non-rigid
transformation, and (d) Not sure, may be ambiguous.
To evaluate the consistency of the respondents’ votes, we adopt the variation ratio (VR) which is
                     F
defined as vr = 1 − K  , where F is the maximum frequency for a choice in a question and K is the
number of the respondents. The higher the VR, the more dispersed the choices are, indicating that
the corresponding user intention is more ambiguous.
The average VR of all samples in our user study is 0.47, with the VR for each sample varying
between 0.3 and 0.7. Figure 10 also shows some samples of the study. These results validate


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    DragDiffusion                                       GDrag (Ours)
       Input
                          Intermediate                     Final              Intermediate              Final


        Figure 7: Visual examples of the proposed method in addressing complex motions.

      Input         DragDiffusion        DragonDiffusion           FreeDrag          DragNoise         GDrag (Ours)


                                Figure 8: Visualization of failure cases.


that even for the same 2D dragging manipulation, different people have varied interpretations of its
intention and are not always consistent. Therefore, the concept of our method, which represents user
intentions through atomic tasks, is necessary.
We then investigate whether user intentions can be predicted. Impressed by the powerful reasoning
abilities of modern multi-modal large language models (MLLMs), we propose to use them to inter-
pret user intentions. We use images with drawn dragging trajectories and the following prompt for
MLLM reasoning: “The white arrow in the figure represents the drag editing starting from the red
dot to the blue dot that the user needs to implement. Please select which type of task the user is most
likely to want to implement and why, from the following three task types: relocation, rotation, or
non-rigid transformations.”
We use Qwen2.5, one of the most advanced MLLMs that is open and free, to complete the afore-
mentioned questionnaire as well. We find that only 40% of its choices are consistent with those
selected by most respondents. Figure 10 demonstrates some of its results, we can see that even for


                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Input        DragDiffusion   DragonDiffusion      FreeDrag      DragNoise           GDrag(Ours)


 Rotation
 Rotation
 Relocation
 Relocation
 N.R. Transform.
 N.R. Transform.


                   Figure 9: More visual comparison between GDrag and other state-of-the-art methods.


a less ambiguous sample like the rotation task in the first row, the MLLM mistakenly considers it
as the non-rigid transformation. With these results, we believe that it is still challenging for current
methods to understand user intentions given dragging trajectories. Consequently, our method that
explicitly specifies atomic tasks is effective and efficient.

A.3                E FFECTS OF S EGMENTATION M ODELS

Our GDrag utilizes semantic segmentation to
calculate dense trajectories. To investigate                   Table 4: Ablation study on the segmentation model.
how the segmentation results affect the per-
formance of GDrag, except for SAM (Kir-                                     Method               MD↓      LPIPS↓
illov et al., 2023), we also employ Mobile-
SAM (Zhang et al., 2023a) for evaluation,                            GDrag w/ MobileSAM          26.74     0.0959
which is the light-weight version of SAM.                              GDrag w/ SAM              26.49     0.0915
Considering that MobileSAM uses only 1.5%
of the parameters of SAM, it is reasonable
that the masks predicted by MobileSAM are less accurate. However, from the quantitative results in
Table 4, we observe that GDrag still performs well with MobileSAM. The mean distance and LPIPS


                                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Input            Human                                                            MLLM
                                                 A: The user is most likely trying to implement a non-rigid transformation.
                              5%                 Here's why:
                        10%         15%
                                                 Starting Point (Red Dot): The red dot is positioned near the alpaca's nose.
                                                 Ending Point (Blue Dot): The blue dot is positioned slightly to the right and higher up
                                                 from the red dot.
                                                 Given this movement path, it suggests that the user wants to manipulate the shape
                              70%                around the alpaca's nose area, possibly to make it appear smaller or adjust its position.
                                                 This kind of manipulation is best achieved through a non-rigid transformation, which
                Relocation     Rotation
                                                 allows for local deformations without affecting the entire image uniformly.
                N.R. Transform Not Sure          Therefore, the intended task is most likely a non-rigid transformation.

                                                 A: The white arrow in the image points directly leftwards, indicating a straightforward
                                                 movement along a single axis. This suggests a simple change in position without any
                         10%
                                                 rotation or deformation. Therefore, the user is most likely trying to implement a
                                                 relocation task.
                                        25%
                                                 Here's the reasoning for each option:
                                                 Relocation: The arrow points directly left, indicating a clear intention to move the
                     50%
                                     15%         object (in this case, the bicycle wheel) to a new location horizontally.
                                                 Rotation: There is no indication of circular motion or angular displacement, so rotation
                                                 is unlikely.
                                                 Non-Rigid Transformations: These involve changes in shape or form, such as
                Relocation           Rotation    stretching or bending, which are not suggested by the straight, horizontal arrow.
                N.R. Transform       Not Sure
                                                 Given these considerations, the most appropriate choice is relocation.

                                                 A: The white arrow in the image points directly leftwards, indicating a straightforward
                                                 movement along a single axis. This suggests a simple change in position without any
                              5%                 rotation or deformation. Therefore, the user is most likely trying to implement a
                                                 relocation task.
                                        27%
                                                 Here's the reasoning for each option:
                  26%                            Relocation: The arrow points directly left, indicating a clear intention to move the
                                                 object (in this case, the car tire) to a new location horizontally.
                               42%               Rotation: There is no indication of circular motion or angular displacement, so rotation
                                                 is unlikely.
                                                 Non-Rigid Transformations: These involve changes in shape or form, such as
                 Relocation           Rotation
                                                 stretching or bending, which are not suggested by the straight, horizontal arrow.
                 N.R. Transform       Not Sure
                                                 Given these considerations, the most appropriate choice is relocation.

                                                 A: The white arrow in the image points directly upwards, indicating a straightforward
                                                 movement along a single axis. This suggests a simple change in position without any
                                                 rotation or deformation. Therefore, the user is most likely trying to implement a
                                      20%        relocation task.
                        25%                      Here's the reasoning for each option:
                                                 Relocation: The arrow points directly up, indicating a clear intention to move the
                                     25%
                                                 object (in this case, the person) to a new location vertically.
                        30%                      Rotation: There is no indication of circular motion or angular displacement, so rotation
                                                 is unlikely.
                                                 Non-Rigid Transformations: These involve changes in shape or form, such as
                Relocation           Rotation    stretching or bending, which are not suggested by the straight, upward arrow.
                N.R. Transform       Not Sure
                                                 Given these considerations, the most appropriate choice is relocation.


             Figure 10: Visual samples of the study on understanding user intentions.


of GDrag with MobileSAM are 26.74 and 0.0959, respectively, while those of GDrag with SAM
are 26.49 and 0.0915. Figure 11 also shows that, despite some artifacts like holes and disconnected
regions in the predicted masks, GDrag still generates high-quality edited images.

A.4   C OMPUTATIONAL C OST A NALYSIS

Our computational cost analysis is conducted using an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU with 24
GB of memory. We calculate the mean processing time per image and the GPU memory consump-
tion on the DragBench dataset (Shi et al., 2024b), with a fixed image size of 512 × 512 and 250
optimization steps. We select DragDiffusion (Shi et al., 2024b) as the baseline for comparison as
it also adopts Stable Diffusion 1.5 as the base generator. The computational cost of the baseline
is approximately 12 GB of memory and 132 seconds per image, including 40 seconds for employ-
ing low-rank adaption (LoRA) and 92 seconds for optimization. In comparison, GDrag consumes
about 16 GB of memory and 192 seconds per image, including 40 seconds for LoRA, 2 seconds


                                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Input          MobileSAM Mask     Result w/ MobileSAM      SAM Mask           Result w/ SAM


      Figure 11: Visual comparison of the proposed method with different segmentation models.


for segmentation, and 150 seconds for optimization. We find that the additional computational cost
is proportional to the task difficulty. For easier tasks like relocation and in-plane rotation, the pro-
cessing time of GDrag is almost the same as the baseline, while more complex manipulations like
out-of-plane rotation and non-rigid transformation take longer. Considering that our task prioritizes
image quality over processing speed and that most current methods are not real-time, the proposed
GDrag remains competitive.

A.5     A BLATION S TUDY ON ADT

The proposed ADT method converts sparse
handle points specified by users into task-aware Table 5: Quantitative comparison of different
dense trajectories to better exploit contextual methods with ADT.
information. To ensure the fairness of com-
parison and validate that the advantages of the             Method             MD↓ LPIPS↓
proposed method do not merely rely on more
handle points, we conduct an ablation study              DragDiffusion         33.91 0.0940
that replaces the inputs of the baselines with      DragDiffusion w/ ADT       33.48 0.1559
dense trajectories. The results reported in Ta-        DragonDiffusion         31.63 0.1033
ble 5 show that not all baselines benefit from     DragonDiffusion w/ ADT 29.16 0.1109
dense trajectories. Although DragDiffusion                 FreeDrag            27.41 0.0996
(Shi et al., 2024b) and DragonDiffusion (Mou           FreeDrag w/ ADT         35.16 0.1061
et al., 2024) with dense trajectories achieve             DragNoise            29.56 0.1017
lower mean distances, the performance of Free-        DragNoise w/ ADT         30.00 0.1399
Drag (Ling et al., 2024) and DragNoise (Liu              GDrag (Ours)          26.49 0.0915
et al., 2024) deteriorates. This is because Free-
Drag devises its own strategy for trajectory cal-
culation, while DragNoise conducts high-level feature optimizations and already adopts whole seg-
mentation masks for guidance. Therefore, we can conclude that the performance gains of GDrag
mainly stem from its method, instead of using more handle points.
This can also be validated by the visual examples shown in Figure 12. In these examples, the end
positions of handle points of the baselines with dense trajectories are closer to the targets. However,
their results still have noticeable artifacts compared with the proposed method, such as the warped
fire extinguishers in the last example.

A.6     A BLATION S TUDY ON SMS

Our SMS method introduces learnable latent biases and scaling maps to balance the modifi-
cation and preservation of latents. To further validate its effectiveness, we perform an ab-
lation study considering five variants of SMS, including: (i) “Latent” which optimizes la-


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Input/GDrag (Ours)            DragDiffusion DragonDiffusion       FreeDrag          DragNoise


                    w/o ADT
                    w/ ADT
                    w/o ADT
                    w/ ADT


         Figure 12: Visual examples of the ablation study on the proposed ADT method.



tent features directly; (ii) “Bias” which only learns latent biases; (iii) “Scaling Scalar” that
learns a scaling scalar for the LoRA side branch as in conventional methods; “Scaling Map”
that converts the scalar in (iii) to a learnable map; (v) “Bias + Scaling Scalar” that com-
bines (ii) and (iii). We employ the proposed ADT method with all these five variants.

Table 6 reports the quantitative comparison Table 6: Quantitative comparison of SMS variants.
among the variants of SMS. We observe that,
compared with optimizing latents directly,                      Method           MD↓ LPIPS↓
“Bias”, “Scaling Scalar”, and “Bias + Scal-                     Latent           27.09 0.0940
ing Scalar” reduce the LPIPS values signifi-                     Bias            47.11 0.0522
cantly yet perform badly when evaluated by                  Scaling Scalar       47.92 0.0486
the mean distance metric. This suggests that                 Scaling Map         28.62 0.0873
while these variants tend to preserve the orig-          Bias + Scaling Scalar 47.15 0.0516
inal images and generate high-fidelity images,                   SMS             26.49 0.0915
they are less effective at following user inten-
tions. The “Scaling Map” variant performs
better than “Latent” on LPIPS, as it allows us
to employ LoRA in a finer manner. Nevertheless, without the optimization of latents or latent bi-
ases, this variant is still inferior for diverse modifications and falls behind “Latent” on the mean
distance. Finally, with both optimizable components, our SMS method outperforms the latent-based
optimization on both metrics consistently.
The above analysis is further validated by the qualitative examples shown in Figure 13. It can be
observed that the images synthesized by “Bias”, “Scaling Scalar”, and “Bias + Scaling Scalar” are
almost identical to the input images. The “Latent” and “Scaling Map” variants modify the images
to a certain extent but they also result in distorted target structures.


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Input            Latent        Bias        Scaling Scalar   Scaling Map   Bias + Scaling Scalar    SMS


              Figure 13: Visual examples of the ablation study on the proposed SMS strategy.

      Input            t=10          t=20           t=30            t=35              t=40              Random


         Figure 14: Visual comparison between randomly sampled and fixed denoising steps.



A.7    O PTIMIZATION RESULTS UNDER DIFFERENT DENOISING STEPS

Another key idea of our SMS method is that previous
methods selecting a fixed denoising time step t are Table 7: Quantitative comparison with dif-
insufficient to complete various manipulations. This ferent denoising steps.
is because a large t generally results in large struc-
tural changes, while a small t is more suitable for           Method MD↓ LPIPS↓
small modifications. Hence, we propose sampling
time steps randomly during optimization to cover as            t = 10    43.72 0.0628
many variations as possible and reduce the compu-              t = 20    35.05 0.0739
tational cost of exhausting all time steps. To validate        t = 30    30.36 0.0873
this, we compare SMS with a variant that adopts a              t = 35    29.37 0.0908
fixed time step. As the maximum denoising time                 t = 40    31.66 0.0928
step in our base model T = 50, we report the re-              Random 26.49 0.0915
sults of the variant with t = 10, 20, 30, and 40. Both
the quantitative comparison in Table 7 and the qual-
itative comparison in Figure 14 show that our SMS method with random time steps outperforms
the fixed one significantly. Hence, our SMS overcomes the limitations of selecting the time step
manually and is more practical for real-world applications.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Input           Seed=0           Seed=30          Seed=42         Seed=121       Seed=166


Figure 15: Visual results under different random seeds. These examples are satisfactory and validate
that our method is stable.


A.8    O PTIMIZATION RESULTS UNDER DIFFERENT RANDOM SEEDS

In GDrag, an arbitrary time step is randomly selected
for optimization. Therefore, to demonstrate the sta- Table 8: Quantitative results under different
bility of our method, we visualize the edited images random seeds. MD stands for mean distance.
under five different random seeds, as shown in Fig-
ure 15. We can see that our method is robust to the       Random Seed MD↓ LPIPS↓
choice of random seeds, e.g., in the first row, the ro-
tations of the faces are almost identical, and all re-          0          26.56 0.0907
sults are satisfactory. We also report the quantitative        30          26.25 0.0929
performance of our method with different random                42          26.33 0.0916
seeds in Table 8, which further validates the stability        121         26.97 0.0919
of our method.                                                 166         26.33 0.0905

A.9    T HE GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE

Figure 16 shows an example of our graphical user
interface (GUI), where we guide the user to complete the rotation task. This GUI allows the user to
define complex rotations easily, e.g., by dragging an ellipse that roughly covers the editing area and
rotating the ellipse to mimic out-of-plane rotations.

A.10    T HE VALUE OF β BASED ON DIFFERENT TASKS

Here we will provide a detailed definition of the value of β in different tasks:
1) Relocation:
                                          n   Ln−1
                                               align |M|
                            β n = exp(−     ∗ n−1 ∗       ∗ 50) ∗ 0.1,                             (13)
                                          N Lsmooth H ∗ W
   where H and W are the height and width of the input image.
2) In-plane Rotation:

                            n      n  Ln−1
                                       align  |M|
                          β = exp(− ∗ n−1 ∗        ) ∗ 0.7 + 0.3.                                  (14)
                                   N Lsmooth H ∗ W
3) Out-of-plane Rotation:
                                                  n   Ln−1
                                                       align |M|
                                 β n = exp(−        ∗ n−1 ∗       ).                               (15)
                                                  N Lsmooth H ∗ W
4) Non-rigid Transformation:

                             n       n  Ln−1
                                         align  |M|
                            β = exp(− ∗ n−1 ∗        ∗ 25) ∗ 0.2.                                  (16)
                                     N Lsmooth H ∗ W

                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 (a)                                     (c)            Center X     Center Y X Range Y Range
                                                         257          185      0.4     0.51

                                                   z      Y Angle              Z Angle
                                                    x     0                     0
                                               y
                                                                      Draw Ellipsoid
                                                                                                           (e)


Relocation   Rotation   N.R. Transform



 (b)                                     (d)            Rot Axis X   Rot Axis Y Rot Axis Z Rot Angle
                                                               0          1       0         20

                                                            Rot Axis X Coord      Rot Axis Y Coord
                                                               -1                  -1

                                                                Undo Point             Drag Ellipsoid


             Segment


Figure 16: The graphical user interface of rotation task. (a) The user selects the input image and
specifies the editing task. (b) The user uses the promptable segmentation model to locate the editing
area, with prompts like positive points and bounding boxes. (c) The user drags and customizes an
ellipsoid to roughly cover the target, of which parameters like the center coordinates and the lengths
of axes are recorded. (d) The user selects an axis and drags it to rotate the ellipsoid, and we record
the rotation angle to calculate the corresponding trajectories. (e) The edited image synthesized by
our method.


In all tasks, β decreases gradually as n increases. This is because more optimization steps will
lead to more image information loss at the initial position. Consequently, we need to decrease the
value of β to increase the weight of Lalign as the step of optimization increases. In order to more
balance the weights of Lalign and Lsmooth during the optimization process, we also consider Lalign
and Lsmooth in the previous optimization into the formula. The intuition is that if the value of
Lsmooth is relatively large in the previous optimization, we should focus more on the Lsmooth in this
optimization, which also applies to Lalign .
Additionally, for different inputs, we adjust the rate of β reduction based on the proportion of the
editing area relative to the entire image. Specifically, a larger ratio requires a faster reduction, as
the larger the ratio of editing area is, the more easily the image information at the initial position
is lost. Finally, for different tasks, the range of β values will vary. For example, in the relocation
task, β needs to be restricted to a relatively small range. This ensures that our model focuses more
on Lalign , meaning it pays more attention to preserving the initial image information of the edited
object during the dragging process. In contrast, the in-plane rotation task requires generating new
image information, so β needs to be within a larger range.

A.11         A BLATION STUDY ON TASK - SPECIFIC PARAMETERS

We investigate the effects of our task-related
parameters ρ and β in the non-rigid trans-                                   Table 9: Ablation study on ρ.
formation task as it is the most challenging
among all three atomic tasks. Table 9 reports                                                      MD↓           LPIPS↓
the results of our method with different values
of ρ. From the results, we observe that the low-                             Baseline              33.86         0.0733
est mean distance is achieved when ρ = 0.4                                   ρ = 0.2               31.26         0.0679
and gradually increases as the value of ρ in-                                ρ = 0.4               30.61         0.0682
creases. This is reasonable since the role of ρ                              ρ = 0.6               33.52         0.0642
is to preserve the original images. Hence, the                               ρ = 0.8               34.74         0.0632
larger ρ is, the fewer modifications are exhib-                              ρ = 1.0               34.39         0.0647


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ited in the edited images. The LIPIPS scores
of ρ with different settings are similar, which
suggests that the optimization process of GDrag and the image quality of its outputs are stable.
As for β, we vary its base scaling factor in
Eq. (16) from 0.2 to 1.0 to analyze its effects.           Table 10: Ablation study on β.
The results in Table 10 show that the overall
trend of β in affecting the performance of our                          MD↓      LPIPS↓
method is similar to that of ρ. As discussed in
A.10, we use β to control the weight of Lalign ,            Baseline    33.86    0.0733
consequently preserving the initial image in-               β = 0.2     30.08    0.0663
formation before editing. From the results, we              β = 0.4     30.61    0.0682
can see that β also fulfills our goal, as the mean          β = 0.6     33.52    0.0642
distance increases (indicating fewer modifica-              β = 0.8     34.74    0.0632
tions) as the value of β increases.                         β = 1.0     34.39    0.0647


                                                     23
