Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G RAPHON N EURAL D IFFERENTIAL E QUATIONS AND
T RANSFERABILTY OF G RAPH N EURAL D IFFERENTIAL
E QUATIONS
  Anonymous authors
  Paper under double-blind review



                                                             A BSTRACT

            Graph Neural Differential Equations (GNDEs) extend Graph Neural Networks
            (GNNs) to a continuous-depth framework, providing a robust tool for modeling
            complex network dynamics. In this paper, we investigate the potential of GN-
            DEs for transferring knowledge across different graphs with shared convolutional
                                                         Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
            structures. To bridge the gap between discrete and continuous graph representa-
            tions, we introduce Graphon Neural Differential Equations (Graphon-NDEs) as
            the continuous limit of GNDEs. Using toolsTheorem
                                                            fromA.13. dynamical          system theories and
                                                                          Suppose that AS2 and AS4 hold. Let W : I ⇥ I ! {0, 1} be a graphon of simple
            graph limit theory, we rigorously establishgraphs
                                                            thiswithcontinuum
                                                                      b := dim (@W ) limit          and
                                                                                         2 [1, 2), and
                                                                                                    B    G =develop
                                                                                                             +
                                                                                                               [G : f 2 N a] with G , f 2 N being stepf                   F           f             F
                                                         functions. Let W and G be defined by ?? and ?? with ??. Let X and X denote the vector-
            mathematical framework to quantify the approximation                  errorto thebetween
                                                         valued functions corresponding
                                                                                               n
                                                                                                solutions of 6 a
                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                andGNDE
                                                                                                                    12. Let P and Q be constants defined in
                                                                                                                                                                                          n

                                                                                                                                          depending on W
            and its corresponding Graphon-NDE, whichequation
                                                         and
                                                                  45 with p = 2. Then for any ✏ > 0, there exists a positive integer N
                                                           decreases
                                                             G such that whenasn >theN number
                                                                                          , it holds that of nodes in-
                                                                                                             W,G
                                                                                                                                                                                      W,G


            creases, ensuring reliable transferability. We further derive             specific rates
                                                                               kX(T ) X (T )k              P
                                                                                                                  for
                                                                                                                    1 var-
                                                                                                                     n    + QC p ,
                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                L2 (I;RF )             (62)                   G
            ious graph families, providing practical insights into the performance of GNDEs.
                                                                                                                                                              b+✏
                                                                                                                 n                 n                      1    2


                                                         where C is a constant only depending on G.
            These findings extend recent results on GNNs to the continuous-depth setting and
                                                                                  G



            reveal a fundamental trade-off between discriminability            and transferability
                                                         Proof. We begin with estimating kW W k
                                                                                                                   in GN-
                                                                                                              . Recall that N (@W ) denotes the number of                         +
                                                                                                                                 n L2 (I⇥I)
                                                          -mesh cubes that intersect @W . We set = 1/n, and it follows from definition of W that
                                                                                                                 +
                                                                                                                                                                                                    n
            DEs and are supported by our numerical examples.                               Z
                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                          kW   Wn k2L2 (I⇥I) =               |W (u, v)           Wn (u, v)|2 dudv  N1/n (@W + )                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                    .         (63)
                                                                                                                     I                                                                        n
                                                                           According to definition 61 of upper box-counting dimension, for any ✏ > 0, there exists NW 2 N
                                                                                                        log N1/n (@W + )
                                                                           such that when n > NW ,                       < b+✏. Therefore, N1/n (@W + )  nb+✏ which combining
1     I NTRODUCTION                                                        with 63 yields
                                                                                                             log(1/n)

                                                                                                                                                                   b+✏
                                                                                                                  kW          Wn kL2 (I⇥I)  n (1                   2 )   .                                   (64)
                                                                           We proceed to estimate kG       Gn kL2 (I;RF ) . Note that
Graph Neural Differential Equations (GNDEs) represent an innovative extension of(GGraph                 kG Gn k2L2 (I;RF ) =
                                                                                                                       ) k
                                                                                                                               X Neu-
                                                                                                                                    kGf            (65)                  2

ral Networks (GNNs), where the forward pass is formulated as the solution of an ordi-
                                                                                                                                                                     n f L2 (I)
                                                                                                                                         f 2NF

nary differential equation (ODE), with the derivative
                                                   It follows function
                                                   there holds
                                                              from Lemma ?? thatparameterized
                                                                                    for each f 2 N , there by
                                                                                                            exists Na GNN.          In-
                                                                                                                         2 N such that when n > N ,
                                                                                                                                         F                           Gf                                       Gf


troduced by Poli et al. (2019), this framework generalizes NeuralkGODEs                      (G ) k   Chen C p   et1
                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                        al.
                                                                                                                         f    (2018)
                                                                                                                                   n f L2 (I)      (66)       Gf

to the graph domain, enhancing sample efficiency and generalization performance on                                           ⇣P net- ⌘                                                                  1/2
                                                   where C       is a constant only depending on G . By letting C :=                   C        , when                                        2
worked data compared to traditional discrete GNNs. n > N := max{N   GNDEs   : f 2 N and
                                                                                 G
                                                                                     Gf
                                                                                              their
                                                                                      }, we obtain       variants
                                                                                                   from 65
                                                                                                   Gf      and 66 that
                                                                                                                 F
                                                                                                                           are par-          f                        G               f 2NF   Gf


ticularly effective in modeling continuous-time phenomena in networked dynamical                                   1        systems
                                                                                      kG G k              C p .                                   (67)
and often outperform conventional deep learning models that do not explicitly naccount for
                                                                                                                                 n L2 (I;RF )                 G



graph structures Poli et al. (2019); Choi et al. (2022);
                                                   We set N
                                                                 Xu result
                                                   and get the desired   et 62.
                                                                              al. (2023); Chen et al. (2024).
                                                                   := max{N , N }. Then when n > N
                                                                                     W,G                W     , we plug the estimates 64 and 67 into 49
                                                                                                                 G                                  W,G


Similar to Neural ODEs, GNDEs can be trained us-                                                                 [Ẋn (s)]i = [ (Sn ; Xn (s), H(s))]i                                                         (68)

ing standard backpropagation and the adjoint sensitivity
method, which offers memory efficiency. However, train-
ing GNDEs on large, dense graphs remains a challenging
problem. In GNNs, graph convolutions employ shared
coefficients across nodes, allowing generalization across
different graphs. GNDEs share this capability, prompt-
ing an important question: Can GNDEs trained on mod-
erately sized graphs be transferred to larger, structurally
similar graphs while preserving high prediction accuracy?
                                                                                                                                         24
In discrete settings, the transferability of Graph Neural                                 Figure 1: Vector fields generated by the
Networks (GNNs) across graphs of varying sizes has gar-                                   GNDE model over cyclic kNN (k=4)
nered significant attention. Recent advances have intro-                                  graphs with N = 10, 20, 40 nodes.
duced Graphon Neural Networks (Graphon-NNs) as limit
objects of GNNs, establishing theoretical bounds on the


                                                                      1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


approximation error between GNNs and their corresponding Graphon-NNs. These results reveal
a fundamental trade-off between discriminability and transferability. However, directly extending
these bounds to Graph Neural Differential Equations (GNDEs) is challenging. While GNDEs can
be viewed as continuous-depth limits of GNNs, the process of taking such limits causes the existing
bounds to diverge. This divergence arises from the infinite-dimensional nature of continuous-depth
models, which requires a fundamentally different analytical framework.
To address this issue, we leverage tools from theory of dynamical systems and graph limits to
develop a new framework for analyzing the transferability of GNDEs, ensuring that meaningful
bounds hold in the continuous-depth setting. We introduce Graphon Neural Differential Equations
(Graphon-NDEs) as continuous counterparts of GNDEs and derive rigorous results that capture the
complex trade-offs between discriminability and transferability. Our framework tackles the unique
challenges posed by the continuous-depth nature of GNDEs, such as handling infinite-dimensional
dynamics and maintaining stability over continuous evolutions—issues that are absent in discrete
GNNs. By overcoming these obstacles, our findings provide new insights into the scalability and
generalization of GNDEs, laying a theoretical foundation for the development of robust and flexible
graph-based neural differential equation models capable of adapting to complex and diverse graph
structures.

R ELATED W ORK
Graphons and their associated convergent graph sequences have been foundational in mathematics
Borgs et al. (2008; 2012); Lovász (2012) and have gained significant traction in machine learning
due to their ability to represent large-scale networks as limit objects.
In networked dynamical systems, graphons enable the transition from finite network models to their
infinite or continuum counterparts. By deriving limits of large network dynamics, researchers gain
insights into complex phenomena such as chimera states Abrams & Strogatz (2004); Kuramoto &
Battogtokh (2002), multistability Girnyk et al. (2012); Wiley et al. (2006), and synchronization.
However, rigorously justifying these limits and ensuring that continuum models accurately repre-
sent the dynamics of the original systems poses significant challenges, often requiring non-trivial,
problem-specific efforts and is a very active line of research in applied math Paul & Trélat (2022).
Building on recent advancements in deriving limits for nonlinear evolution equations on graphs
Medvedev (2014); Paul & Trélat (2022) and transferability in Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) using the graphon framework Maskey et al. (2023), we present new transferability results for
Graph Convolutional Neural Differential Equations (GCNDEs). Specifically, we address both com-
plete weighted graphs sampled from a Lipschitz graphon Ruiz et al. (2020) and simple graphs gener-
ated from {0, 1}-valued graphons Ruiz et al. (2021a;b); Morency & Leus (2021). Using functional
calculus techniques inspired by Maskey et al. (2023) and generalizing them to the continuous-depth
setting through the introduction of new norms and stability theory of dynamical systems, we es-
tablish explicit convergence rates of O(1/n) for Lipschitz graphons and O(1/nc ) for {0, 1}-valued
graphons, where c depends on the box-counting dimension of the boundary of the support.
To maintain simplicity while preserving the core ideas of our approach, we adopt a standard GCN
architecture. However, our framework is flexible and can naturally extend to GNDEs with Lipschitz
filters as introduced in Maskey et al. (2023). In future work, we plan to explore further generaliza-
tions, including random generative models, to broaden the applicability of our method.

2   N OTATION AND P RELIMINARY C ONCEPTS
For a positive integer n, we let [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n} and Zn := {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}. We denote the
unit interval as I := [0, 1] and I 2 := I × I. For an interval J ⊆ I, by |J| we denote the length of J,
and we define the indicator function χJ : J → {0, 1} as

                                                    1, if u ∈ J,
                                       χJ (u) :=
                                                    0, otherwise.

The function space Lp (I; R1×F ) consists of all Lp -integrable vector valued functions mapping I
to R1×F , where 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞ and F denotes the number of features. For a vector-valued function


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G = [Gf : f ∈ [F ]] ∈ L∞ (I; R1×F ), we define the integral of G on I as
                           Z               Z
                              G(u)du :=       Gf (u)du : f ∈ [F ] .
                               I                I
We need a space for time-dependent functions. For Ω ⊂ [0, ∞) and 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞, the space
C 1 (Ω; Lp (I; R1×F )) is composed of functions X : I × Ω → R1×F satisfying

      1. For each t ∈ Ω, X(·, t) belongs to Lp (I; R1×F ).
      2. For each u ∈ I, X(u, ·) is continuously differentiable.

We remark that u ∈ I and t ∈ Ω represents the spatial and time variables, respectively, in the
function X.
Consider an undirected, simple graph Gn = ⟨Vn (Gn ), En (Gn )⟩, where Vn (Gn ) is the set of nodes
with cardinality |Vn (Gn )| = n, and En (Gn ) ⊆ Vn (Gn ) × Vn (Gn ) represents the set of edges. The
weight adjacency matrix is denoted as WGn : En (Gn ) → [0, 1], where [WGn ]ij = [WGn ]ji ̸= 0 if
(i, j) ∈ En (Gn ). A graph feature matrix Xn ∈ Rn×F assigns a feature vector [Xn ]i,: ∈ R1×F to
each node i ∈ Vn (Gn ).

2.1   G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS AND G RAPH N EURAL D IFFERENTIAL E QUATIONS

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), introduced by Scarselli et al. (2008), are foundational tools for
learning from graph-structured data. Graph Neural Differential Equations (GNDEs) extend GNNs
to continuous-time systems, modeling the evolution of node features as

                                 Ẋn (s) = FGn (s; Xn (s); θ(s)),
                                                                                            (1)
                                 Xn (0) = Gn ,
where Xn (s) ∈ Rn×F represents the node features at time s with initial node feature matrix
Gn ∈ Rn×F , and FGn is a GNN parameterized by trainable functions θ(s). GNDEs address the
limitations of fixed-depth GNNs, enabling them to capture complex temporal and structural patterns,
particularly in dynamic graph scenarios.
A distinctive feature of GNDEs is that their parameters, θ(s), are graph-agnostic, allowing for po-
tential transferability across different graph structures. This raises a key question: Under what
conditions can GNDEs trained on one graph be effectively transferred to another? Addressing this
question is crucial for leveraging models trained on moderately-sized graphs to perform well on
larger, yet structurally similar, graphs, and therefore alleviating the computational challenging for
large scale graphs.
We focus on Graph Convolutional Neural Differential Equations (GCNDEs) as a specific instance
of GNDEs. Our aim is to establish a rigorous mathematical framework for understanding and im-
proving the transferability of these models. While we concentrate on this particular architecture, the
principles and techniques we develop are expected to extend to broader GNDE architectures, which
we leave for future research.

Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) and Graph Convolutional Neural Differential Equa-
tions (GCNDEs) One of the most prevalent GNN architectures is the GCNs, introduced by Bruna
et al. (2013) and popularized by Kipf & Welling (2016). GCNs excel at capturing local graph struc-
tures by extending traditional convolutions to graphs using spectral methods, effectively aggregating
information from neighboring nodes. This capability makes GCNs particularly successful in tasks
such as node classification and link prediction.
We adopt the formulation of GCNs using a graph shift operator (GSO) Sn , which generalizes prior
approaches by encompassing them as special cases Ruiz et al. (2020). A GSO Sn is a matrix that
encodes the graph structure, where [Sn ]ij = [Sn ]ji ̸= 0 if i = j or (i, j) ∈ En (Gn ). Common
choices for Sn include the (weighted) adjacency matrix or the graph Laplacian. The graph convolu-
tion operation for a graph signal x ∈ Rn is defined by
                                             K−1
                                             X
                                h ∗Sn x :=          hk Snk x = h(Sn )x,
                                             k=0


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                PK−1
where h(x) := k=0 hk xk , x ∈ R, is a polynomial determined by the filter h = [hk : k ∈ ZK ].
With the notation of graph convolutional operation, the output of ℓ-th layer of a GCN is given by
                                  F
                                                           !
                                 X     fg
                 [Xn,ℓ ]:,f := ρ     hℓ ∗Sn [Xn,ℓ−1 ]:,g , f ∈ [F ], ℓ ∈ [L],                    (2)
                                   g=1

where Xn,0 := Gn ∈ R     n×F
                            is the input feature matrix and ρ is a nonlinear activation function. The
output of this L-layer GCN can be compactly represented as
                                    Xn,L := Φ(Sn ; Xn,0 ; H),                                      (3)
where the tensor Hf,g,ℓ,: := hfℓ g ∈ RK contains the trainable filter coefficients for all layers.
Graph Convolutional Neural Differential Equations (GCNDEs) further refine GNDEs by evolving
node features according to

                              Ẋn (s) = Φ(Sn ; Xn (s); H(s)),
                                                                                        (4)
                              Xn (0) = Gn ∈ Rn×F ,
where the parameters in H(s) ∈ RF ×F ×L×K are independent of the graph size n. This indepen-
dence enables the model to be transferred to new graphs by only adjusting Sn once trained.

2.2   G RAPHON AS G RAPH L IMITS AND G RAPHON C ONVOLUTIONAL N EURAL N ETWORKS

Recent advances in the transferability of GCNs utilize graphons to model the continuous limit of
large graphs. To build on this, we first review the key theoretical concepts that form the foundation
of our approach.
A graphon is a bounded, symmetric, and measurable function W : I 2 → I, serving as a continuous
generalization of an adjacency matrix. In this setting, nodes i and j are represented by points
ui , uj ∈ I, with the edge weight between them given by W(ui , uj ).
To quantify the convergence of a graph sequence {Gn }, we use graph motifs F, which are arbitrary,
unweighted, and undirected graphs. A homomorphism from F = ⟨V (F), E(F)⟩ to a graph G =
⟨V (G), E(G)⟩ is a mapping ϕ : V (F) → V (G) that preserves adjacency, meaning (i, j) ∈ E(F)
implies (ϕ(i), ϕ(j)) ∈ E(G). The homomorphism density is defined as
                                                hom(F, G)
                                    t(F, G) :=                 ,
                                               |V (G)||V (F )|
which measures the relative frequency of F appearing in G and quantifies structural similarity be-
tween graphs.
Homomorphisms from graphs to graphons are defined similarly to those between graphs. Let
t(F, W) denote the density of homomorphisms from a graph F into a graphon W. We say that
a sequence of graphs {Gn } converges to the graphon W if, for all finite, unweighted, and undirected
graphs F,
                                    lim t(F, Gn ) = t(F, W).
                                      n→∞

Every graphon is the limit object of some convergent graph sequence, and, conversely, every con-
vergent graph sequence converges to a unique graphon Lovász (2012). Thus, a graphon repre-
sents an entire class of graphs that, regardless of their size, belong to the same “graphon family.”
Graphons effectively capture the asymptotic behavior of dense graph sequences {Gn }, providing a
robust framework for analyzing large-scale networks. One can refer to more details in A.2.

Graphon Convolutional Neural Networks (Graphon-CNNs) Extending the concept of graph
convergence, a sequence of GNNs can converge to a graphon neural network, which is a limit
architecture defined by layers of graphon convolutions and nonlinear activations. In this framework,
the continuous analogue of graph convolution operators, known as graphon convolution operators,
is derived in Ruiz et al. (2020; 2021a). For a given graphon W : I 2 → I, the graphon convolution
operator, denoted by TW , acting on a feature function x ∈ L2 (I; R) is defined as
                                          Z 1
                              TW x(v) :=      W(u, v)x(u) du, v ∈ I.
                                            0



                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This integral operator is self-adjoint and Hilbert-Schmidt, with eigenvalues lying on [−1, 1] and
accumulating around zero. For a filter h = [h0 , . . . , hK−1 ]⊤ , by introducing a polynomial h(x) :=
PK−1
  k=0 hk x , x ∈ R, the graphon convolution is defined by
           k

                                                 K−1
                                                 X
                                                           k
                                     h ∗W x :=         hk TW x = h(TW )x,
                                                 k=0
where
                               Z 1
                                              k−1
                  k
                 TW x(v) :=          W(u, v)(TW   x)(u) du,        v ∈ I,          0
                                                                              and TW := I,
                                 0
where I is the identity operator. Let X0 ∈ L∞ (I; R1×F ) represent the input feature function. The
ℓ-th layer of a Graphon-CNN is given by:
                                   F
                                                      !
                                   X    fg
                     [Xℓ ]:,f = ρ     hℓ ∗W [Xℓ−1 ]:,g , f ∈ [F ], ℓ ∈ [L],                     (5)
                                       g=1
where ρ denotes a nonlinear activation function. The output is represented as:
                                       XL := Φ(W; X0 ; H),
where H contains the trainable filter parameters as those in 3.

3    G RAPHON C ONVOLUTIONAL N EURAL D IFFERENTIAL E QUATIONS
Building on the transition from GCNs to Graphon Convolutional Neural Networks, we extend the
concept of GCNDEs to the continuous domain by introducing Graphon Convolutional Neural Dif-
ferential Equations (Graphon-CNDEs). The system is defined by

                              ∂
                                X(u, t) = Φ(W; X(u, t); H(t)),
                             ∂t                                                                               (6)
                                X(u, 0) = G(u) ∈ L∞ (I; R1×F ),
where Φ denotes the graphon convolutional operator parameterized by
                              n                                           o
                       H(t) = [hfℓ g ]k (t) : f, g ∈ [F ], ℓ ∈ [L], k ∈ ZK ,
and W represents the graphon characterizing the continuous structure of the underlying graph se-
quence. The initial graphon feature function G specifies the node features at time t = 0. For each
t > 0, by hfℓ,tg we denote the polynomial determined by the filter hfℓ g (t), for all f, g ∈ [F ] and
ℓ ∈ [L], that is
                                          X   fg
                                          K−1
                            hfℓ,tg (x) :=     [hℓ ]k (t) xk , x ∈ R.                               (7)
                                              k=0

To ensure the validity of our newly introduced Graphon-CNDEs, it is crucial to establish their well-
posedness. This guarantees the existence, uniqueness, and continuous dependence of solutions on
the initial conditions. Notably, we achieve this under mild assumptions that require only measure-
theoretic properties of the graphons, without imposing any topological regularity conditions. This
flexibility allows our results to be applicable in very general spaces including generalizations to
atom-free standard probability space.

       • AS0. The convolutional filters are A0 -Lipschitz continuous about t, namely, for each f, g ∈
          [F ], ℓ ∈ [L], k ∈ ZK , there holds [hfℓ g ]k (t1 ) − [hfℓ g ]k (t2 ) ≤ A0 |t1 − t2 |, for all t1 , t2 ∈
          R.
       • AS1. The activation function ρ is normalized Lipschitz, that is, |ρ(x) − ρ(y)| ≤ |x − y|,
          x, y ∈ R and ρ(0) = 0.
Theorem 3.1 (Well-posedness, proof in Section A.4). Suppose that AS0 and AS1 hold. If W ∈
L∞ (I 2 ; R) and G ∈ L∞ (I; R1×F ), then for any T > 0, there exists a unique solution of IVP 6,
such that X ∈ C 1 ([0, T ]; L∞ (I; R1×F )).


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   G RAPHON -CNDE S AS D ETERMINISTIC G ENERATIVE M ODELS FOR GCNDE S

By comparing the GCDE 4 and the Graphon-CNDE 6, we observe that both can share the same
set of parameters H. For graphs derived from a common graphon family, this implies that GCDEs
can be viewed as specific instances of Graphon-CNDEs. Consequently, Graphon-CNDEs serve as
deterministic generative models for GCNDEs, offering insights into the structural properties of these
networks.
We focus on two deterministic families of discrete convergent (as detailed in SubSection 2.2) graph
models, Model I for complete weighted graphs and Model II for simple unweighted graphs, con-
structed from a graphon W. Although deterministic, these models provide a foundation for under-
standing more complex random graph models and their behavior in machine learning tasks such as
node classification, link prediction, and graph signal processing.
                                                                                 (n)
We split the unit interval I into n subintervals by setting ui := i−1n and Ii     := [ui , ui+1 ) for
i ∈ [n]. In the following, we introduce different ways to model a sequence of graphs {Gn }n∈N with
node features generated from the graphon W and a graphon feature function G ∈ L2 (I; R1×F ).

Model I (Complete Graphs with weighted adjacent matrix) Suppose that W is a graphon and
G is a graphon feature function. For each n ∈ N, a complete graph Gn on n nodes is defined by

                                       Gn := ⟨[n], [n] × [n]⟩,

where we construct the weighted adjacency matrix WGn ∈ Rn×n by direct sampling on the graphon
W over the mesh grid as
                                [WGn ]ij := W(ui , uj ),        i, j ∈ [n].                       (8)

This model is particularly useful in scenarios where a fully connected network structure is required,
such as in dense communication networks or certain types of recommendation systems, where un-
derstanding interactions between all nodes is crucial.
Consistently, the corresponding node feature matrix Gn ∈ Rn×n on Gn is generated by sampling
on the graphon feature function G as

                                    [Gn ]i,: := G(ui ),     i ∈ [n].                              (9)

Model II (Simple Graphs with binary adjacent matrix) Suppose that W : I 2 → {0, 1} is a
graphon for simple graphs having binary weights and G is a graphon feature function. We denote
by W+ the support set of W, that is W+ := {(u, v) : W(u, v) = 1}. For each n ∈ N, we construct
a simple graph Gn as
                                          Gn := ⟨[n], E(Gn )⟩,
where the edge set E(Gn ) is defined by
                                                          (n)      (n)
                     E(Gn ) := {(i, j) ∈ [n] × [n] : (Ii        × Ij ) ∩ W+ ̸= ∅},

and the adjacent matrix WGn is defined by

                                                  1, if (i, j) ∈ E(Gn ),
                               [WGn ]ij :=                                                      (10)
                                                  0, otherwise.

We remark that here [WGn ]ij represents the binary connectivity between nodes i and j of the graph
Gn . This model is well-suited for generating network structures with binary relations, which are
prevalent in social networks, citation graphs, and biological networks. The corresponding node
feature matrix Gn for graph Gn is defined, with the help of graphon feature function G, by
                                             Z
                                          1
                           [Gn ]i,: := (n)         G(u) du, i ∈ [n].                          (11)
                                       |Ii | Ii(n)

                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Given a graph Gn constructed under either model I or II, we define GSO as Sn = n1 WGn , where
the scaling factor n1 is necessary for convergence. Then the corresponding graph neural differential
equation is formulated as
                                    ∂
                                       Xn (t) = Φ(Sn ; Xn (t); H(t)),
                                    ∂t                                                             (12)
                                      Xn (0) = Gn
where Gn is the corresponding discrete node features of G over Gn (cf.9 or 11).
As n increases, both the matrix WGn and the initial condition Gn converge to the graphon W and
the continuous initial condition G, respectively. Consequently, we expect the solution Xn of the
discrete model in 12 to converge towards the solution X of the continuum model in 6. The primary
research questions we address are as follows:

      (A) Accuracy of Continuum Approximation: Does the continuum model 6 provide an accu-
          rate approximation of the dynamics of the discrete model 12 for large finite n? If so, what
          is the precise sense in which the solutions of the integro-differential equation approximate
          those of the discrete model?
      (B) Applicability Across Network Topologies: To what extent is the continuum limit appli-
          cable across various network topologies? Can it be generalized beyond specific structures
          like k-nearest-neighbor graphs on a ring, extending to more complex and realistic networks
          such as small-world or scale-free graphs?

Direct comparison between the continuous output X(·, t), defined over the interval I, and the discrete
output Xn (t), defined over the index set [n], is challenging. To bridge this gap, we introduce a
Graphon-NDE induced by a GNDE.
For n ∈ N, with a discrete adjacency matrix WGn , and a discrete node feature matrix Gn being
given, we define a graphon Wn : I 2 → R (corresponding to WGn ) by
                                   X
                     Wn (u, v) :=     [WGn ]ij χI (n) (u)χI (n) (v), u, v ∈ I,           (13)
                                                        i       j
                                      i,j∈[n]

and a graphon feature function Gn : I → R (corresponding to Gn ) by
                                       X
                             Gn (u) :=    [Gn ]i,: χI (n) (u), u ∈ I.                              (14)
                                                            i
                                            i∈[n]

Then the induced Graphon-NDE is formulated as
                                  ∂
                                     Xn (u, t) = Φ(Wn ; Xn (u, t); H(t)),
                                  ∂t                                                               (15)
                                    Xn (u, 0) = Gn (u),
where Φ(Wn ; Xn (u, t); H(t)) denotes the graphon convolutional neural network parameterized by
H(t) over the induced graphon Wn , and Gn is the graphon representation of initial node feature
matrix Gn . This construction embeds the dynamics of the discrete graph domain 12 “equivalently”
into the continuous graphon domain 15, and enables a systematic comparison between GNDEs and
their continuous counterparts, facilitating the analysis of their convergence and scalability.
We proceed to consider the quality of approximation of the solution of 15 to the solution of 6 as
n → ∞, for both Models I and II. We list some mild assumptions, partially used for Models I and
II, on convolutional filters H, graphon W and initial graphon feature function G.

        • AS2. For each t ≥ 0, f, g ∈ [F ] and ℓ ∈ [L], the function hfℓ,tg is Lipschitz continuous with
          Lipschitz constant Lip(hfℓ,tg (·)).
        • AS3. The graphon W is A1 -Lipschitz, that is, |W(u2 , v2 ) − W(u1 , v1 )| ≤ A1 (|u2 − u1 | +
          |v2 − v1 |), for all v1 , v2 , u1 , u2 ∈ I.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • AS4. The initial graphon feature function G = [Gf : f ∈ [F ]] ∈ L∞ (I; R1×F ) is A2 -
         Lipschitz, that is, for each f ∈ [K], |Gf (u2 ) − Gf (u1 )| ≤ A2 |u2 − u1 |, for all u1 , u2 ∈ I.

Below, we present the linear convergence rate of solutions for Model I.
Theorem 3.2 (proof in A.6). Suppose that AS0-AS4 hold. Let Wn and Gn be defined by 13 and 14
with coefficients 8 and 9, respectively. Let X and Xn denote the solutions of 6 and 15, respectively.
Then it holds that
                                                                  C
                                 ∥X − Xn ∥C([0,T ];L2 (I;R1×F )) ≤ ,                            (16)
                                                                  n
where C is constant independent of n and only depends on H, G, W, A1 , A2 and T with explicit
formula provided in 56.

The proof of Theorem 3.2 requires only Lipschitz continuity on filters, unlike the highly regular√
filters in Ruiz et al. (2020); Keriven et al. (2020), and improves the convergence rate from O(1/ n)
in Ruiz et al. (2020) to O(1/n). This result also extends Theorem 5.4 of Maskey et al. (2023) to
GNDEs with a continuous-depth setting.
We mention that the graphons for simple graphs are discontinuous, so in general, AS1 is not satisfied
for Model II. We tackle this problem by employing the concept of upper box-counting dimension to
characterize the complexity of the boundary of W+ .
Theorem 3.3 (proof in A.6). Suppose that AS0-AS2 and AS4 hold. Let W : I 2 → {0, 1} be a
graphon for simple graphs with b := dimB (∂W+ ) ∈ [1, 2). Let Wn and Gn be defined by 13
and 14 with coefficients 10 and 11, respectively. Let X and Xn denote the solutions of 6 and 15,
respectively. Then for any ϵ > 0, there exists a positive integer NW (depending on W) such that
when n > NW , it holds that
                                                                       e
                                                                       C
                                 ∥X − Xn ∥C([0,T ];L2 (I;R1×F )) ≤      b+ϵ   ,                      (17)
                                                                     n1− 2
where Ce is a constant independent of n, and only depends on H, G, W, A2 and T with explicit
formula provided in 64.

Theorem 3.3 deals with irregular graphons that are merely measurable, offering convergence rates
not presented in prior work Ruiz et al. (2021b;a); Morency & Leus (2021); Maskey et al. (2023).
In summary, Theorems 3.2 and 3.3 address problem (A) in Section 3.2 by providing explicit ap-
proximation bounds within the relevant function space, and tackle problem (B) by imposing purely
measure-theoretic or mild regularity assumptions, thereby covering a broad family of graphs. As
a byproduct, one can derive transferability bounds for GNDEs from our main theorems using the
triangle inequality: for graphs of sizes n1 and n2 sampled as in Model I, the bound is O( n11 + n12 ),
and for Model II, O( n1c + n1c ) (where c := 1 − b+ϵ
                                                  2 as in 17). Notably, for Model I, existing bounds
                       1     2
                                                  C
for discrete GCNs with L̃ layers behave as O( nL̃ ), with CL̃ → ∞ as L̃ → ∞, highlighting the need
for a new analytic framework for GCNDEs, even though they can be viewed as continuous limits of
residual GCNs.

4   N UMERICAL R ESULTS
In the following sections, we illustrate the GNDEs transferability results via several examples with
additional set-up and computation details provided in Appendix A.1

Transfer Learning of Nonlinear Heat Equations on Complete Weighted Graphs We investi-
gate the transferability of GNDEs in modeling nonlinear heat equation dynamics Medvedev (2014)
across graphs of varying sizes. We train GNDE models on graphs Gn of different sizes, with
n ∈ {20, 40, 60, 80, 100} nodes, all sampled from the same underlying graphon. The learned pa-
rameters are transferred to predict the same type of dynamics on a larger graph with N = 500 nodes.
The GNDE, parameterized by a GCN (L = 2, K = 2, F = 1) is trained using an MSE loss function
and optimized with ADAM (lr = 0.001, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999) based on a single training trajectory
of the nonlinear heat equation defined over Gn (see equation 18).


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We evaluate transferability by measuring the test ℓ2 error between the true dynamics YN (1) and
the GNDE-predicted dynamics XN,n (1) on GN , where the parameters were learned on Gn . The
               ∥Y (1)−XN,n (1)∥2
relative error N ∥YN (1)∥   2
                                  is shown in Figure 3 (a). The errors are small, on the order of
O(10−2 ), and exhibit a general decay with increasing graph sizes. The fluctuations in error can
be attributed to training challenges for larger number of nodes, but given the two-digit accuracy of
the theoretical bound (O(1/500)), these variations are expected. These findings demonstrate that
GNDEs can learn complex physical dynamics on smaller graphs (even with n = 20) and effectively
transfer this knowledge to larger systems (N = 500, see Figure 2), enabling scalable modeling of
physical processes on graphs.

                       n = 20                                       N = 500


             True                Predicted                 True                Predicted

Figure 2: Top: Initial conditions for the nonlinear heat equation with n = 20 and N = 500 nodes,
respectively. Bottom: True and trained GNDE prediction comparison of heat distribution at t = 1
for the given graph. Bottom left model is transferred to bottom right to make N = 500 prediction.


Figure 3: Left: GNDE relative prediction errors for nonlinear heat equations on a complete graph
with 500 nodes. Right: Log-log convergence plot for transferability bounds of Checkerboard
graphons.


Transferability of GCNDEs on {0, 1}-valued Checkerboard Graphons with Varying Checker-
board Sizes Theorem 3.3 demonstrates that the convergence rate of GNDEs is influenced by the
box-counting dimension of the boundary of the {0, 1}-valued graphon support. While this upper
bound provides valuable insights, it may not be optimal, and the necessity of this condition remains
an open question. To empirically investigate, we study convergence rates on subgraphs derived from
checkerboard graphons, where increasing checkerboard sizes correspond to higher box-counting di-
mensions. We generate diverse, smooth initial feature vectors using random Fourier series. For each
checkerboard size, experiments are conducted on subgraphs with varying node counts, generated


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


via Model II, ensuring consistent GDE parameter transfer from the original graph. The relative ℓ2
norm error between the GNDE outputs on the original and subgraphs is computed, and results are
averaged over multiple trials to account for variability in initial conditions. At t = 0, the expected
convergence rate of initial conditions sampled from subgraphs is O(1/n). As shown in the log-
log convergence plots for the solution discrepancy at t = 1 ((see Figure 3 (b))), the error decay
rate decreases with increasing box-counting dimensions, supporting our theoretical predictions and
highlighting the influence of structural complexity on transferability.

Transferability of GCNDEs on the Cora Citation Network We explore the transferability of
GNDEs in node classification tasks. The Cora citation network is a benchmark dataset of 2708
scientific publications each described by 1433 features. Publications are classified into 7 categories.
We use the standard data split Kipf & Welling (2016) with 140 training, 500 validation, and 1000
testing nodes. We train GNDE models on random subgraphs of various sizes. We consider subgraphs
with 10 − 50% of the original nodes. For each subgraph, we create a corresponding model which
consists of a linear head mapping to an input dimension of 16, a GNDE parameterized by a GCN
(L = 2, K = 2, F = 16), and a linear readout layer mapping to the 7 class labels for the final
classification task. We train with cross-entropy loss using ADAM optimization (lr = 0.001, β1 =
0.9, β2 = 0.999) on the subgraph. Training takes place over 1000 epochs. To avoid overfitting,
representative models were selected as the lowest validation loss model after an initial convergence
period of 200 epochs. Transfer then occurs to the full graph and test set accuracy for the full dataset
is recorded. Ten random subgraphs were tested for each proportion of nodes, and the average results
are reported in Table 1. As we train on a larger proportion of nodes, we gain accuracy on full graph
prediction.

                               Table 1: Cora Average Test Accuracies

     Nodes in Subgraph           10%           20%           30%           40%           50%

     Subgraph Accuracy        25.0 ± 5.7    31.3 ± 5.4    30.5 ± 4.6    31.5 ± 3.4    33.8 ± 3.3
     Full Graph Accuracy      26.5 ± 7.4    29.1 ± 6.0    30.0 ± 4.5    31.5 ± 3.1    34.0 ± 2.3



C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

Transferability involves defining models that generate graphs and establishing metrics to measure
discrepancies when a fixed GNN is applied to graphs of different sizes, which can be viewed as a
notion of generalization. We introduced Graphon-NDEs as a novel framework integrating dynam-
ical systems theory with the study of transferability in GNNs to analyze transferability of GNDEs.
Our approach bridges these fields, enabling Graphon-NDEs to serve as generative models for GN-
DEs while providing theoretical guarantees on approximation accuracy. The framework can also
incorporate other approaches analyzing the transferability of GCNs, such as the stability method
Gama et al. (2020); Kenlay et al. (2021a;b) and sampling techniques Keriven et al. (2020); Levie
et al. (2021), each offering unique perspectives. While we focused on deterministic graphs, this
work lays the foundation for future research on stochastic graphs and more complex network struc-
tures, enhancing the robustness and generalization of GNDEs across diverse settings. We believe
our framework provides a promising starting point for future work integrating dynamical systems
and machine learning.


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Reproducible code for all experiments will be fully open-sourced upon acceptance.


R EFERENCES
Daniel M Abrams and Steven H Strogatz. Chimera states for coupled oscillators. Physical review
  letters, 93(17):174102, 2004.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Christian Borgs, Jennifer T Chayes, László Lovász, Vera T Sós, and Katalin Vesztergombi. Conver-
  gent sequences of dense graphs i: Subgraph frequencies, metric properties and testing. Advances
  in Mathematics, 219(6):1801–1851, 2008.
Christian Borgs, Jennifer T Chayes, László Lovász, Vera T Sós, and Katalin Vesztergombi. Conver-
  gent sequences of dense graphs ii. multiway cuts and statistical physics. Annals of Mathematics,
  pp. 151–219, 2012.
Joan Bruna, Wojciech Zaremba, Arthur Szlam, and Yann LeCun. Spectral networks and locally
  connected networks on graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6203, 2013.
Lanlan Chen, Kai Wu, Jian Lou, and Jing Liu. Signed graph neural ordinary differential equation
  for modeling continuous-time dynamics. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 8292–8301, 2024.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
  differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Jeongwhan Choi, Hwangyong Choi, Jeehyun Hwang, and Noseong Park. Graph neural controlled
  differential equations for traffic forecasting. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 36, pp. 6367–6374, 2022.
J. B. Conway. A Course in Functional Analysis. 2nd Edition. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1990.
J.R. Dormand and P.J. Prince. A family of embedded runge-kutta formulae. Journal of Computa-
   tional and Applied Mathematics, 6(1):19–26, 1980.
Sever Silvestru Dragomir. Some gronwall type inequalities and applications. Science Direct Working
  Paper, (S1574-0358):04, 2003.
Kenneth Falconer. Fractal geometry: mathematical foundations and applications. John Wiley &
  Sons, 2014.
Fernando Gama, Joan Bruna, and Alejandro Ribeiro. Stability properties of graph neural networks.
  IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 68:5680–5695, 2020.
Taras Girnyk, Martin Hasler, and Yuriy Maistrenko. Multistability of twisted states in non-locally
  coupled kuramoto-type models. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 22
  (1), 2012.
Henry Kenlay, Dorina Thano, and Xiaowen Dong. On the stability of graph convolutional neural net-
  works under edge rewiring. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 8513–8517. IEEE, 2021a.
Henry Kenlay, Dorina Thanou, and Xiaowen Dong. Interpretable stability bounds for spectral graph
  filters. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5388–5397. PMLR, 2021b.
Nicolas Keriven, Alberto Bietti, and Samuel Vaiter. Convergence and stability of graph convolu-
  tional networks on large random graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:21512–21523, 2020.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
  works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
Yoshiki Kuramoto and Dorjsuren Battogtokh. Coexistence of coherence and incoherence in nonlo-
  cally coupled phase oscillators. arXiv preprint cond-mat/0210694, 2002.
Ron Levie, Wei Huang, Lorenzo Bucci, Michael Bronstein, and Gitta Kutyniok. Transferability of
  spectral graph convolutional neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(272):
  1–59, 2021.
László Lovász. Large networks and graph limits, volume 60. American Mathematical Soc., 2012.
Sohir Maskey, Ron Levie, and Gitta Kutyniok. Transferability of graph neural networks: an extended
  graphon approach. Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis, 63:48–83, 2023.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Georgi S Medvedev. The nonlinear heat equation on dense graphs and graph limits. SIAM Journal
  on Mathematical Analysis, 46(4):2743–2766, 2014.
Matthew W Morency and Geert Leus. Graphon filters: Graph signal processing in the limit. IEEE
 Transactions on Signal Processing, 69:1740–1754, 2021.
Thierry Paul and Emmanuel Trélat. From microscopic to macroscopic scale equations: mean field,
  hydrodynamic and graph limits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.08832, 2022.

AI Perov. K voprosu o strukture integral’noı voronki. Nauc. Dokl. Vysšeıi Školy. Ser FMN, 2, 1959.
Michael Poli, Stefano Massaroli, Junyoung Park, Atsushi Yamashita, Hajime Asama, and Jinkyoo
 Park. Graph neural ordinary differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.07532, 2019.
Denis Potapov and Fedor Sukochev. Operator-lipschitz functions in schatten–von neumann classes.
  2011.
Luana Ruiz, Luiz Chamon, and Alejandro Ribeiro. Graphon neural networks and the transferability
  of graph neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1702–1712,
  2020.
Luana Ruiz, Luiz FO Chamon, and Alejandro Ribeiro. Graphon signal processing. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Signal Processing, 69:4961–4976, 2021a.
Luana Ruiz, Luiz FO Chamon, and Alejandro Ribeiro. Graphon filters: Signal processing in very
  large graphs. In 2020 28th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), pp. 1050–1054.
  IEEE, 2021b.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini.
  The graph neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 20(1):61–80, 2008.
Joachim Weidmann. Linear operators in Hilbert spaces, volume 68. Springer Science & Business
  Media, 2012.
Dirk Werner. Funktionalanalysis. Springer-Verlag, 2006.
Daniel A Wiley, Steven H Strogatz, and Michelle Girvan. The size of the sync basin. Chaos: An
  Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science, 16(1), 2006.
Ke Xu, Yuanjie Zhu, Weizhi Zhang, and S Yu Philip. Graph neural ordinary differential equations-
  based method for collaborative filtering. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining
  (ICDM), pp. 1445–1450. IEEE, 2023.


                                                12
