Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I NTERPRETING AND E DITING V ISION -L ANGUAGE
R EPRESENTATIONS TO M ITIGATE H ALLUCINATIONS
 Nick Jiang∗ , Anish Kachinthaya∗ , Suzie Petyrk† ,Yossi Gandelsman†
 University of California, Berkeley
 {nickj,anishk,spetryk,yossi gandelsman}@berkeley.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

          We investigate the internal representations of vision-language models (VLMs)
          to address hallucinations, a persistent challenge despite advances in model size
          and training. We project VLMs’ internal image representations to their language
          vocabulary and observe more confident output probabilities on real objects than
          hallucinated objects. We additionally use these output probabilities to spatially
          localize real objects. Building on this approach, we introduce a knowledge erasure
          algorithm that removes hallucinations by linearly orthogonalizing image features
          with respect to hallucinated object features. We show that targeted edits to a
          model’s latent representations can reduce hallucinations by up to 25.7% on the
          COCO2014 dataset while preserving performance. Our findings demonstrate how
          a deeper understanding of VLMs’ latent representations can enhance reliability and
          enable novel capabilities, such as zero-shot segmentation.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have recently emerged as powerful tools for understanding images
via text (Dai et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a). They have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across
multimodal tasks such as image captioning (Li et al., 2023a), visual question answering (Ye et al.,
2023), and complex multimodal reasoning (Bai et al., 2023). Despite their capabilities, VLMs tend to
hallucinate content that does not appear in the images (Ji et al., 2023), which poses serious concerns
for the reliability of these models in real-world applications (Hu et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2024).
Widespread belief has been that scaling to larger models and more training data will naturally mitigate
hallucinations. However, recent studies have shown that hallucinations persist even in larger and more
advanced models (Rohrbach et al., 2019; Li et al., 2023b), suggesting that this issue cannot be solved
by scale alone. Current methods reduce hallucinations by applying external interventions (e.g. object
detectors; Yin et al. (2023)) or additional model fine-tuning (e.g. on hallucination examples; Zhou
et al. (2024); Zhang et al. (2024a)). Nevertheless, these methods often struggle to distinguish between
subtle hallucinations and existing details, requiring new models or updated model parameters.
In this paper, we aim to introduce fine-grained edits directly to the image latent representations
of VLMs to reduce hallucinations without hindering their performance, an approach that has had
some success in large language models (Zhang et al., 2024b; von Rutte et al., 2024). To edit
the latent representations of VLMs, we first explain their role via text. We employ the logit lens
technique (nostalgebraist, 2020) to directly interpret the spatial VLM image representations with
VLM text vocabulary. Surprisingly, the characteristics of these image representations are different
for real objects that appear in the image and objects that are hallucinated. Moreover, the logit lens
enables spatially localizing objects within the input image.
Relying on the ability to detect hallucinated objects, we edit them out by intervening in their internal
representations. We introduce a knowledge erasure algorithm, P ROJECTAWAY, to target and remove
objects by linearly orthogonalizing image features with respect to the text features of target objects.
We find that P ROJECTAWAY can erase both real and hallucinated objects with high rates of removal.
    ∗
      Equal contribution as first authors.
    †
      Equal contribution as last authors.
    1
      Code: https://github.com/nickjiang2378/vl-interp


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       (a) Vision-Language Model           (b) Project Latents to                    (c) Object Removal
                                    Cat and dog<end>            Vocabulary                                            Cat <end>
Language Model                                                       44.96% couch


                                                                                    Language Model
                                                                     41.01% table
                 Layer 4
                                                                     …
                 Layer 3

                                                                     60.32% couch
                 Layer 2
                                                                     36.11% table
                 Layer 1                                             …

                                                                     94.14% cat
                                         Cat and dog                 2.01% bear                                              Cat
                                                                     …                                                         edit
                                                                                    Edit and replace
 Input image


                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                    image representations:                     edit
                                  WU Unembedding Matrix              63.63% cat                                          -
                                                                     32.86% dog                                                edit
                                                                                                     “dogˮ text          -
                                  Latent Representations             …                                                         edit
                                                                                                     representation      -


Figure 1: Interpreting VLM internal image representations. (a) Given a VLM, (b) we unembed
the latent representations from image embeddings to the vocabulary and classify hallucinations. We
remove hallucinations by (c) linearly editing them out of the latent representations.


We use our interpretation and editing approach for three tasks. First, we utilize the logit lens on image
features to detect hallucinations in the image. We find that it improves mAP by 22.45% and 47.17%
in two VLMs. Then, we combine our editing and detection method to erase hallucinations from the
VLM’s internal representations, reducing hallucinations up to 25.7% on standard benchmarks, while
preserving accuracy in image captioning. Finally, we use the logit lens to localize objects in the
image features. We find that our spatial mapping provides comparable performance to state-of-the-art
zero-shot segmentation methods. Our results indicate that understanding the internal representations
of VLMs can be achieved and used to repair model hallucinations and introduce new capabilities.


2                  R ELATED WORK

2.1                  I NTERPRETING L ATENT R EPRESENTATIONS IN L ANGUAGE M ODELS

Interpreting the inner workings of large language models enables fine-grained improvement of the
language model behavior. Recent work involves utilizing the model’s attention maps (Kobayashi
et al., 2020; Chefer et al., 2021), activation patterns (Conmy et al., 2023; Meng et al., 2023; Bronzini
et al., 2024), and latent representations (Ghandeharioun et al., 2024; Cunningham et al., 2023; Bricken
et al., 2023) to understand their behavior with applications such as early exiting (Halawi et al., 2024)
and editing or erasing the model’s knowledge (Dai et al., 2022; Ravfogel et al., 2024). One class of
methods probe the VLMs knowledge with linear classifiers (Hewitt & Manning, 2019; Tucker et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2024; Belrose et al., 2023). The logit lens method (nostalgebraist, 2020), which we
will use in our analysis, finds the output distribution over the vocabulary of the language model at
intermediate layers with the model’s own unembedding matrix. We apply this approach to VLMs to
interpret the model’s understanding of visual information in the model’s textual vocabulary.

2.2                  I NTERPRETING LATENT REPRESENTATIONS IN V ISION M ODELS

Understanding the internal dynamics of vision models is critical for ensuring safety and reliability in
multimodal systems. Early works in this area focused on producing saliency maps (Petsiuk et al.,
2018), analyzing individual neurons (Bau et al., 2020; 2019; Dravid et al., 2023), and training networks
to map latent representations to concepts (Esser et al., 2020). With the emergence of transformer-
based vision models like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), recent methods explain latent tokens (Chen
et al., 2023) and the roles of attention heads and neurons with natural language (Gandelsman et al.,
2024b;a). Few works currently interpret the internal computation of VLMs: Palit et al. (2023) develop
a neuron causal tracing tool; Schwettmann et al. (2023) identifies multi-modal neurons; and Huo
et al. (2024) ablates domain-specific neurons to improve vision question-answering. Whereas past


                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


papers have primarily studied the mechanisms (e.g. neuron analysis) that drive VLMs, we focus on
interpreting and editing their latent representations for real-world applicability.

2.3   D ETECTING AND REDUCING VLM HALLUCINATIONS

While VLM performances on image caption and visual question answering are continually improving,
they continue to hallucinate facts that are not supported by the visual input. Existing methods for
detecting hallucinations in language models during inference utilize latent representations (He et al.,
2024; Su et al., 2024), activations (Chen et al., 2024), and output logit values (Varshney et al.,
2023). SAPLMA (Azaria & Mitchell, 2023) trains a hallucination classifier on the internal latent
representations. LUNA (Song et al., 2024) learns a transition function on latent representations
and identifies abnormal transitions. Varshney et al. (2023) uses the final layer logits to score the
model’s confidence in an entity or keyword and intervenes by instructing the model to either repair
or remove the hallucinated information. Among VLMs, LURE (Zhou et al., 2024) is a fine-tuned
revisor model to detect and reduce hallucinations. OPERA (Huang et al., 2024) uses the model’s
internal attention weights to detect and suppress patterns that align with the beginning of hallucinated
phrases. In contrast to these methods, we leverage the internal image representations in the VLMs for
hallucination reduction and for zero-shot segmentation.

3     E XTRACTING K NOWLEDGE FROM VLM S

We start by introducing VLMs and the general framework of their architectures in most recent work.
We then describe our approach for decoding the features in intermediate image representations in
VLMs into text, and apply it to two types of VLMs. Surprisingly, this approach effectively probes the
knowledge about objects present in images and can localize objects within the image.

3.1   P RELIMINARIES

Vision-Language Models. The architecture of recent state-of-the-art VLMs for text generation
typically involves three main components: a vision encoder to process image inputs, a mapping
network to map image features to image embeddings, and an autoregressive language model to
process the image embeddings and prompt embeddings to generate text. We focus on two recent
state-of-the-art VLMs: LLaVA 1.5 (Liu et al., 2024a) and InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2023). We use
7B versions of both these models. LLaVA utilizes a frozen CLIP vision encoder and an MLP as
a mapping network to project the vision encoder outputs into image embeddings for the language
model. The MLP is pre-trained on a large vision-language dataset and both the MLP and the language
model are fine-tuned on an instruction-focused dataset. In contrast, InstructBLIP freezes both the
vision encoder and the language model and only trains the mapping network.
Notations. For the purposes of our work, we define the VLM architecture as follows. The vision
encoder processes an input image to produce n image features. These image features are projected
to embedding space via the mapping network, resulting in n d-dimensional image embeddings
{ki : ki ∈ Rd , i = 1, ..., n}. For the language model, the entire set of text tokens constitutes the
vocabulary V with vocabulary size |V |. The image embeddings, followed by m text embeddings
{ti : ti ∈ Rd , i = 1, ..., m} of the prompt tokens, are input to the language model through L decoder
layers. For an input embedding x ∈ Rd , we define hl (x) ∈ Rd to be the latent representation
for embedding x at layer l ∈ {1, ..., L}, the output of the decoder layer, which is conditioned on
previous tokens of the input sequence. An unembedding matrix WU ∈ R|V |×d maps the last latent
representation hL (tm ) to a probability distribution over the vocabulary for the next token tm+1 .
Logit Lens. Logit Lens is an interpretability method for intermediate language model representa-
tions introduced in Section 2.1. The logit lens technique applies the unembedding matrix WU to
latent representations hl (x) in the L intermediate layers in the language model to retrieve the logit
distributions over the vocabulary.
                    fl (tm ) = WU · hl (tm ) = [logit1 , logit2 , logit3 , . . . , logit|V | ]      (1)

This is the logit distribution representing the predictions of the model after l layers, where logitj
corresponds to the token j in the vocabulary.


                                                        3
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        4 ×10
                3                  InstructBLIP                                        ×103                  LLaVA
                    Not in Image                                                   6          Not in Image
        3           In Image                                                                  In Image
Frequency


                                                                           Frequency
                                                                                   4
        2
        1                                                                          2
        0 10 4           10 3          10 2           10 1           100           0 10 2                     10 1           100
                                Internal Confidence                                                    Internal Confidence
  Figure 2: Comparison of internal confidence in objects present and not present in the image.
  We examine the internal confidence of COCO objects that exist and do not exist in the image within
  intermediate VLM image representations. We observe that objects that do not exist in the image have
  lower internal confidence.


  3.2       A PPLYING L OGIT L ENS ON VLM S

  We apply the logit lens to probe the language model as it processes the image representations. This
  enables us to interpret the image features’ output distributions as they are transformed by the layers
  of the language model and localize objects spatially within the image.
  Extracting probability distributions from intermediate image representations. We apply logit
  lens on the image representations in the VLM. For a given image embedding ki , we find the latent
  representation of the image embedding at layer l, hl (ki ), taking the logit lens to get the probability
  distribution over the vocabulary, softmax(fl (ki )). We define an object o, an object word composed of
  tokens from the vocabulary. We inspect the probability of a specific object o, softmax(fl (ki ))o . For
  multi-token objects, we take the maximum probability value over the object tokens. This provides a
  generalizable framework for analyzing specific latent image representations via text, with respect
  to specific objects. Next, we find the maximum probability over all image representations over all
  layers. For object o, we compute:


                                                  co = max {softmax(fl (ki ))o }                                              (2)
                                                             1≤l≤L
                                                             1≤i≤n


  We define co as the VLMs internal confidence of an object o existing in the image: the highest
  probability of object presence across n image representations through L layers of the language model.
  Comparing the internal confidence of present and not present objects. To determine if internal
  confidence provides meaningful information about objects in the image, we examine co for objects
  present and not present in an image. We use InstructBLIP and LLaVA to caption 5000 random
  COCO2014 images in the Karpathy validation split (Lin et al., 2015) and determine co for all 80
  COCO objects, only a few of which are present in each image. Since there are many more objects
  not present than present, we randomly sample a subset of the internal confidences for objects not
  present. Figure 2 exhibits the internal confidences for objects present and not present in the image.
  We empirically find that the VLMs’ internal confidences are higher for present objects than not
  present ones. We use this claim later to classify objects as hallucinations in Section 5.1.
  Object localization. Given that the language model can distinguish between objects present and not
  present in an image, we examine whether it can attribute high object internal confidence to specific
  patches in an image. For each image embedding ki in n image embeddings, we find the maximum
  softmax probability of an object within the layers of the model, max1≤l≤L {softmax(fl (ki ))o }. Using
  these internal confidence values, we localize the objects in the image patches, each of which maps to
  an image embedding. We focus on LLaVA for this task, since its image encoder preserves the spatial
  mapping of image patches to image features.
  We observe that image representations that exhibit higher internal confidence for specific objects
  correspond to the image patches in which those objects are visually present (examples in Figure 3).
  Building on our previous observation, we see that the intermediate image representations semantically
  align with latent token representations of objects present in them while maintaining their spatial
  locality. We use this unique finding for zero-shot segmentation in Section 5.3.


                                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Input image      “catˮ probabilities   “catˮ localization     “bicycleˮ probabilities “bicycleˮ localization


      Input image    “bottleˮ probabilities “bottleˮ localization    “bowlˮ probabilities   “bowlˮ localization


Figure 3: Localizing objects using internal confidence values. We find the probabilities of objects
through layers of the language model for every image embedding in LLaVA. We use the highest layer
probability per image embedding to localize an object within the image.


While the model is not directly trained to map the image representations closer to the text represen-
tations of objects within them, we can unembed the image representations in the text vocabulary
for localization and find differences in internal confidence for present and hallucinated objects. In
Section 5.1, we will use this observation for various applications including hallucination detection
and zero-short segmentation.


4     E RASING KNOWLEDGE FROM VLM S

Recognizing that image embeddings are directly interpretable (Section 3.2), we edit these embeddings
to erase the presence of objects from image captions. We propose a linear editing algorithm that
subtracts the text embedding of a target object from all image embeddings. When applied on singular
and multiple object removals, we find that it erases hallucinated objects more effectively than correctly
detected (CD) objects (i.e. real objects that the model correctly detects).

4.1    E RASING OBJECTS FROM IMAGE REPRESENTATIONS

We present an algorithm, P ROJECTAWAY (Fig-                         Algorithm 1: P ROJECTAWAY
ure 4), that orthogonalizes image representations
with respect to text representations in order to          Input: A set of image embeddings K, text em-
erase objects in image captions, applying it to           bedding ⃗t, and weight factor α
remove objects one at a time and all at once.             Output: A set of modified image embeddings
                                                          K ′ projected away from the text embedding
Given an image and an object to remove, we edit           Initialization: K ′ ← ∅
the latent representations hlI (ki ) at a hidden          for ⃗k ∈ K do
layer lI across all image embeddings ki . We do                p ← ⃗k · ⃗t
not modify any latent representations outside of               if p > 0 then
those belonging to image features. We compute
                                                                   K ′ ← K ′ ∪ {⃗k − α · ∥⃗tp∥2 · ⃗t}
the dot product, p, of hlI (ki ) and the object’s                                             2

text embedding ⃗t, subtracting a weighted ⃗t from              else
hlI (ki ) only if the dot product is positive. At                  K ′ ← K ′ ∪ {⃗k}
α = 1, P ROJECTAWAY is equivalent to orthogo-                  end if
nalizing the image representations with respect           end for
to the text representation. To compute text rep-      Figure 4: Our editing algorithm erases the pres-
resentation ⃗t, we pass the object (e.g. “hot dog”)   ence of an object from image embeddings by or-
into the VLM’s text model and extract hlT (t-1 )      thogonalizing them with respect to the object’s text
at hidden layer lT , where t-1 is the last token of   embedding.
the object. We use the last token of the object to
capture the whole of the object’s meaning.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Edit Scope        Model          Individual RR (%)    Mass RR (%)     CD change (%)      Ci ↓   Cs ↓
                   InstructBLIP   -                    -               -                  15.0   54.1
 No edits
                   LLaVA          -                    -               -                  14.6   51.1
                   InstructBLIP   83.3                 74.3            +0.07              8.94   33.2
 Hallucinations
                   LLaVA          86.0                 72.8            +0.01              11.2   35.5
                   InstructBLIP   16.2                 15.0            -2.2               17.3   58.3
 CD
                   LLaVA          6.9                  8.3             -1.6               15.2   52.4


Table 1: Removing mentioned objects individually & in-mass. Using P ROJECTAWAY, we remove
hallucinated objects and observe high hallucination reduction with CHAIR, mass-removal rate (Mass
RR), and individual removal rate (Individual RR). We also remove correctly detected (CD) objects
but find that they are more resistant to linear editing. Denote CHAIRS as CS and CHAIRI as CI .


4.1.1    R EMOVING OBJECTS ONE BY ONE
We evaluate the P ROJECTAWAY algorithm’s effectiveness at erasing individual objects from captions
across multiple images and objects.
Experimental setting. We apply P ROJECTAWAY on 5000 random images from the COCO2014
training set on all mentioned COCO objects (i.e. hallucination and CD) individually and measure the
removal rate at which objects no longer appear in the caption. For InstructBLIP, we set (lI , lT , α) =
(1, 2, 1.5). For LLaVA, we set (lI , lT , α) = (19, 21, 3.5). These parameters are fixed irrespective
of image and are chosen for their maximal effect (see ablations in Section 4.2). To differentiate
hallucinations from CD, we compute CHAIR (Rohrbach et al., 2019), an evaluation criteria that
compares model-generated captions to ground-truth human annotations. CHAIR provides two main
scores, CHAIRI and CHAIRS , that quantify hallucinations for instances and sentences, respectively:
                  |{captions with hallucinated objects}|             |{hallucinated objects}|
   CHAIRS =                                              , CHAIRI =                                (3)
                             |{all captions}|                       |{all objects mentioned}|

Results. Table 1 shows that P ROJECTAWAY is significantly more effective in erasing individual
hallucinated objects at an individual level than CD objects for both InstructBLIP and LLaVA. Along
with the insight that hallucinated objects have lower softmax scores (Figure 2), these results suggest
that hallucinated objects manifest more weakly in image embeddings and are hence easier to remove
than CD objects.

4.1.2    M ASS - REMOVING OBJECTS
We iteratively apply P ROJECTAWAY to a set of objects, following the same experimental setup and
observing similarly different removal rates for hallucinated objects and CD objects.
Mass-removing hallucinations. We mass-remove hallucinations identified with ground truth an-
notations using P ROJECTAWAY. Table 1 shows that editing out all the hallucinations of an image
yields a similar removal rate as individually editing out and, importantly, that erasing hallucinated
objects together does not interfere with each other. We achieve a hallucination reduction rate of
41.3% for InstructBLIP and 23.3% for LLaVA (see Table 4). Recall count slightly increases for both
models, indicating that caption accuracy is preserved. This may be because removed hallucinations
are replaced with objects the model is more confident in. Qualitative results are in Figure 5.
Mass removing CD. We similarly find that applying P ROJECTAWAY can successfully remove CD
objects when edited all together in Table 1. Furthermore, CHAIR scores minimally change, which
indicates that this mass-removal merely erases object presence without eroding caption accuracy.
While the removal rate is lower than for hallucinated objects, this insight proves useful when we
apply P ROJECTAWAY for hallucination reduction in Section 5.2.

4.2     A BLATION S TUDY: MASS - REMOVING HALLUCINATIONS

We perform ablations on parameters of P ROJECTAWAY to improve object removal rate for erasing
hallucinations in-mass.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Before: In the image, a group of four young men    Before: The image features a delicious slice     Before: The image features a black and white cat sitting
are gathered around a picnic table, posing for a   of pizza sitting on a white paper plate. The     in the middle of a cluttered living room floor. The cat is
photo. They are holding frisbees in their hands    pizza is topped with various ingredients,        surrounded by various items such as clothes, bags,
and seem to be having a good time together.        including pepperoni, olives, and mushrooms,      books, and a backpack. There are two chairs placed
The picnic table is located in the middle of the   making it a mouth-watering dish. The plate       near the cat, one on the left side and the other on the
scene, providing a central point for the group's   is placed on a table, adding to the overall      right side of the room. In addition to the cat, there are
gathering. There are several chairs placed         presentation of the pizza. In addition to the    two people visible in the scene. One person is standing
around the table, indicating that the group may    pizza slice, there are several other items on    on the left side of the room, while the other person is
have been enjoying a meal or socializing while     the table, including two cups, a fork, a         located on the right side of the room. Both individuals
playing with the frisbees. A car can be seen       knife, and a spoon. These items add to the       seem to be engrossed in their own activities, possibly
parked in the background, possibly belonging to    overall atmosphere of the scene, creating a      unaware of the cat's presence.
 
one of the group members.

                        cozy and inviting setting for enjoying the
                                                   pizza.

                                         After: The image depicts a black and white cat sitting in
After: A group of four young men are gathered                                                       the middle of a cluttered room. The cat is surrounded by
around a picnic table, posing for a photo while    After: The image features a delicious slice of   a variety of items, including suitcases, backpacks,
holding frisbees. They seem to be enjoying their   pizza on a paper plate, placed on a dining       clothes, and shoes. There are at least three suitcases
time together, possibly playing a friendly game    table. The pizza is topped with various          scattered around the room, with one located closer to the
of frisbee. The picnic table is located in the     ingredients, including pepperoni, olives, and    cat and the other two further away. A backpack can be
middle of the scene, providing a convenient spot   mushrooms, making it a mouth-watering            seen on the left side of the room, and a pair of shoes can
for the group to gather and play. In addition to   meal. The pizza slice dominates the scene,       be spotted on the right side. In addition to these items,
the frisbees, there are several backpacks          taking up most of the space on the paper         there are several clothes spread out on the floor,
scattered around the area, suggesting that the     plate. The plate is placed on top of a dining    including a shirt, a jacket, and a pair of pants. The
group may have come prepared for an outdoor        table, which can be seen in the background.      cluttered environment suggests that the room may have
adventure.                                                                    .                     been recently used for packing or preparing for a trip.

Figure 5: Qualitative results for mass object removal. We present example images and their
captions after mass-removing hallucinations (red) with P ROJECTAWAY., which can effectively remove
hallucinations while preserving, even increasing, correctly detected objects (green).


Experimental setting. We ablate the three parameters of P ROJECTAWAY: layer lI to edit at, layer
lT to retrieve the text representation, and weight factor α. At lT = −1, we average together the
object’s constituent token embeddings. At lI = −1, we edit the image embeddings directly inputted
to the text model. We evaluate across 500 training samples from COCO 2014 that have at least one
hallucination.
Hidden layers. Figure 6 shows hallucination reduction rate on LLaVA from mass-removing halluci-
nations on every combination of lI and lT (each from -1 to 31). As a core concern is that editing
erodes caption accuracy, we gray out any combination that reduces CD objects. For InstructBLIP
(see Figure 10), the best parameters (lI = 1, lT = 2) reduces hallucinations by 38.5%. For LLaVA,
our best parameters (lI = 19, lT = 21) reduce hallucinations by 25.7%, and the middle layers are
the best to edit and extract latent text embeddings from. Our results also provide a wide range of
reasonable parameter alternatives to use if this reduction rate does not generalize beyond our samples.
Weight factor. Using the best-reduced hidden layers, we ablate the weight factor α for P ROJECT-
AWAY across the same 500 randomly selected COCO images. Figure 7 shows that as α increases,
hallucinations are removed at a higher rate, and the overall hallucination count drops significantly. At
high α, we observe through anecdotal examples that captions become nonsensical, as quantitatively
shown by the complete loss of both correctly detected and hallucinated objects from the caption.
Therefore, as a pre-caution, we only select weight factors that do not reduce CD objects when we
apply P ROJECTAWAY to erase hallucinated objects.


5      A PPLICATIONS

5.1      H ALLUCINATION D ETECTION

When extracting knowledge from VLMs in Section 3.2, we found that applying logit lens on in-
context image representations exhibit useful information about visual objects present in the image.
Using these observations, we present an approach for object presence classification that only relies
on the VLMs own parameters. We utilize the internal confidence co value to classify object presence,


                                                                             7
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                        25


              -1 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
                                                                                                                                                     100
                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                 Percentage change
                                                                                                                                                      80
 Edited hidden layer

                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                      60

                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                      40

                                                                                                                                                                      Hallucinations
                                                                                                                        5                             20              Correctly detected
                                                                                                                                                                      Mass removal rate
                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                           0             2              4           6            8
                                                                                                                                                                             Weight factor
                                                                                                                        0
                                                   -1 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
                                                                  Text embedding hidden layer
    Figure 6: Hidden layer ablations for LLaVA.                                                                                       Figure 7: Weight ablations for LLaVA. We
    We track hallucination reduction (%) across dif-                                                                                  vary the weight factor α and measure changes
    ferent layers to edit at and extract latent embed-                                                                                in correctly detected objects, removal rate, and
    dings for the text embedding, crossing out (red)                                                                                  hallucination reduction. We observe a decline in
    parameters from consideration where there is a                                                                                    hallucinations as weight grows and mark a weight
    decrease in correctly detected objects.                                                                                           where there is no loss in correctly detected objects.


                                                                             InstructBLIP                                                                                        LLaVA
                                                              ROC Curve                       1      PR Curve                                                  ROC Curve                      1      PR Curve
                      1                                                                                                                       1
True Positive Rate


                                                                                                                             True Positive Rate
                                                                                      Precision


                                                                                                                                                                                      Precision
                                                               Ours (0.83 AUC)                     Ours (AP=0.92)                                              Ours (AUC=0.68)                     Ours (AP=0.87)
                                                               Baseline (AUC=0.55)                 Baseline (AP=0.76)                                          Baseline (AUC=0.47)                 Baseline (AP=0.74)
                      0                                                                       00                                              0                                               00
                                                 0                                1                                     1                         0                               1                                     1
                                                           False Positive Rate                         Recall                                         False Positive Rate                               Recall
     Figure 8: Object Presence Classification Curves for InstructBLIP and LLaVA. We show the
     Precision-Recall and ROC curves of our confidence measure for present object-hallucination clas-
     sification on the COCO training subset. Classifying object presence with the internal confidence
     outperforms the baseline, indicating that the language model’s image representations know which
     objects are hallucinations and which are truly present.



    since the internal confidence for objects that are not present in the image, or hallucinated, are lower
    within the image representations.
     Experimental setting. We evaluate the strength of the internal confidence co as an indicator of
     object presence. We sample 5000 images from the MSCOCO training set, using the image captioning
     objective to caption methods with both InstructBLIP and LLaVA. We use the co for present objects
     and hallucinations within the captions generated by each VLM. We assess how well the internal
     confidence aligns with the ground truth labels of object presence, where a negative sample is a
     hallucination and a positive sample is a present object.
     Baseline. As a baseline, we use the maximum output probability of the object’s tokens. This is
     the confidence of the model prediction. Previous works such as Zhou et al. (2024) have found that
     hallucinations occur more frequently on objects characterized by high uncertainty during generation.
     Results. We present quantitative results in Figure 8 and Table 5. We show qualitative results for
     LLaVA (Figure 14) and InstructBLIP (Figure 15) in the Appendix. We find that utilizing internal
     confidence to classify object hallucinations provides a 47.17% improvement in mAP in InstructBLIP
     and 22.45% in LLaVA. Furthermore, the ROC AUC improves over the baseline by 50.10% in
     InstructBLIP and 44.68% in LLaVA, indicating stronger object presence classification.


                                                                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Model          Method         CHAIRi ↓      CHAIRs ↓     Hallucinated Objects ↓
                          Greedy         57.0          23.3         512
                          Nucleus        58.0          24.0         508
           InstructBLIP   Beam Search    53.4          14.6         564
                          OPERA          45.6          13.9         472
                          Ours           43.8          12.5         419
                          Greedy         49.2          14.2         532
                          Nucleus        55.8          17.1         618
           LLaVA          Beam Search    52.4          15.0         583
                          OPERA          44.8          12.8         462
                          Ours           42.0          12.2         444


Table 2: Hallucination intervention performance. We mass-remove hallucinations detected by the
method in Section 5.1 and outperform other baselines. We observe a considerable drop in the raw
count of hallucinated objects.


5.2   H ALLUCINATION R EMOVAL

We use the mass editing technique to remove hallucinations detected by the prior method. Sec-
tion 4.1.2 successfully removes a significant portion of hallucinations but presupposes a knowledge
of what the hallucinations are. We threshold on the internal confidence of each object to identify hal-
lucinations and mass-remove them using P ROJECTAWAY. Our chosen threshold prioritizes precision
over recall (i.e. we allow classification of some CD objects as hallucinations) because CD objects are
less affected by the removal method, as shown in Section 4.1.2.
Experimental setting. We threshold hallucinations as co < 0.2 for InstructBLIP and co < 0.1 for
LLaVA. Based on prior ablations (Section 4.2), we select (lI = 1, lT = 2, α = 1.5) for InstructBLIP
and (lI = 19, lT = 21, α = 3.5) for LLaVA. Our prompt is “Please describe this image in detail.”
Baselines. Since our method intervenes during the decoder step, we compare our method with 3
standard decoding algorithms. Greedy decoding predicts the next token based on the highest logit
probability. Beam search maintains a tree of beams and selects the best beam at generation end.
Nucleus sampling selects the next token from a set of high probability tokens whose cumulative
probability reaches a threshold p. We also evaluate against OPERA (Huang et al., 2024), which
mitigates hallucinations by adding an overtrust penalty during decoder generation. We set p = 0.9
for nucleus sampling. We use beam search in our method and unify Nbeam = 5 for the baseline.
Results. We apply these parameters to 500 COCO images from the Karpathy validation set. We
provide qualitative results in Figure 17 and Figure 16. Quantitative results in Table 2 show that
we outperform our baselines and reduce hallucinations by 25.7% on InstructBLIP and 23.8% on
LLaVA compared to beam search. Our approach achieves a similar hallucination reduction rate
as Section 4.1.2, despite not precisely differentiating hallucinations and some CD objects being
incorrectly edited out. Notably, our method relies on no training or external models, effectively
offering a “free lunch.” We find similar performance on additional models (Appendix A.5) and
attribute hallucinations (Appendix A.7).

5.3   Z ERO - SHOT S EGMENTATION

Building upon our findings in Section 3.2, we utilize the internal confidence per image feature for
zero-shot image segmentation. This application leverages the spatial information encoded in the
image representations and demonstrates how VLMs internally represent and localize objects within
images.
Method. Our approach leverages the spatial correspondence between image patches and their
associated image embeddings. We use LLaVA to generate the name of the class in the image and we
focus on the internal confidence of that class per image patch. We take the mean internal confidence
for tokens comprising a class word. We resize the set of 24 × 24 internal confidence values per image
patch back into a fixed image size of 336 × 366 pixels. We then apply a threshold to these confidence
values to binarize them into a foreground/background segmentation for the object in the image.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Model                                      Method             Pixel Acc. ↑   mIoU ↑   mAP ↑
        raw attention (CLIP)                    Image Encoder            69.81       45.19    77.30
        TextSpan (Gandelsman et al., 2024b)     Image Encoder            75.57       53.60    80.22
        raw attention (VLM)                         VLM                  67.28       39.27    73.96
        Ours                                        VLM                  76.16       54.26    79.90


Table 3: Segmentation Performance on ImageNet-segmentation. Localizing objects using their
probabilities within the image representations results in more accurate zero-shot segmentation than
previous methods relying on vision encoders and VLMs.


Baseline. As a baseline, we extract the attention       Input Image
values of generated tokens with the image em-
beddings from LLaVA. We also compare to the
segmentation method introduced by Gandels-
man et al. (2024b), which utilizes the attention
heads of the image encoder without the addi-            raw attention (VLM)
tional VLM processing, using the same image
encoder (CLIP-ViT-L/14 at 336px).
Results. We evaluate our method on the Im-
agenet validation set. Qualitative results are
                                                        Ours
shown in Figure 9 and quantitative comparisons
with the baselines in Section 5.3. We improve
mAP by 8.03% over using the VLMs raw atten-
tion values and provide better and/or comparable
performance to other state-of-the-art methods
that utilize just the image encoder. While the          Figure 9: Zero-shot segmentation. Warmer areas
VLM is not directly trained for segmentation,           indicate higher internal confidence for the class at
our technique reveals that it still encodes signifi-    that image patch. We binarize these values with a
cant spatial information about objects within its       threshold to generate segmentations.
intermediate image representations.

6    D ISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS
We interpreted VLMs’ image representations through the language model layers and discovered
that linear editing of these representations can selectively remove object information via a simple
orthogonalization. Our findings enabled hallucination reduction and improved zero-shot segmentation.
We present two limitations of our work and conclude with future directions.
Multi-token objects. Our method simplifies the use of object words that may be composed of
multiple tokens, such as by taking the max internal confidence over object tokens or utilizing the
average token embedding for editing. This can introduce noise to the internal confidence if certain
tokens are common in multiple different words and lead to an approximation of the object’s latent
representations when editing.
Fine-grained edits. The editing approach may struggle with highly abstract or longer sentences that
involve attributes or interactions of objects. Removing a full sentence, for example, is not something
we assessed in this paper, since our focus is on the removal of individual objects.
Future work. While our focus was on interpreting objects and object hallucinations in VLMs, we
believe that our approach can be extended to other key elements of visual scenes, such as people,
attributes, and actions. We also focused on object removal, but we believe that editing can also be
extended to inject objects into a caption (by adding instead of subtracting the text embedding). We
hope to explore the applications of our approach in other multimodal architectures. Our insights
may help design better VLMs that are more robust to hallucinations and have improved spatial
understanding. We plan to explore these directions in our future work.


                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6.1   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Kayo Yin for her comments and feedback on our paper. YG is supported by the Google
Fellowship. Authors, as part of their affiliation with UC Berkeley, were supported in part by the the
Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Research (BAIR) commons program.

R EFERENCES
Amos Azaria and Tom Mitchell. The internal state of an LLM knows when it’s lying. In
 Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association for Compu-
 tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 967–976, Singapore, December 2023. Association
 for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.68. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/2023.findings-emnlp.68.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang Zhou,
   and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-vl: A versatile vision-language model for understanding, localization,
   text reading, and beyond, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.12966.
David Bau, Jun-Yan Zhu, Hendrik Strobelt, Bolei Zhou, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, William T. Freeman,
  and Antonio Torralba. Gan dissection: Visualizing and understanding generative adversarial
  networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2019.
David Bau, Jun-Yan Zhu, Hendrik Strobelt, Agata Lapedriza, Bolei Zhou, and Antonio Torralba.
  Understanding the role of individual units in a deep neural network. Proceedings of the National
 Academy of Sciences, 2020. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1907375117. URL https:
 //www.pnas.org/content/early/2020/08/31/1907375117.
Nora Belrose, Zach Furman, Logan Smith, Danny Halawi, Igor Ostrovsky, Lev McKinney, Stella
  Biderman, and Jacob Steinhardt. Eliciting latent predictions from transformers with the tuned lens,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08112.
Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Conerly, Nick
  Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan Wu, Shauna Kravec,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Alex Tamkin, Karina
  Nguyen, Brayden McLean, Josiah E Burke, Tristan Hume, Shan Carter, Tom Henighan, and
  Christopher Olah. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with dictionary
  learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. URL https://transformer-circuits.
  pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html.
Marco Bronzini, Carlo Nicolini, Bruno Lepri, Jacopo Staiano, and Andrea Passerini. Unveiling
 llms: The evolution of latent representations in a dynamic knowledge graph, 2024. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2404.03623.
Hila Chefer, Shir Gur, and Lior Wolf. Generic attention-model explainability for interpreting bi-modal
  and encoder-decoder transformers, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.15679.
Chao Chen, Kai Liu, Ze Chen, Yi Gu, Yue Wu, Mingyuan Tao, Zhihang Fu, and Jieping Ye.
  Inside: Llms’ internal states retain the power of hallucination detection, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2402.03744.
Haozhe Chen, Junfeng Yang, Carl Vondrick, and Chengzhi Mao. Interpreting and controlling vision
  foundation models via text explanations, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.
  10591.
Arthur Conmy, Augustine N. Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià Garriga-
  Alonso. Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2304.14997.
Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse autoen-
  coders find highly interpretable features in language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2309.08600.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao Chang, and Furu Wei. Knowledge neurons in
  pretrained transformers, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08696.
Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Li, Pascale Fung, and Steven Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language
 models with instruction tuning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06500.
Amil Dravid, Yossi Gandelsman, Alexei A. Efros, and Assaf Shocher. Rosetta neurons: Mining
 the common units in a model zoo. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
 Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1934–1943, October 2023.
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. A disentangling invertible interpretation network
  for explaining latent representations, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2004.13166.
Yossi Gandelsman, Alexei A. Efros, and Jacob Steinhardt. Interpreting the second-order effects of
  neurons in clip, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04341.
Yossi Gandelsman, Alexei A. Efros, and Jacob Steinhardt. Interpreting clip’s image representation
  via text-based decomposition, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.05916.
Asma Ghandeharioun, Avi Caciularu, Adam Pearce, Lucas Dixon, and Mor Geva. Patchscopes:
  A unifying framework for inspecting hidden representations of language models, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.06102.
Danny Halawi, Jean-Stanislas Denain, and Jacob Steinhardt. Overthinking the truth: Understanding
  how language models process false demonstrations, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2307.09476.
Jinwen He, Yujia Gong, Kai Chen, Zijin Lin, Chengan Wei, and Yue Zhao. Llm factoscope:
   Uncovering llms’ factual discernment through inner states analysis, 2024. URL https://
   arxiv.org/abs/2312.16374.
John Hewitt and Christopher D. Manning. A structural probe for finding syntax in word repre-
  sentations. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019
  Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4129–4138, Minneapolis,
  Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1419.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/N19-1419.
Yuan Hu, Jianlong Yuan, Congcong Wen, Xiaonan Lu, and Xiang Li. Rsgpt: A remote sensing vision
  language model and benchmark, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15266.
Qidong Huang, Xiaoyi Dong, Pan Zhang, Bin Wang, Conghui He, Jiaqi Wang, Dahua Lin, Weiming
  Zhang, and Nenghai Yu. Opera: Alleviating hallucination in multi-modal large language models
  via over-trust penalty and retrospection-allocation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2311.17911.
Jiahao Huo, Yibo Yan, Boren Hu, Yutao Yue, and Xuming Hu. Mmneuron: Discovering neuron-
   level domain-specific interpretation in multimodal large language model, 2024. URL https:
   //arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11193v1.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, March 2023. ISSN 1557-7341. doi: 10.1145/3571730. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3571730.
Goro Kobayashi, Tatsuki Kuribayashi, Sho Yokoi, and Kentaro Inui. Attention is not only a weight:
 Analyzing transformers with vector norms. In Bonnie Webber, Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and
 Yang Liu (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
 Processing (EMNLP), pp. 7057–7075, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.574. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2020.emnlp-main.574.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models, 2023a. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2301.12597.
Kenneth Li, Aspen K. Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Watten-
  berg. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic task,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.13382.
Yifan Li, Yifan Du, Kun Zhou, Jinpeng Wang, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. Evaluating
  object hallucination in large vision-language models, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2305.10355.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, Lubomir Bourdev, Ross Girshick, James Hays, Pietro
  Perona, Deva Ramanan, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Piotr Dollár. Microsoft coco: Common objects
  in context, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0312.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruction
  tuning, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03744.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Sheng Shen, and Yong Jae Lee.
  Llava-next: Improved reasoning, ocr, and world knowledge, January 2024b. URL https:
 //llava-vl.github.io/blog/2024-01-30-llava-next/.
Fuwen Luo, Chi Chen, Zihao Wan, Zhaolu Kang, Qidong Yan, Yingjie Li, Xiaolong Wang, Siyu
  Wang, Ziyue Wang, Xiaoyue Mi, Peng Li, Ning Ma, Maosong Sun, and Yang Liu. Codis:
  Benchmarking context-dependent visual comprehension for multimodal large language models,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.13607.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in gpt, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.05262.
nostalgebraist. Interpreting GPT: The logit lens. LessWrong, Aug 2020.
  URL             https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/
  interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens.
Vedant Palit, Rohan Pandey, Aryaman Arora, and Paul Pu Liang. Towards vision-language mecha-
  nistic interpretability: A causal tracing tool for blip, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/
  2308.14179.
Vitali Petsiuk, Abir Das, and Kate Saenko. Rise: Randomized input sampling for explanation of
  black-box models, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/1806.07421.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/pdf/2103.00020.
Shauli Ravfogel, Michael Twiton, Yoav Goldberg, and Ryan Cotterell. Linear adversarial concept
  erasure, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.12091.
Anna Rohrbach, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Kaylee Burns, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. Object
  hallucination in image captioning, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.02156.
Sarah Schwettmann, Neil Chowdhury, Samuel Klein, and Antonio Torralba. Multimodal neurons in
  pretrained text-only transformers, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.01544.
Da Song, Xuan Xie, Jiayang Song, Derui Zhu, Yuheng Huang, Felix Juefei-Xu, and Lei Ma. Luna:
  A model-based universal analysis framework for large language models, 2024. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2310.14211.
Weihang Su, Changyue Wang, Qingyao Ai, Yiran HU, Zhijing Wu, Yujia Zhou, and Yiqun Liu.
 Unsupervised real-time hallucination detection based on the internal states of large language
 models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.06448.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shengbang Tong, Ellis Brown, Penghao Wu, Sanghyun Woo, Manoj Middepogu, Sai Charitha Akula,
  Jihan Yang, Shusheng Yang, Adithya Iyer, Xichen Pan, Austin Wang, Rob Fergus, Yann LeCun,
  and Saining Xie. Cambrian-1: A fully open, vision-centric exploration of multimodal llms, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.16860.
Mycal Tucker, Peng Qian, and Roger Levy. What if this modified that? syntactic interventions via
 counterfactual embeddings, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.14002.
Neeraj Varshney, Wenlin Yao, Hongming Zhang, Jianshu Chen, and Dong Yu. A stitch in time saves
  nine: Detecting and mitigating hallucinations of llms by validating low-confidence generation,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03987.
Dimitri von Rutte, Sotiris Anagnostidis, Gregor Bachmann, and Thomas Hofmann. A language
  model’s guide through latent space, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.14433.
Qinghao Ye, Haiyang Xu, Jiabo Ye, Ming Yan, Anwen Hu, Haowei Liu, Qi Qian, Ji Zhang, Fei
  Huang, and Jingren Zhou. mplug-owl2: Revolutionizing multi-modal large language model with
  modality collaboration, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.04257.
Shukang Yin, Chaoyou Fu, Sirui Zhao, Tong Xu, Hao Wang, Dianbo Sui, Yunhang Shen, Ke Li, Xing
  Sun, and Enhong Chen. Woodpecker: Hallucination correction for multimodal large language
  models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16045.
Jinrui Zhang, Teng Wang, Haigang Zhang, Ping Lu, and Feng Zheng. Reflective instruction tuning:
   Mitigating hallucinations in large vision-language models, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/
   abs/2407.11422.
Shaolei Zhang, Tian Yu, and Yang Feng. Truthx: Alleviating hallucinations by editing large language
  models in truthful space, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.17811.
Yiyang Zhou, Chenhang Cui, Jaehong Yoon, Linjun Zhang, Zhun Deng, Chelsea Finn, Mohit Bansal,
  and Huaxiu Yao. Analyzing and mitigating object hallucination in large vision-language models,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.00754.


                                                14
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         Edit Scope        Model                      Hallucinations           CD
                                                                                           InstructBLIP               4545                     14178
                                                                         No edits
                                                                                           LLaVA                      4372                     15053
                                                                                           InstructBLIP               2672                     14189
                                                                         Hallucinations
                                                                                           LLaVA                      3348                     15061
                                                                                           InstructBLIP               5078                     13864
                                                                         CD
                                                                                           LLaVA                      4583                     14826


   Table 4: Supplemental metrics for Table 1. We measure unique hallucinated and correctly detected
   (CD) objects.
             -1 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29


                                                                                                    35
                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                    30


                                                                                                         Percentage change
                                                                                                                             80
Edited hidden layer


                                                                                                    25


                                                                                                    20                       60                            Hallucinations
                                                                                                                                                           Correctly detected
                                                                                                    15                       40
                                                                                                                                                           Mass removal rate

                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                   0   1   2      3    4     5    6     7       8
                                                  -1 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                               Weight factor
                                                             Text embedding hidden layer
   Figure 10: Hidden layer ablations for In-                                                                Figure 11: Weight ablations for InstructBLIP.
   structBLIP. We track hallucination reduction                                                             We vary the weight factor α and measure changes
   (%) across different layers to edit at and extract la-                                                   in correctly detected objects, object removal rate,
   tent embeddings for the text embedding, crossing                                                         and hallucination reduction. We observe a decline
   out (red) parameters from consideration where                                                            in hallucinations as weight increases and mark a
   there is a decrease in correctly detected objects.                                                       weight where there is no loss in correctly detected
                                                                                                            objects.



    A                                                     A PPENDIX

    A.1                                                   M ASS - REMOVING OBJECTS

   We mass-remove mentioned objects (hallucinations and correctly detected) with P ROJECTAWAY and
   tally up the total number of unique hallucinated and CD objects in Table 4.


    A.2                                                   A BLATIONS FOR I NSTRUCT BLIP

   We show hidden layer and weight ablations for mass-removing hallucinations in InstructBLIP
   referenced in Section 4.2. The hidden layer ablations indicate that most of the parameter space is
   too sensitive to edit and leads to losses in correctly detected objects. We find that smaller lT and lI
   parameters are the most effective for reducing hallucinations. Our best parameters (lI = 1, lT = 2)
   reduce hallucinations by 38.5%. It is not fully understood why the majority of the parameter
   search space is invalid in comparison with LLaVA in Figure 6. It is possible that the fine-tuning
   step in LLaVA semantically aligns hidden image representations with text embeddings more than
   InstructBLIP, allowing linear edits to have the precise, intended effect.


                                                                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3    H ALLUCINATION D ETECTION

We show quantitative comparisons from our hallucination detection approach using internal confi-
dence (Section 5.1) to the baseline in Table 5. We also show qualitative examples for LLaVA in
Figure 14 and for InstructBLIP in Figure 15. These samples exhibit model-generated captions, parsed
objects, and whether they are classified as hallucinated or correctly detected based on their internal
confidence score.

A.4    H ALLUCINATION R EDUCTION

We exhibit sample results from our hallucination reduction approach (Section 5.2), which linearly
removes text representations of hallucinations from image representations, in Figure 17 for Instruct-
BLIP and Figure 16 for LLaVA. We show the image caption before and after our linear editing
method, removing objects detected as hallucinations.

A.5    Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATIONS ON M ORE A DVANCED M ODELS

We evaluate our approach on two additional models, LLaVA-NeXT 7B (Liu et al., 2024b) and
Cambrian-1 8B (Tong et al., 2024) with Llama 3. We threshold hallucinations as co < 0.4 for
LLaVA-NeXT and co < 0.3 for Cambrian-1. Based on qualitative examples and referencing optimal
parameters from other models in Section 4.2, we select (lI = 24, lT = 22, α = 2) for both models.
We show quantitative results for hallucination detection in Table 6 and for hallucination intervention
in Table 7. With our method, we observe a 27.73% improvement in CHAIRS with LLaVA-NeXT
and a 28.86% improvement with Cambrian-1, demonstrating consistency with our findings on the
LLaVA and InstructBLIP models.

A.6    O BJECT L OCALIZATION

We show qualitative examples for localization with internal confidence for specific image representa-
tions, specifically for the LLaVA model, in Figure 18.

A.7    ATTRIBUTE H ALLUCINATIONS

Our analysis in this paper centered on object hallucinations because automated tooling and bench-
marks for attribute (ex. shape, color, number) hallucinations are relatively sparse. However, we
demonstrate the applicability of our editing technique on attribute hallucinations with qualitative
examples filtered from the VQA 2.0 challenge in Figure 12. We reuse the editing hyperparameters
for InstructBLIP (lI = 1, lT = 2, α = 1.5) and only edit attributes with co < 0.05.

A.8    Z ERO - SHOT C LASSIFICATION

We evaluate the strength of internal confidence derived from the logit lens on image representations
for classification of the COCO class within patches of the image. We use the COCO ground truth
segmentations to find ground truth classes for image patches. We determine the accuracy of the
rankings found from logit lens internal confidence scores to predict the class per patch and present
our results in Table 8. We find that these values highly vary across classes, which we hypothesize is
because certain classes such as “person” are represented with more specific tokens such as “doctor”,
“skier”, “girl”, etc. resulting in lower internal confidence for the tokens in “person” while other objects
like “toothbrush”, “banana”, and “broccoli” are described in the same word as the COCO class.

A.9    Q UALITATIVE EXAMPLES BEYOND COCO 2014

We focus on COCO 2014 in our analyses because CHAIR, our main evaluation criteria, is tied with
the dataset and can automatically categorize objects of interest in image captions. While COCO 2014
is a diverse set of images, we provide qualitative examples of hallucination reduction (see Section 5.2)
on images from LLaVA-Bench (Liu et al., 2024b), a collection of 24 images of varying subjects. The
examples in Figure 13 using InstructBLIP align with the strong hallucination reduction observed with
COCO 2014.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Question: What color are the gym shoes?

    Question: What color is the bike wheels rims?

    Question: What color is the lollipop?


Before: red and black.

                     Before: black.

                                   Before: white.


After: black and white.                      After: silver.                                     After: red.


Question: How many bunches of bananas are    Question: How many trucks are on the road?

       Question: How many yellow vases?


there?


                                             Before: Two.

                                     Before: 0.


Before: three


                                             After: One.                                        After: 1.
After: one

Figure 12: Qualitative results for attribute hallucinations using InstructBLIP. We filter the
VQA dataset for color and object number inaccuracies and correct answers with low confidence
scores (co < 0.05) using P ROJECTAWAY. We reuse the same hyperparameters previously chosen for
InstructBLIP (lI = 1, lT = 2, α = 1.5).


                                              InstructBLIP                                     LLaVA
                             Method         mAP ↑ ROC AUC ↑                         mAP ↑       ROC AUC ↑
                             Baseline       0.53                0.55                  0.49               0.47
                             Ours           0.78                0.83                  0.60               0.68

Table 5: Object presence classification performance. We use internal confidence co as a confidence
score to classify whether the object is present in the image. We evaluate the mAP and ROC AUC of
our classification method against the baseline for both the InstructBLIP and LLaVA models over a
subset of 5000 COCO images.


                                              LLaVA-NeXT                              Cambrian-1
                                 Method     mAP ↑ ROC AUC ↑                        mAP ↑ ROC AUC ↑
                                 Baseline    0.93                0.66                0.94             0.73
                                 Ours        0.95                0.75                0.97             0.83


Table 6: Object presence classification on more models. We classify whether the object is present
in the image using internal confidence for LLaVA-NeXT and Cambrian-1 over a subset of 500 COCO
images.


                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Before: The image captures a breathtaking aerial       Before: The image features a painting of a           Before: The image depicts a long wooden pier
view of a scenic coastline with a mountainous          beautiful woman with long, flowing hair. She is      extending into a serene lake, surrounded by
landscape in the background. The ocean is              depicted wearing a black dress and has a serene      trees and mountains in the background. The pier
visible in the foreground, stretching from the left    expression on her face. The painting captures the    stretches out into the water, inviting visitors to
side of the image to the right. There are several      essence of Leonardo da Vinci's Mona Lisa, one of     explore the tranquil surroundings. A boat can be
boats scattered throughout the water, some             the most famous paintings in the world. In the       seen docked at the end of the pier, adding to the
closer to the shoreline and others further out. In     painting, the woman's face takes up a significant    peaceful atmosphere of the scene. In addition to
addition to the boats, there are several people        portion of the canvas, making her the focal point    the boat, there are several smaller boats
visible in the scene. Two people can be seen on        of the artwork. Additionally, there are several      scattered around the lake, creating a sense of
the left side of the image, one closer to the water    trees visible in the background of the painting,     activity and enjoyment for those spending time
and the other slightly further away. On the right      adding depth and dimension to the scene.


          on the water. Overall, the image captures a
side of the image, there are two more people,                                                               relaxing and picturesque setting, perfect for
both closer to the water's edge.

                                                                         unwinding and taking in the natural beauty of the
                                                       After: The image depicts a painting of a beautiful   lake and its surroundings.  

After: The image depicts an aerial view of a           woman with long, flowing hair. She is wearing a
scenic coastal area with a large mountain in the       black dress and has a serene expression on her
background. The mountain is situated on the left       face. The painting captures the essence of the       After: The image depicts a long wooden pier
side of the image, while the ocean can be seen         famous painting "Mona Lisa" by Leonardo da           extending into a serene lake, surrounded by
on the right side. There are several cars visible in   Vinci, which is considered one of the most           trees and mountains in the background. The pier
the scene, likely parked or driving along the          famous paintings in the world. The painting is       is situated in the middle of the lake, creating a
coastal road. Some of the cars are closer to the       well-known for its enigmatic smile and intricate     peaceful and tranquil atmosphere. There are
mountain, while others are further away from it.       brushstrokes, making it a timeless masterpiece.
     several trees visible in the surrounding area,
In addition to the cars, there are several trees                                                            adding to the natural beauty of the scene. The
scattered throughout the landscape, adding to                                                               pier seems to be a popular spot for fishing or
the natural beauty of the area.
                                                                            simply enjoying the serene surroundings.


Figure 13: Qualitative results on images from LLaVA-Bench. We randomly select images from the
benchmark and use InstructBLIP to detect and edit out hallucinations. Our hyperparameter selection
is the same as in Section 4.1.1 (lI = 1, lT = 2, α = 1.5).


                        Model                      Method                 CHAIRi ↓            CHAIRs ↓             Recall (%) ↑
                                                   Beam Search            6.8                 23.8                 63.12
                        LLaVA-NeXT
                                                   Ours                   5.52                17.2                 63.12
                                                   Beam Search            3.27                9.2                  53.28
                        Cambrian-1
                                                   Ours                   2.7                 6.6                  53.28


Table 7: Hallucination intervention performance on more models. We mass-remove hallucinations
detected by the method in Section 5.1 on two more models, LLaVA-NeXT and Cambrian-1, on the
same subset of 500 COCO images as used in Table 2. We observe consistent improvement over the
baseline while maintaining recall of objects present in the image.


                                                                             18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                      Internal                                              Internal
                                 Internal                                             Confidences                                           Confidences
                                 Confidences                                          traffic light 97.61%                                  clock 98.04%
                                 stop sign 99.27%                                     truck 90.28%                                          car 7.20%
                                 car 2.54%                                            car 47.20%                                            person 2.10%
                                 truck 2.34%                                          fire hydrant 4.02%
                                 pedestrian 0.00%                                     person 0.44%


                   Baseline Caption                                    Baseline Caption                                       Baseline Caption
 The image depicts a street corner with a stop         The image depicts a quiet city street on a            The image features a large brick church with a
 sign prominently displayed on the right side of       sunny day, with a few cars and trucks parked          tall clock tower. The clock is situated on the side
 the scene. Next to the stop sign, there is a street   along the side of the road. There are multiple        of the tower, making it a prominent feature of
 sign that reads "Hell Canyon Rd." The street sign     traffic lights at various points along the            the building. The church has a steeple and a
 is positioned above the stop sign, making it          street, ensuring safe passage for vehicles and        cross on top of the tower, adding to its
 clearly visible for drivers and pedestrians. In the   pedestrians.                                          architectural charm.
 background, there is a car parked on the left                                                               There are two people visible in the scene, one
 side of the scene, and a truck can be seen            In addition to the cars and trucks, there are a       standing closer to the left side of the church and
 further back on the right side.                       few pedestrians walking along the sidewalk.           the other closer to the right side. Additionally,
                                                       One person can be seen near the center of             there is a car parked in front of the church, likely
                                                       the scene, while two others are closer to the         belonging to one of the visitors.
                                                       right side of the image. A fire hydrant is also
                                                       visible on the right side of the street. Overall,
                                                       the scene conveys a calm and peaceful
                                                       atmosphere in the city.


              Internal Confidences                                   Internal Confidences                                Internal Confidences
        cake 99.99%       man 96.33%                        horse 96.33%         man 60.63%                     oven 98.22%          bottle 97.34%
        table 88.02%      chair 57.04%                      girl 29.65%         bench 9.58%                     woman 83.76%         stove 71.44%
        cup 6.85%         tv 0.686%                         dining table 2.43%                                  spoon 64.54%         refrigerator 6.61%
                                                                                                                microwave 4.93%      bowl 3.02%

                  Baseline Caption                                       Baseline Caption                                     Baseline Caption
 The image depicts a group of men in military          The image features a man and a young girl             The image features a woman standing in a
 uniforms gathered around a dining table,              sitting on the back of a brown and white horse.       kitchen, cooking a meal. She is wearing a green
 celebrating their 70th anniversary. They are          The man is holding the reins of the horse,            shirt and is focused on stirring a large pot on the
 shaking hands and posing for a picture in front       ensuring the girl's safety while she enjoys the       stove. The pot appears to be filled with food,
 of a large sheet cake. The cake is placed on the      ride. The girl is wearing a pink dress, adding a      and the woman is using a spoon to mix the
 table, taking up a significant portion of the         touch of color to the scene.                          ingredients.
 space.                                                In the background, there is a bench and a             The kitchen is well-equipped with various
 There are multiple chairs surrounding the dining      dining table, suggesting that the location might      appliances and utensils. There is a refrigerator
 table, and several cups can be seen on the            be a park or an outdoor gathering area.               on the left side of the room, and an oven can be
 table as well. In the background, a TV is                                                                   seen on the right side. A microwave is placed
 mounted on the wall, adding to the atmosphere                                                               above the oven, and a bowl is located on the
 of the celebration.                                                                                         countertop near the center of the kitchen.
                                                                                                             Additionally, there are two bottles, one on the
                                                                                                             left side and the other on the right side of the
                                                                                                             kitchen, possibly containing cooking ingredients
                                                                                                             or beverages.


Figure 14: LLaVA Object Presence Classification. Sample image captions from LLaVA and the
internal confidence scores for objects in the caption used for classification as correctly detected
objects or hallucinations.


                                                                             19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Internal Confidences                              Internal Confidences                                 Internal Confidences
        cake 99.76%         fork 97.46%                      cat 95.21%     chair 88.33%                       table 98.78%      chair 73.14%
        table 94.19%       man 25.49%                        table 4.16%    bowl 0.32%                         umbrella 4.15% person 0.47%
        knife 1.79%        spoon 0.44%                       cup 0.13%                                         car 0.18%
        bowl 0.4%

                Baseline Caption                                     Baseline Caption                                    Baseline Caption
The image features a man sitting at a dining        The image features a black cat sitting on a red      The image features a small table and two
table with a plate of chocolate cake in front of    chair next to a pair of white shoes. The cat is      chairs placed outside on a sidewalk. The table
him. He is holding a fork and appears to be         interacting with the shoes, possibly trying to       has a vintage hair dryer sitting on top of it,
about to take a bite from the cake. There are       play with them or investigate them. There are        adding a unique touch to the scene. The chairs
several other utensils on the table, including      several other objects in the room, such as a         are positioned close to the table, creating a
knives, forks, and spoons, suggesting that the      bowl and a cup placed on a table near the cat's      cozy seating area for two people. There is also
man might be sharing the cake with someone          position. Additionally, a window can be seen in      an umbrella placed near the table, providing
else. In the background, there is a bowl placed     the background, adding to the overall                additional protection from the sun or rain. A
on the table, possibly containing additional food   atmosphere of the scene.                             street can be seen in the background, with cars
or drinks. Overall, the scene depicts a man                                                              passing by occasionally.
enjoying a delicious slice of chocolate cake.


              Internal Confidences                               Internal Confidences                                Internal Confidences
       airplane 56.59%     plane 19.46%                    table 99.85%       vase 99.56%                      sink 97.07%      spoon 5.19%
       person 0.53%        fire hydrant                    chair 83.84%       bench 3.69%                      knife 0.3%       fork 0.07%
       0.23%                                               person 0.22%


                 Baseline Caption                                   Baseline Caption                                     Baseline Caption
 The image depicts an American Airlines             The image features an outdoor patio with a           The image depicts a kitchen sink area with
 airplane parked on a runway next to a body of      glass-topped dining table surrounded by              two sinks, one on the left side and the other
 water, possibly a lake or a river. The plane       chairs. On the table, there is a vase filled with    on the right side. The sink on the left is closer
 appears to be preparing for takeoff or landing.    pink flowers, adding a touch of beauty and           to the edge of the countertop, while the sink
 There are several people visible in the scene,     elegance to the space. The vase is placed in         on the right is positioned further away from
 some standing near the airplane, while others      the center of the table, making it the focal point   the edge. In addition to the sinks, there is a
 are positioned further away from it. In total,     of the area. There are several chairs                dishwasher located in the middle of the
 there are at least 10 people present in the        surrounding the table, providing ample seating       kitchen area. There are several utensils
 scene. Additionally, there is a fire hydrant       for people to enjoy their meals or relax in the      scattered throughout the scene, including a
 located close to the airplane, likely for          sunshine. A bench can also be seen on the left       spoon, a fork, and a knife, placed near the
 emergency purposes.                                side of the patio, offering additional seating       sinks and the dishwasher.
                                                    options. Overall, the scene radiates a warm and
                                                    inviting atmosphere, perfect for outdoor
                                                    gatherings and relaxation.


                               Figure 15: InstructBLIP Object Presence Classification.


                                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Before: The image depicts a person wearing a                         Before: The image shows a person sitting                      Before: The image features a man wearing a dress shirt

black shirt and gray pants, standing next to a                       on a bench, holding a donut in their hand.                    and tie, standing in a room. He is wearing a striped tie,

skateboard. The skateboard is placed on the                          The donut appears to be half-eaten, with a                    and the shirt appears to be white. The man appears to be

ground, with the person's hand resting on it. The                    bite taken out of it. The person seems to be                  looking down at his tie, possibly adjusting it or checking

person appears to be in the process of picking                       enjoying their snack while sitting on the                     its appearance.



up the skateboard or preparing to ride it.                           bench.  

                                                                                                                                   In the room, there is a couch located towards the right

In the background, there is a chair and a dining                     In addition to the person and the donut,                      side of the image, and a chair can be seen in the

table, suggesting that the scene might be taking                     there is a handbag placed next to the                         background on the left side. The man is positioned in the

place in an outdoor or semi-outdoor setting.

                       person on the bench, and a backpack can                       center of the scene, drawing attention to his attire.
 

                                                                     be seen in the background.



After: In the image, a person is standing on a                                                                                     After: The image depicts a man wearing a dress shirt and

sidewalk, holding a colorful skateboard in their                     After: In the image, a person is sitting on a                 tie, standing in a room. The shirt is white, and the tie is

hand. The skateboard features a vibrant design,                      bench and holding a pastry in their hand.                     blue. The man is wearing a belt, which is visible around

making it an eye-catching sight. The person                          The pastry appears to be a doughnut, and                      his waist. The room appears to be dimly lit, creating a

appears to be either preparing to skate or taking                    the person is in the process of eating it.                    somewhat mysterious atmosphere.\n\nIn addition to the

a break from their skateboarding session. The                        Another doughnut can be seen on the                           man, there are two other people in the room, one on the

scene captures the essence of skateboarding                          bench, close to the person's hand. A chair is                 left side and the other on the right side of the image.

culture and the enjoyment it brings to those who                     also visible in the scene, placed near the                    However, they are not the main focus of the scene, as the

participate in it.                                                   bench where the person is sitting.                            man in the dress shirt and tie is the central figure.


Before: The image captures a            man     in mid-air,          Before: The image captures a heartwarming                     Before: The image depicts a clean and well-maintained

leaping over a        bed   in a bedroom. He is wearing a            scene of two e e   l ph     s
                                                                                               ant   , an adult and a              kitchen with a white s o t ve top oven. The o     ven has two

tie   and appears to be in the middle of an                          baby, playing together in a body of water.                    burners, one on the left side and the other on the right

energetic jump. There are several other people in                    The a  dul   t elephant is partially submerged in             side. Above the oven, there is a light that illuminates the

the room, with one person standing near the left                     the water, while the baby elephant is                         cooking area. The kitchen is e    q   uipped with various

side of the bed and two others closer to the                         swimming nearby. They appear to be                            utensils, including multiple    k v
                                                                                                                                                                    ni    es and a spoon. The

right side. The bedroom is furnished with a                          enjoying their time in the water, splashing                   knives are placed in a knife block, while the spoon can be

couch    , a   chair  , and a   dining table   . A   potted          and interacting with each other.

                            found on the left side of the oven. Additionally, there is a

plant   can be seen on the right side of the room,                                                                                 bowl   located on the left side of the kitchen, and a     bottle
adding a touch of greenery to the space. A                   clock   In addition to the two elephants, there are a                 can be seen on the right side.



is mounted on the wall, and a           cup    is placed on          few other objects in the scene.         A bench        can

the dining table.

                                                  be seen on the left side of the image, and a                  After: The image depicts a kitchen with an old-fashioned

                                                                     potted plant     is located near the top left                         t v
                                                                                                                                   white s o   e top o v en. The stove has four burners, with

After: The image depicts a           man   in a white shirt          corner.
                                                      two on the left side and two on the right side. Above the

and a blue      tie   jumping in the air above a bed in a                                                                          stove, there is a light that illuminates the cooking area.

bedroom. He appears to be in the process of                          After: The image depicts two e e       l ph   ant s    in a   The kitchen is well-e   quipped with various utensils and

diving onto the bed. There are several other                         body of water, possibly a river or a lake. One                appliances. There are two       k v
                                                                                                                                                                    ni   es, one on the left side of

people in the room, with some standing near the                      of the elephants appears to be an a         dul   t,          the stove and the other on the right side. Additionally,

bed and others scattered around the area. The                        while the other is a baby elephant. The baby                  there are two spoons, one near the left knife and the

bedroom is furnished with a           dining table     , a           elephant is swimming in the water, while the                  other near the right knife. A    bottle   can be seen on the left

chair  , and a    potted plant                   cup
                                   . There is also a                 adult elephant is standing nearby. They                       side of the stove, and a c oc  l k    is mounted on the wall

placed on the dining table, and a          handbag       can         seem to be enjoying their time together in                    above the oven.

be seen near one of the people in the room.                          the water.

Overall, the scene captures a lively and

energetic atmosphere in the bedroom.


Figure 16: Qualitative results for LLaVA hallucination intervention. Our algorithm removes
hallucinations and, at times, adds correctly detected objects.


                                                                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Before: The image depicts a young woman               Before: The image features a young woman                       Before: The image depicts a group of people riding in
sitting on a bench, leaning against a wall, and       sitting on a bench outside, eating a hot dog                   an old-fashioned, open-air truck. The truck is carrying
talking on her cell phone. She is wearing a white     wrapped in a napkin. She appears to be enjoying                a large number of people, with some sitting on the bed
shirt and appears to be engrossed in her              her food as she takes a big bite out of the hot                of the truck and others standing around it. There are
conversation. In the background, there are            dog. There are several bottles scattered around                several umbrellas in the scene, one of which is held by
several other people walking around, some of          the scene, including one close to the woman's                  a person in the back of the truck, providing shade for
them carrying bags or purses. The scene takes         left hand and another near her right foot. In                  the passengers. In addition to the umbrella, there are
place at night, with streetlights illuminating the    addition to the bottles, there are two cars visible            several handbags scattered throughout the scene,
area and casting shadows on the surroundings.

       in the background, one on the left side and                    likely belonging to the passengers. The truck appears
                                                      another on the right side of the image.

                      to be making its way through a wooded area,
After: A young man is sitting on a railing, leaning                                                                  surrounded by trees and foliage.
 
against it while talking on his cell phone. He is     After: The image depicts a young woman sitting
wearing a backpack and appears to be                  on a bench outside, eating a hot dog wrapped in                After: The image features a group of people riding in
engrossed in his conversation. There are several      a napkin. She appears to be enjoying her meal                  an old-fashioned, open-air vehicle, likely an old tractor
other people in the scene, some of whom are           while surrounded by other people who are                       or truck, on a dirt road surrounded by trees. They are
standing or walking around. One person is closer      walking around the area. There are several                     enjoying a leisurely ride through the countryside, with
to the man on the railing, while others are           bottles scattered throughout the scene, likely                 one person holding a purple umbrella to protect
scattered throughout the area. A handbag can          containing drinks or other beverages. In the                   themselves from the sun. There are several people in
be seen nearby, possibly belonging to one of the      background, there is a building with multiple                  the vehicle, with some seated in the front and others in
people in the scene.                                  windows visible.                                               the back. The scene captures the essence of a relaxed
                                                                                                                     and enjoyable day out in the countryside.


Before: The image depicts a group of four young       Before: The image depicts a city street with a red             Before: The image depicts a co y living room filled with
men playing a game of risbee on a grassy field.       and white public transit b s parked on the side
                                                                                                                                                             z

                        f                                                                  u                         various furniture and decorations. There is a black
They are all wearing orange shirts, and one of        of the road. The bus is surrounded by other                            placed in the center of the room, surrounded by
them is jumping up to catch the frisbee as it flies   vehicles, including a s,         , and a
                                                                                                                     couch

                                                                         c         r       trucks                    several                 . On the left side of the room,
through the air. There are several benches                         . There are several         visible in
                                                                                                                                 potted plants

                                                      motorcycle                                   people            there is a coffee table with two         placed on it. A
scattered around the field, providing seating         the scene, some standing near the bus and
                                                                                                                                                             cups

                                                                                                                     t     s o can be seen on the right side of the room,
options for the players and spectators. In            others walking along the sidewalk. b             is
                                                                                                                     elevi   i   n

                                                                                                      A     icycle   positioned close to the wall. In addition to the couch
addition to the benches, there are two                also present in the scene, likely belonging to one             and coffee        , there are several potted plants
             visible in the scene, likely belonging   of the pedestrians. verall, the scene showcases
                                                                                                                                     table

backpacks                                                                 O                                          scattered throughout the room, adding a touch of
to the players or spectators. Overall, the scene      a busy urban environment with various modes of                 greenery to the space. Two ott s are also visible, one
captures a lively and energetic game of frisbee       transportation in use
                                                                                                                                                         b   le

                                                                             .
                                      on the left side of the room and the other on the right
among friends.

                                                                                                     side, near the coffee table. Overall, the living room has
                                                      After: A red and white city b s is parked on the
                                                                                               u                     a warm and inviting atmosphere, perfect for relaxing
After: There is a group of young men playing a        side of a street, waiting for passengers to board.             and spending time with friends or family.


game of risbee on a soccer field. They are all
         f                                            There are several people    in the vicinity of the
wearing matching shirts, and one of them is           bus, including one person standing near the front              After: The image depicts a well-appointed living room
jumping up to catch the frisbee as it flies through   of the bus, another person walking towards the                 with a        , coffee table, and a             . There
the air. The other players are also actively          bus, and a third person further away from the
                                                                                                                             couch                               dining table

                                                                                                                     are several                 scattered throughout the
participating in the game, trying to catch the        bus. A b        is also visible in the scene, likely
                                                                                                                                     potted plants

                                                              icycle                                                 room, adding a touch of greenery to the space. A
frisbee or block their opponents attempts to
                                 '                    belonging to one of the pedestrians. In the                    bookshelf is visible on the left side of the room,
score. There are several benches scattered            background, there is a a parked on the other
                                                                                       c   r                         showcasing various            and decorative items. In the
around the field, providing seating for those         side of the street.
                                                                                                                                             books

                                                                                                                     center of the room, there is a coffee table surrounded
watching the game or taking a break from the                                                                         by        , providing a comfortable seating area for
action.
                                                                                                                        chairs

                                                                                                                     guests. The room has a co y and inviting atmosphere,
                                                                                                                                                     z

                                                                                                                     perfect for relaxation and social gatherings.

                 Figure 17: Qualitative results for InstructBLIP hallucination intervention.


                                                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Input Image   raw attention (VLM)    Ours            Input Image   raw attention (VLM)   Ours


                               Figure 18: Object Localization Samples.


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Class            T3% T5% T10% Patches              Class           T3% T5% T10% Patches
     airplane         51.0   61.8   72.5     102        kite            66.7   77.8    88.9       9
     apple            70.2   76.6   80.9      47        knife           24.0   26.0    34.0      50
     backpack         44.8   48.5   58.5     614        laptop          34.1   38.3    46.1     334
     banana           77.2   79.2   83.2     101        microwave       23.8   37.2    55.2     223
     baseball bat      0.0   33.3   33.3       3        motorcycle      64.7   70.6    78.3     984
     baseball glove   65.4   69.2   73.1      26        mouse           50.0   50.0    66.7       6
     bear             37.6   41.4   47.6     739        orange          44.2   50.0    57.7      52
     bed              44.0   47.8   52.0    2373        oven            38.9   54.4    78.9     507
     bench            61.3   63.9   66.6     524        parking meter   20.9   24.8    29.6     230
     bicycle          27.2   32.3   58.3     235        person           0.5    1.1    12.6   11528
     bird             75.5   79.4   80.6     155        pizza           41.8   52.1    69.4    3146
     boat             26.2   29.7   38.8     516        potted plant    43.8   52.1    63.0     192
     book             28.1   39.0   44.8     210        refrigerator    23.7   31.4    50.0     156
     bottle           46.2   53.4   62.0     208        remote          14.3   17.3    17.3      98
     bowl             22.1   25.0   31.9    1364        sandwich        40.2   44.4    54.3     468
     broccoli         75.9   77.2   79.7      79        scissors        71.9   71.9    71.9      32
     bus              49.8   54.1   61.3    1786        sheep           49.5   52.6    56.6     489
     cake             43.2   51.4   83.5    1182        sink            57.0   60.3    65.1     272
     car              29.4   37.7   52.7     714        skateboard      48.1   50.6    57.7     239
     carrot           50.0   50.0   75.0       4        skis            27.6   34.2    44.7      76
     cat              57.7   61.5   66.5    2239        snowboard       37.5   41.7    47.9      48
     cell phone       73.4   76.6   82.8      64        spoon           35.5   43.5    53.2      62
     chair            31.6   33.1   37.6     516        sports ball      4.4    8.9    20.0      45
     clock            67.6   70.6   75.9     299        stop sign       85.7   88.6    89.9     237
     couch            33.4   38.9   63.2    2435        suitcase        38.1   40.7    44.7     472
     cow              51.9   58.6   67.0     324        surfboard       48.6   57.5    69.9     146
     cup               9.4   14.9   30.4     181        teddy bear      38.5   43.1    47.7     239
     dining table     25.4   47.6   74.9    7403        tennis racket   88.9   88.9    88.9       9
     dog              45.9   51.3   59.7    1057        tie             46.2   49.7    52.8     197
     donut            34.8   40.0   45.2     115        toilet          92.0   97.3    99.6    1131
     elephant         47.0   57.4   64.9     902        toothbrush      78.9   78.9   100.0      19
     fire hydrant     43.4   47.0   50.1     419        traffic light   45.5   45.5    45.5      11
     fork             41.4   45.7   54.3      70        train           40.7   45.0    52.1    3008
     frisbee          50.0   60.6   71.2      66        truck           34.5   40.1    54.6     930
     giraffe          32.0   39.8   62.8     810        tv              27.2   32.6    37.6     298
     handbag          42.2   53.0   57.8      83        umbrella        39.5   40.5    42.8     526
     horse            63.7   65.8   68.8     240        vase            29.9   32.6    45.1     264
     hot dog          56.9   62.7   69.3     394        wine glass      61.9   67.0    74.3     218
     keyboard         43.1   47.7   49.2      65        zebra           33.0   35.9    44.5     373
     Overall          32.7   39.3   52.2   55988


Table 8: Per-class patch classification accuracy. For each COCO class, we show the percentage of
patches containing that object that top-k logit lens predictions can correctly identify.


                                                   24
