Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


V IDEO P HY : E VALUATING P HYSICAL C OMMONSENSE
FOR V IDEO G ENERATION

    Hritik Bansal∗1 Zongyu Lin∗1 Tianyi Xie†1 Zeshun Zong†1 Michal Yarom‡2
    Yonatan Bitton‡2 Chenfanfu Jiang1 Yizhou Sun1 Kai-Wei Chang1 Aditya Grover1
    1                                                       2
        University of California Los Angeles                    Google Research

                                                       A BSTRACT
             Recent advances in internet-scale video data pretraining have led to the development
             of text-to-video generative models that can create high-quality videos across a
             broad range of visual concepts, synthesize realistic motions and render complex
             objects. Hence, these generative models have the potential to become general-
             purpose simulators of the physical world. However, it is unclear how far we are
             from this goal with the existing text-to-video generative models. To this end, we
             present V IDEO P HY, a benchmark designed to assess whether the generated videos
             follow physical commonsense for real-world activities (e.g. marbles will roll
             down when placed on a slanted surface). Specifically, we curate diverse prompts
             that involve interactions between various material types in the physical world
             (e.g., solid-solid, solid-fluid, fluid-fluid). We then generate videos conditioned
             on these captions from diverse state-of-the-art text-to-video generative models,
             including open models (e.g., CogVideoX) and closed models (e.g., Lumiere, Dream
             Machine). Our human evaluation reveals that the existing models severely lack
             the ability to generate videos adhering to the given text prompts, while also lack
             physical commonsense. Specifically, the best performing model, CogVideoX-5B,
             generates videos that adhere to the caption and physical laws for 39.6% of the
             instances. V IDEO P HY thus highlights that the video generative models are far from
             accurately simulating the physical world. Finally, we propose an auto-evaluator,
             V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS, to assess the performance reliably for the newly released
             models. Code: https://github.com/Hritikbansal/videophy.


                             Model Performance on VideoPhy Dataset
        CogVideoX-5B                                                          Figure 1: Model performance on the
                  Pika                                                        V IDEO P HY dataset using human evalua-
         VideoCrafter2                                                        tion. We assess the physical commonsense
        CogVideoX-2B                                                          and semantic adherence to the conditioning
                 LaVIE                                                        caption in the generated videos. We find that
 Dream Machine (Luma)                                                         CogVideoX-5B can generate videos that fol-
        Lumiere-T2I2V
                  SVD                                                         low the caption and physics commonsense for
            ZeroScope                                                         39.6% of the prompts, while the other mod-
          Lumiere-T2V                                                         els are far behind (< 20%). This indicates
                Gen-2                                                         that the existing models severely lack the abil-
             OpenSora                                                         ity of being general-purpose physical world
                         0    5    10   15   20   25   30       35       40   simulators.
                             Accuracy Based on Human Evaluation (%)


1        I NTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in pretraining on internet-scale video data [3, 122, 113, 111, 24] have led
to the development of various text-to-video (T2V) generative models such as Sora [68] that can
generate photo-realistic videos conditioned on a text prompt [8, 110, 22, 80, 98, 15, 49]. Specifically,
these models can generate complex scenes (e.g., ‘busy street in Japan’) and realistic motions (e.g.,
‘running’, ‘pouring’), making them amenable for understanding and simulating the physical world.
As humans, we develop an intuitive understanding of the object interactions through our experience


                                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Initial Frame     Middle Frame       Last Frame

                                                                             Prompt: Pouring milk into a cup.

             LaVIE                                                          Conversation of Mass Violation:
                                                                           The level of the milk in the cup does
                                                                                      not increase.

                                                                             Prompt: Shoveling sand into a
                                                                                       bucket.
             Gen-2                                                         Newton's First Law Violation: The
                                                                           sand in the front shifted without any
                                                                                     force by shovel.

                                                                           Prompt: Wood floats down a canal.

            OpenSora                                                       Solid Constitutive Law Violation:
                                                                            Rigid objects (wood) should not
                                                                             deform under small force load.


Figure 2: Illustration of poor physical commonsense by various T2V generative models. Here, we show
that the generated videos can violate a diverse range of laws pf physics such as conversation of mass, Newton’s
first law, and solid constitutive laws. In V IDEO P HY, we curate a wide range of prompts that would be used to
assess the physical commonsense of the T2V models.



with the real-world, without any formal education in physics (also termed as intuitive physics) [27].
For instance, we can predict the trajectories of the billiard balls after an application of force. Recent
efforts [26, 19, 1] have further utilized text-guided video generation to train agents that can act, plan,
and solve goals in the real world. In spite of the strong physical motivations of these works, it remains
unclear how well the generated videos from T2V models adhere to the laws of physics.
One might be tempted to assess the physical commonsense of generated videos by comparing them
with physical simulations as a ground truth. However, this is non-trivial, and no similar approaches
have been proposed yet. The main challenges include the lack of mature methods to accurately
generate 3D geometries from single-view images or video, which is essential for physical simulations.
Further, physical simulations usually require precise tuning of material parameters based on the
expertise of graphics researchers to match real-world dynamics. Recently, some efforts have been
made to tune simulation parameters from generated videos (e.g., [40, 64, 130, 75]). Nevertheless,
they depend on the physical plausibility of the generated videos themselves, which is again the
open question we want to address. Finally, the accurate lighting and rendering are also necessary to
convert physically simulated results into images and videos, yet these parameters are also unknown.
Most importantly, it should be noted that physical simulations are not equivalent to ground truth.
They are merely numerical solvers of differential equations that attempt to approximate and describe
real-world dynamics based on models proposed by researchers. Prior work such as VBench [42, 67]
introduced a comprehensive benchmark to evaluate various qualities of generated videos (e.g., motion
smoothness, background consistency) using existing models, but it does not specifically address the
generated videos’ adherence to physical laws. Therefore, existing benchmarks and metrics are either
unreliable or lack coverage for holistic evaluation of the physical commonsense capabilities.
To this end, we propose V IDEO P HY, a dataset designed to evaluate the adherence of generated
videos to physical commonsense in real-world scenarios. Specifically, we focus on the intuitive
understanding of the behavior and dynamics of various states of matter (solids, fluids) in the physical
world [84, 126, 11]. For instance, ‘water pouring into a glass’ will intuitively result in the water level
in the glass rising over time. As a result, we rely on human perception and experience in the physical
world to assess the adherence of the generated videos to physical laws instead of precise dynamical
equations, which are harder to assess. In Figure 2, we provide qualitative examples to illustrate
physical commonsense violations in the videos. Our dataset is constructed through a three-stage
pipeline that involves (a) prompting a large language model [78] to generate candidate captions that
depict interactions between diverse states of matter (e.g., solid-solid, solid-fluid, fluid-fluid), (b)
human verification of the generated captions, and (c) annotating the complexity in rendering objects
or synthesizing motions described in the captions based on physics simulation.
In total, V IDEO P HY comprises 688 high-quality, human-verified captions that will be used to generate
videos from T2V models. In addition, the dataset consists human-labeled annotations for physi-
cal commonsense of the generated videos. Specifically, we acquire generated videos from twelve
diverse T2V models including open models (e.g., OpenSora [80], SVD [13], VideoCrafter2 [22],


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CogVideoX [123]) and closed models (e.g., Pika [83], Lumiere [8], Gen-2 [29], Dream Machine
[2]). Subsequently, we perform human evaluation on the generated videos for semantic adherence to
the conditioning text (e.g., do the videos follow the caption?) and physical commonsense (e.g., do
the videos follow physical laws intuitively?). Interestingly, we find that the existing T2V generative
models severely lack the capability to follow caption accurately and generate videos with physical
commonsense. Specifically, the best performing model, CogVideoX-5B, follows the text and gener-
ates physically accurate videos for 39.6% of the instances (§5). Our fine-grained analysis reveals that
current T2V models are particularly poor at generating physically plausible videos for prompts that
require solid-solid interaction (e.g., ball bouncing on the floor, hammer hits a nail). In Figure 1, we
compare the performance (i.e., accurate semantic adherence and physical commonsense) of various
T2V generative models on the V IDEO P HY dataset. In addition, we perform a detailed qualitative
analysis to study the modes of the failures for different models in detail (§5.2). In particular, we
observe that the models often struggle to accurately identify individual objects and comprehend their
material properties, which is essential for generating physically plausible dynamics. For instance, an
object recognized as a rigid body in the physical world should not deform over time.
Although human evaluation of semantic adherence and physical commonsense is reliable, it is both
expensive and difficult to scale. To address this challenge, we introduce V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS, an
open video-language model designed to assess the semantic adherence and physical commonsense of
generated videos using user queries grounded in text (§6). Specifically, we finetune V IDEOCON [5],
a robust semantic adherence evaluator for real videos, on generated videos and human annotations
collected as a part of our dataset. Our results demonstrate that V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS outperforms
Gemini-Pro-Vision-1.5 [90], showing a 9 points improvement in semantic adherence and a 15 points
improvement in physical commonsense on unseen prompts. Further, we show that V IDEO C ON -
P HYSICS generalizes to unseen generative models, which established its reliability for evaluating
future generative models. Overall, the V IDEO P HY dataset aims to bridge the gap in understanding
physical commonsense in generated videos and enables scalable testing for upcoming T2V models.

2     V IDEO P HY DATASET
Our dataset, V IDEO P HY, aims to offer a robust evaluation benchmark for physical commonsense in
video generative models. Specifically, the dataset is curated with guidelines to cover (a) a wide range
of daily activities and objects in the physical world (e.g., rolling objects, pouring liquid into a glass),
(b) physical interactions between various material types (e.g., solid-solid or solid-fluid interactions),
and (c) the perceived complexity of rendering objects and motions under graphic simulation. For
instance, ketchup, which follows non-newtonian fluid dynamics [114], is harder to model and simulate
than water, which follows newtonian fluid dynamics, using traditional fluid simulators [16]. Under
the collection guidelines, we curate a list of text prompts that will be used for conditioning the
text-to-video generative models. Specifically, we follow the 3-stage pipeline to create the dataset.

    Category       Difficulty      Example Captions
                     Easy          Bottle topples off the table. ( rigid bodies )
    Solid-Solid
                     Hard          Scrubber scrubs a dirty dish. ( complex contacts )
                      Easy         Water flows down a circular drain. ( contacts with rigid bodies )
    Solid-Fluid
                      Hard         A swimmer splashing in the sea water. ( contacts with high-speed )
                      Easy         Rain splashing on a pond. ( mixing of same fluids )
    Fluid-Fluid
                      Hard         Ink spreading in still water. ( mixing of different fluids )

Table 1: Example captions in the V IDEO P HY dataset. Specifically, we design them to depict the interactions
between two states of matter (solid-solid, solid-fluid, fluid-fluid). We further classify the captions as easy or hard
based on the modeling and simulation complexity in the computer graphics. We highlight the reasoning behind
the easy and hard annotations by our expert annotators in the () .


LLM-Generated Captions (Stage 1). Here, we query a large language model, in our case GPT-4
[78], to generate a list of 1000 candidate captions depicting real-world dynamics. As the majority of
real-world dynamics involve solids or fluids, we broadly classify those dynamics into three categories:


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Statistics of the V IDEO P HY dataset.

             Statistic                   Number
          Total captions                   688
          Unique actions                   138
        Total T2V models                    12
      Total generated videos              11330
       Human annotations                  36500
  Category (Interacting materials)           3
            Solid-Solid                    289
            Solid-Fluid                    291
            Fluid-Fluid                    108
 Category (Interaction complexity)          2
               Easy                        366  Figure 3: Top-20 most frequently occurring verbs (in-
               Hard                        322  ner) and their top-4 direct nouns (outer) in captions.



solid-solid interactions, solid-fluid interactions, and fluid-fluid interactions. Specifically, we consider
fluid dynamics involving in-viscid and viscous flows—representative examples being water and
honey, respectively. On the other hand, we find that solids exhibit more diverse constitutive models,
including but not limited to rigid bodies, elastic materials, sands, metals, and snow. In total, we
prompt GPT-4 to generate 500 candidate captions for solid-solid and solid-fluid interactions, and 200
candidate captions for fluid-fluid interactions. We present the GPT-4 prompts in Appendix G.

Human Verification (Stage 2). Since LLM-generated captions may not adhere to our input query,
we perform a human verification step to filter bad generations. Specifically, the authors perform
human verification to ensure the quality and relevance of the captions, adhering to these criteria: (1)
the caption must be clear and understandable; (2) the caption should avoid excessive complexity, such
as overly varied objects or too intricate dynamics; and (3) the captions must accurately reflect the
intended interaction categories (e.g., that fluids are mentioned in solid-fluid or fluid-fluid dynamics).
Finally, we have 688 captions where 289 captions for solid-solid interactions, 291 for solid-fluid
interactions, and 108 for fluid-fluid interactions, respectively. We highlight that our prompts include
a wide range of material types and physical interactions that are common in both real life and the
graphics community. Material types include simple rigid bodies [60], deformable bodies [41], think
shells [23], metal [59], fracture [115], cream [129], sand [47] and so on. The contact handling is also
diverse as it is based on the interactions of all aforementioned materials [35, 56, 36, 133]. We provide
more discussion on categorization in Appendix B. We highlight that the data quality is paramount for
evaluating foundation models. For instance, Winoground (400 examples) [105], Visit-Bench (500
examples) [12], LLaVA-Bench (90 examples) [65], and Vibe-Eval (269 examples) [81] are commonly
employed to assess vision-language models due to their high-quality despite their limited size. Given
that human verification demands significant expert hours and is not scalable within our budget, we
prioritize data quality for evaluating T2V models.

Difficulty Annotation (Stage 3). To acquire fine-grained insights into the quality of the video
generation, we further annotate our each instance in the dataset with perceived difficulty. Specifically,
we ask two experienced graphics researchers (senior Ph.D. students in physics-based simulation)
to independently classify each caption as easy (0) or hard (1) based on their perception of the
complexity in simulating the objects and motions in the captions using state-of-the-art physics
engines [56, 25, 118, 132, 87, 32]. Subsequently, the disagreements were discussed to reach a
unanimous judgment for less than 5% of the instances. The difficulty of a simulation is primarily
influenced by the complexity of the model, which varies depending on the type of material. For
example, deformable bodies pose a greater modeling challenge than rigid bodies because they change
shape under external forces, leading to more complex partial differential equations (PDEs). In
contrast, rigid bodies maintain their shape, resulting in simpler models. Another key factor is the
numerical difficulty in solving these equations, which increases with the material’s velocity, especially
when high-order terms are involved in the PDEs. As a result, slower-moving materials are generally
easier to simulate than faster-moving ones. We note that the level of difficulty is evaluated within


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


each category (e.g., solid-solid, solid-fluid, fluid-fluid), and cannot be compared across different
categories. We present the examples for generated captions in Table 1.

Data Analysis. A fine-grained metadata facilitates a comprehensive understanding of the bench-
mark. Specifically, we present the main statistics of the V IDEO P HY dataset in Table 2. Notably, we
generate 11330 videos for the prompts in the dataset using a diverse range of generative models. In
addition, the average caption length is 8.5 words, indicating that most captions are straightforward
and do not complicate our analysis with complex phrasing that could be excessively challenging the
generative models. 1 The dataset includes 138 unique actions grounded in our captions. Figure 3
visualizes the root verbs and direct nouns used in the V IDEO P HY captions, highlighting the diversity
of actions and entities. Hence, our dataset encompasses a wide range of visual concepts and actions.
We perform fine-grained diversity analysis in Appendix J.

3     E VALUATION
3.1   M ETRICS

The ability to assess the quality of the generated videos is a challenging task. While humans can
evaluate videos across various visual dimensions [42, 20], we focus primarily on the models’ adher-
ence to the provided text and the incorporation of physical commonsense. These are key objectives
that conditional generative models must maximize. We note that several video characteristics such
as object motion, video quality, text adherence, physical commonsense, temporal consistency of
subject and object etc. are usually intertwined with each other. It is non-trivial to disentangle
their effect when humans make decisions. However, focusing on each aspect at a time provides a
comprehensive picture of the model capabilities along a specific dimension. In this work, we focus
on physical commonsense and semantic adherence. Further, there are diverse ways to acquire human
judgments such as dense and sparse feedback. While a dense feedback provides detailed information
about the model mistakes, it is hard to acquire and miscalibrated [69, 55]. Due to the simplicity
of binary judgment and its widespread use in text-to-image generative models [58, 54], we employ
binary feedback (0/1) to evaluate the generated videos in this work (more discussion in Appendix C).
Further, our experiments will demonstrate that binary feedback effectively highlights differences in
the model’s quality across various object interactions and levels of task complexity.

Semantic Adherence (SA). This metric assesses whether the text caption is semantically grounded
in the frames of the generated videos, measuring video-text alignment. Specifically, it assesses if the
actions, events, entities, and their relationships are perceived to be correctly depicted in the video
frames (e.g., water is flowing into the glass in the generated video for the caption ‘water pouring
into the glass’). In this work, we annotate the generated videos for semantic adherence, denoted as
SA = {0, 1}. Here, SA = 1 indicates that the caption is grounded in the generated video.
Physical Commonsense (PC). This metric evaluates whether the depicted actions, and object’s
state follow the physics laws in the real-world. For instance, the level of water should increase
in the glass as water flows into it, following conversation of mass. In this work, we annotate the
physical commonsense of the generated videos, denoted as PC = {0, 1}. Here, PC = 1 indicates
that the generated movements and interactions align with intuitive physics that humans acquire with
their experience in the real-world. As physical commonsense is entirely grounded in the video, it is
independent of the semantic adherence capability of the generated video. In this work, we compute
the fraction of the videos for which semantic adherence is high (SA = 1), physical commonsense is
high (PC = 1), and joint performance of these metrics is high (SA = 1, PC = 1).

3.2   H UMAN E VALUATION

We conducted a human evaluation to assess the performance of the generated videos in terms of
semantic adherence and physical commonsense using our dataset. The annotations were obtained from
a group of qualified Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) workers who were provided with the detailed
task description (and clarifications) on a shared slack channel. Subsequently, 14 workers who have
  1
    We use GPT-4 to enhance and generate longer versions of the original captions. However, we found that
most of the T2V models are poor at following long/enhanced captions most of the time.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


studied high-school physics were chosen to perform the annotations after passing a qualification test.
In this task, annotators were presented with a caption and the corresponding generated video without
any information about the generative model. They were asked to provide a semantic adherence score
(0 or 1) and a physical commonsense score (0 or 1) for each instance. Annotators were instructed to
treat semantic adherence and physical commonsense as independent metrics and were shown several
solved examples by the authors before starting the main annotation task. In some cases, we find
that generative models create static scenes instead of video frames with high motion. Here, we ask
annotators to judge the physical plausibility of the static scene in the real world (e.g., a static scene of
a folded brick does not follow physical commonsense). If the static scenes are noisy (e.g., unwanted
grainy or speckled patterns), we instruct them to consider it as poor physical commonsense. 2
The human annotators were not asked to list the violation of the physics laws since it would make
the annotations more time-consuming and expensive. Additionally, the current annotations can be
performed by annotators experience in the physical world (e.g., workers know that water flows
down from a tap, shape of a wood log will not change while floating on water) instead of advanced
education in physics. A screenshot of the human annotation interface is presented in Appendix H.

3.3     AUTOMATIC E VALUATION

While the human evaluation is more accurate for benchmarking, it is time-consuming and expensive
to acquire at scale. In addition, we want the model developers with limited resources for human
evaluation to use our benchmark. To this end, we design V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS, a reliable auto-rater
for our evaluation dataset. Specifically, we use V IDEOCON, an open video-text language model with
7B parameters, that is trained on real videos for robust semantic adherence evaluation [5]. Specifically,
we prompt V IDEOCON to generate a text response (Yes/No) conditioned on the multimodal template.
We provide details about the templates and score computation using V IDEOCON in Appendix I.
Since V IDEOCON is not trained on the generated video distribution or equipped to judge physical
commonsense, it is not expected to perform well in our setup in a zero-shot manner. Prior work
[74] has shown that data-driven approaches can outperform rule-based physics simulators for more
complicated systems like weather and climate. Hence, we take a data-driven approach in this work.
To this end, we propose V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS, an open-source generative video-text model, that can
assess the semantic adherence and physical commonsense of the generated videos. Specifically, we
finetune V IDEOCON by combining the human annotations acquired for the semantic adherence and
physical commonsense tasks over the generated videos. We present the GPT-4V [79] and Gemini-
1.5-Pro-Vision [90] baselines in Appendix M.3 We assess auto-rater effectiveness by computing the
ROC-AUC between humans and its judgments for videos generated with testing prompts.

4       S ETUP

Video Generative Models. We evaluate a diverse range of twelve closed and open text-to-video
generative models on V IDEO P HY dataset. The list of the models includes ZeroScope [21], LaVIE
[112], VideoCrafter2 [22], OpenSora [80], CogVideoX-2B and 5B [123], StableVideoDiffusion (SVD)-
T2I2V [13], Gen-2 (Runway) [29], Lumiere-T2V, Lumiere-T2I2V (Google) [8], Dream Machine
(Luma AI) [2], and Pika [83]. We provide more model and inference details in Appendix F and N. 4

Dataset setup. As described earlier, we train V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS to enable cheaper and scalable
testing of the generated videos on our dataset (§ 3.3). To facilitate this, we split the prompts in the
V IDEO P HY dataset equally into train and test sets. Specifically, we utilize the human annotations
on the generated videos for the 344 prompts in the test set for benchmarking, while the human
annotations on the generated videos for the 344 prompts in the train set are used for training the
automatic evaluation model. We ensure that the distribution of the state of matter (solid-solid,
solid-fluid, fluid-fluid) and complexity (easy, hard) is similar in the training and testing.
    2
     The workers were compensated at a rate of $18 per hour.
    3
     We note that finetuning separate classifier for semantic adherence and physical commonsense did not provide
any additional benefits over a single classifier (V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS) trained in a multi-task manner.
   4
     While there are various closed models such as Sora [68], Kling AI [48], and Genmo [34], we could not get
access through their videos due to the lack of API support.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Human evaluation results on the V IDEO P HY dataset. We report the percentage of testing prompts for
which the T2V models generate videos that adhere to the conditioning caption and exhibit physical commonsense.
We abbreviate semantic adherence as SA, and physical commonsense as PC. SA, PC indicates the percentage of
the instances for which SA=1 and PC=1. Ideally, we want the generative models to maximize the performance
on this metric. In the first column, we highlight the overall performance, and the later columns are dedicated to
fine-grained performance for the interaction between different states of matter in the prompts.

                           Overall (%)          Solid-Solid (%)        Solid-Fluid (%)        Fluid-Fluid (%)
 Model                 SA, PC SA       PC     SA, PC SA       PC     SA, PC SA       PC     SA, PC SA       PC
 Open Models
 CogVideoX-5B [123]     39.6    63.3    53     24.4    50.3   43.3    53.1    76.5   59.3    43.6    61.8   61.8
 VideoCrafter2 [22]     19.0    48.5   34.6     4.9    31.5   23.8    27.4    57.5   41.8    32.7    69.1   43.6
 CogVideoX-2B [123]     18.6    47.2   34.1    12.7    42.9   28.1    21.9    56.1   34.9    25.4    34.5   47.2
 LaVIE [112]            15.7    48.7   28.0     8.5    37.3   19.0    15.8    52.1   30.8    34.5    69.1   43.6
 SVD-T2I2V [14]         11.9    42.4   30.8     4.2    25.9   27.3    17.1    52.7   32.9    18.2    58.2   34.5
 ZeroScope [21]         11.9    30.2   32.6     6.3    17.5   22.4    14.4    40.4   37.0    20.0    36.4   47.3
 OpenSora [80]          4.9     18.0   23.5     1.4     7.7   23.8     7.5    30.1   21.9    7.3     12.7   27.3
 Closed Models
 Pika [83]              19.7    41.1   36.5    13.6    24.8   36.8    16.3    46.5   27.9    44.0    68.0   58.0
 Dream Machine [2]      13.6    61.9   21.8    12.1    50.0   24.3    16.6    68.1   23.6    9.0     76.3   11.0
 Lumiere-T2I2V [8]      12.5    48.5   25.0     8.4    37.1   25.2    17.1    59.6   26.0    10.9    49.1   21.8
 Lumiere-T2V [8]         9.0    38.4   27.9     8.4    26.6   27.3     9.6    47.3   26.0    9.1     45.5   34.5
 Gen-2 [29]              7.6    26.6   27.2     4.0     8.9   37.1     8.1    38.5   18.5    15.1    37.7   26.4



Benchmarking. Here, we generate one video per test prompt for each T2V generative model in
our testbed. Subsequently, we ask three human annotators to judge the semantic adherence and
physical commonsense of the generated videos. In our experiments, we report the majority-voted
scores from the human annotators. We find that the inter-annotator agreement for semantic adherence
and physical commonsense judgment is 75% and 70%, respectively. This indicates that the human
annotators find the task of judging physical commonsense more subjective than semantic adherence.
5
  In total, we collect 24500 human annotations across the testing prompts and T2V models.

Training set for V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS. Here, we sample two videos per training prompt for
nine T2V models.6 We choose two videos to obtain more data instances for training the automatic
evaluation model. Subsequently, we ask one human annotator to judge the semantic adherence
and physical commonsense of the generated videos. In total, we collect 12000 human annotations,
half of them for semantic adherence and the other half for physical commonsense. Specifically,
we finetune V IDEOCON to maximize the log likelihood of Yes/No conditioned on the multimodal
template for semantic adherence and physical commonsense tasks (Appendix I). We do not collect
three annotations per video as it is financially expensive. In total, we spent $3500 on collecting
human annotations for benchmarking and training.

5       R ESULTS
5.1     P ERFORMANCE ON V IDEO P HY DATASET

We compare the performance of the T2V generative models on the V IDEO P HY dataset using human
evaluation in Table 3. We find that CogVideoX-5B generates videos that adhere to the caption and
follow physics laws (SA = 1, PC = 1) in 39.6% of the cases. The success of CogVideoX can be
attributed to its high-quality data curation including inclusion of detailed captions, and filtering videos
with less motion and poor quality. In addition, we find that the rest of the video models achieve
a score below 20%. This highlights that the existing video models severely lack the capability to
generate videos which follow intuitive physics, and establishes V IDEO P HY as a challenging dataset.7
More specifically, CogVideoX-5B stands out as the best model for generating videos that demonstrate
physical commonsense, achieving a performance of 53%, while CogVideoX-2B is the second best
    5
      Variations in annotations arise from differing tolerance for commonsense violations in imperfect videos. As
generative models improve, human annotations will align more closely.
    6
      Since the CogVideoX and Dream Machine models were released very recently, they could not be included
in the training set of the automatic evaluator.
    7
      We compared pairwise model predictions using the paired t-test at a 95% confidence interval. We find that
the difference between CogVideoX-5B and other video models is statistically significant (p<0.0001).


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


open model at 34.1%. Further, this highlights that scaling the network capacity improves its ability
to capture the underlying physical constraints of the internet-scale video data. In addition, we find
that OpenSora performs the worst on the V IDEO P HY dataset, indicating significant potential for
the community to improve open-source implementations of Sora. Amongst the closed models, Pika
achieves generates videos that achieve positive judgement for semantic adherence and physical
commonsense for 19.7% of the cases. Interestingly, we observe that Dream Machine achieves a high
semantic adherence score (61.9%) but a poor physical commonsense score (21.8%) which highlights
that a optimizing for semantic adherence does not necessarily lead to good physical commonsense.

Variation with the states of matter. We study the variation in the performance of T2V models
with the interaction between the diverse states of matter grounded in the captions (e.g., solid-solid) in
Table 5.1. Interestingly, we find that all the existing T2V models perform the worst on the captions
that depict interactions between solid materials (e.g., bottle topples off the table), with the best
performing model, CogVideoX-5B, achieving 24.4% on accurate semantic adherence and physical
commonsense. Furthermore, we observe that Pika achieves the highest performance in the captions
that depict interaction between fluid and fluid material types (e.g., rain splashing on a pond). This
indicates that the T2V model performance is greatly influenced by the states of matter involved in a
scene, and highlights that model developers can focus on enhancing semantic adherence and physical
commonsense for solid-solid interactions.

Variation with the complexity. We analyze the variation in the video model performance with the
complexity in rendering objects or synthesizing interactions grounded in the caption under physical
simulation in Appendix Table 6. We find that the semantic adherence and physical commonsense
performance of all the video models decreases as the complexity of the captions increases. This
indicates that the captions that are harder to simulate physically are also harder to control via
conditioning for the video generative models. Our analysis thus highlights that the future T2V model
development should focus on reducing the gap between the easy and the hard captions from our
V IDEO P HY dataset. We provide qualitative generated examples from captions of varying complexity
and material states in Appendix V. Further, we present results for additional metrics in Appendix L.

Correlation analysis. To understand the connection between various performance metrics, we
examine the correlation between semantic adherence (SA) and physical commonsense (PC) with
video quality and motion (Appendix §S). Our empirical results show a positive correlation between
video quality and both PC and SA, while motion exhibits a negative correlation with PC and SA. This
indicates that the video models tend to make more mistakes in the SA and PC when more motions
are depicted in them. The closed models (Dream Machine/Pika) contribute to the higher end of the
video quality while open models (Zeroscope/OpenSora) contribute to the lower end of video quality.
While the high quality is ‘correlated’ with the better PC, we note that the absolute performance of the
models is quite poor on our benchmark.

5.2   Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS


  (a) v. Pika. Water spraying from    (b) v. Dream Machine. The sharp        (c) v. Gen-2. A tire rolls through
     a garden hose onto plants.      knife severs the fresh loaf of bread.   a deep puddle, splashing water.

Figure 4: Comparison of CogVideoX-5B with other models. The top row shows the videos generated by
CogVideoX-5B. (a) For Pika, the water streams on the left and right have drastically different speed. (b) For
DM, a part of the bread suddenly changes its shape. (c) For Gen-2, the water droplets remain still in the air.

Here, we provide a qualitative analysis of the generated videos to assess the common failure modes.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (a) Dominoes toppling one after another on the table        (b) Leather glove catching a hard baseball

Figure 5: Illustration of CogVideoX-5B’s limitations in understanding material properties. Even the
best-performing model, CogVideoX-5B, may struggle to correctly capture the material properties, leading to
unnatural dynamics that do not align with the object characteristics. Artifacts in the examples: (a) the dominoes,
which should behave as rigid bodies, show inconsistent changes in geometry and texture over time, (b) the
leather glove exhibits unnatural deformations.


Comparison between CogVideoX-5B with other models. We analyze some qualitative examples
to understand the gap between the best-performing model (CogVideoX-5B) and the other models
in our testbed. We present some examples in Figure 4. Specifically, we find that SVD-T2I2V is
likely to underperform in scenes involving vibrant fluid dynamics. Lumiere-T2I2V and Dream
Machine (Luma) perform better than Lumiere-T2V in terms of visual quality, but they lack profound
understanding of rigid geometries (e.g. in Figure 4(b)). Further, we notice that Gen-2 sometimes
generates static objects in the air with slow camera motion, instead of meaningful physical dynamics
(e.g. in Figure 4(c)). In contrast, CogVideoX-5B shows decent capability of identifying distinct
objects, as deformation from its results seldom mingles multiple objects. Further, it tends to use
simpler backgrounds, avoiding complex patterns where flaws are easier to be spotted. Nevertheless,
even the best-performing model, CogVideoX-5B, may struggle to understand the material properties
of the underlying objects, resulting in unnatural or inconsistent deformations, as shown in Figure
5. This phenomenon is also observed in results from other video generative models. Our analysis
highlights the lack of fine-grained physical commonsense that future research should aim to address.

Failure mode analysis. We present some qual-
itative examples to understand the common fail- Table 4: Comparison of ROC-AUC for au-
ure modes in the generated video regarding poor tomatic evaluation methods. We find that
physical commonsense. Qualitative examples V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS outperforms diverse base-
from various T2V generative models are pro- lines, including GPT-4Vision and Gemini-1.5-Pro,
vided in Figure 15 - 26 in Appendix U. The for semantic adherence (SA) and physical com-
common failure modes include – (a) Conserva- monsense (PC) judgments on the testing prompts.
tion of mass violation: the volume or texture of
an object is not consistent over time, (b) New-         Method(↓)/RUC-AOC(→)               SA PC
ton’s First Law violation: an object changes its        Random                             50   50
velocity in a balanced state without any exter-         GPT-4-Vision [79]                  53   53
nal force, (c) Newton’s Second Law violation:           Gemini-1.5-Pro-Vision [90]         73   58
an object violates the conversation of momen-           V IDEOCON [5]                      65   54
tum, (d) Solid Constitutive Law violation: solids       V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS (Ours) 82         73
deform in ways that contradict their material
properties, e.g., a rigid object deforming over
time, (e) Fluid Constitutive Law violation: fluids exhibit unnatural flow motions, and (f) Non-physical
penetration: objects unnaturally penetrate each other.

6     V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS : AUTOMATIC E VALUATOR FOR V IDEO P HY DATASET

We supplement our dataset with V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS, an automatic rater for scalable and reliable
evaluation of semantic adherence and physical commonsense in the generated videos.

V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS generalizes to unseen prompts. We compare the ROC-AUC of different
automatic evaluators with the human predictions on the testing prompts in Table 4. Here, the videos
are generated by the models that are used to train the V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS model. We find that
the V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS outperforms the zero-shot V IDEOCON by 17 points and 19 points on the
semantic adherence and physical commonsense judgment, respectively. This highlights that finetuning
with the generated video distribution and human annotations aids in improving the model judgment on


                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the unseen prompts. Further, we notice that the model’s agreement are higher for semantic adherence
as compared to the physical commonsense. This indicates that judging physical commonsense is a
harder task than judging semantic adherence for V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS. Interestingly, we observe that
the GPT-4-Vision’s judgments are close to random for semantic adherence and physical commonsense
on our dataset. This implies that faithful evaluations are hard to obtain from the multi-image reasoning
capabilities of the GPT-4-Vision in a zero-shot manner. To address this, we test Gemini-Pro-Vision-
1.5 and find that it achieves a good semantic adherence score (73 points), however, it is close to
random in physical commonsense evaluation (54 points). This highlights that the existing multimodal
foundation models lack the capability to judge physical commonsense.

V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS generalizes to unseen
generative models. To assess performance on Table 5: Performance of V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS on
an unseen video distribution, we train an ab- unseen generative model. We train an ablated version
lated version of V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS on a re- of V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS and find that it outperforms
stricted set of video data. Specifically, we train the baseline in the semantic adherence (SA) and phys-
V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS on human annotations ac- ical commonsense (PC) judgment averaged over three
quired from VideoCrafter2, ZeroScope, LaVIE, unseen video models on the testing prompts.
OpenSora, SVD-T2I2V and Gen-2, and eval-
uate it on unseen videos from the remaining            Method                              SA PC
T2V models in our testbed generated for the test-      V IDEOCON     [5]                   64    57
ing captions. We present the results in Table 5.       V IDEO  C  ON -P HYSICS   (Ours)    79    72
We find that V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS outperforms
V IDEOCON by 15 points and 15 points on semantic adherence and physical commonsense judgement,
respectively. This highlights that V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS can judge semantic adherence and physical
commonsense as new T2V generative models are released.

Automatic leaderboard reliably tracks human leaderboard. We create an automatic leaderboard
by averaging the semantic adherence and physical commonsense scores of the open and closed
video models on the test set. Subsequently, we align these rankings with the human leaderboard
based on the joint performance metrics (SA = 1, PC = 1). We present the human and automatic
leaderboard for the open and closed model in Appendix P. We observe that the relative rankings
of the models in the automatic leaderboard (CogVideoX-5B>VideoCrafter2>LaVIE>CogVideoX-
2B>SVD-T2I2V>ZeroScope>OpenSora) strongly matches with the relative rankings of the mod-
els in the human leaderboard (CogVideoX-5B>VideoCrafter2>CogVideoX-2B>LaVIE>SVD-
T2I2V>ZeroScope>OpenSora). We observe similar trends for the closed models. But, we find that
Pika achieves a relatively low score on the automatic leaderboard, a limitation that can be improved
by acquiring more data for V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS. Overall, we find that the rankings of most of
the models are similar under both the leaderboards, establishing its reliability for future model
development. Further discussion on the usefulness of V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS in Appendix §R.

Finetuning video models. While V IDEO P HY data is used for model evaluation and building
automatic evaluator, we assess whether this dataset can be used to finetune video models in Ap-
pendix T. Post-finetuning, we observe a significant decrease in semantic adherence, while physical
commonsense remains unchanged. This is likely due to limited training samples, optimization
challenges, and the nascency of the video finetuning field. Future work will focus on enhancing
physical commonsense in generative models based on these findings.


7    C ONCLUSION

In this work, we introduce V IDEO P HY, a first of its kind dataset to assess the physical commonsense
in the generated videos. Further, we evaluate a diverse set of video models (open and closed
models) and found that they significantly lack in the physical commonsense and semantic adherence
capabilities. Our dataset unveils that the existing methods are far being general-purpose world
simulators. Further, we introduce V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS, an auto-evaluation model that enables cheap
and scalable evaluation on our dataset. We believe that our work will serve as the cornerstone in
studying physical commonsense for video generative modeling.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
In this work, we provide a detailed description about the dataset construction in §4. Specifically,
we mention the prompts used for initial caption generation in Appendix G. Further, we provide the
details about all the video generative models in §4, along with the inference details in Appendix N. In
addition, we provide the details about finetuning V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS in Appendix O. Finally, we
commit to releasing the data, generated videos, and trained V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS in the camera-ready
version.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
HB is supported in part by AFOSR MURI grant FA9550-22-1-0380. YS was partially supported
by NSF 2211557, NSF 2119643, NSF 2303037, NSF 2312501, SRC JUMP 2.0 Center, Amazon
Research Awards, and Snapchat Gifts. KC was partially supported by ONR grant N00014-23-1-2780,
and U.S. DARPA ECOLE Program No. #HR00112390060.

R EFERENCES
  [1] Niket Agarwal, Arslan Ali, Maciej Bala, Yogesh Balaji, Erik Barker, Tiffany Cai, Prithvijit
      Chattopadhyay, Yongxin Chen, Yin Cui, Yifan Ding, et al. Cosmos world foundation model
      platform for physical ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03575, 2025.
  [2] Luma AI. Luma Dream Machine | AI Video Generator — lumalabs.ai.                     https://
      lumalabs.ai/dream-machine, 2024.
  [3] Max Bain, Arsha Nagrani, Gül Varol, and Andrew Zisserman. Frozen in time: A joint video
      and image encoder for end-to-end retrieval. In IEEE International Conference on Computer
      Vision, 2021.
  [4] Hritik Bansal, Da Yin, Masoud Monajatipoor, and Kai-Wei Chang. How well can text-to-
      image generative models understand ethical natural language interventions? arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2210.15230, 2022.
  [5] Hritik Bansal, Yonatan Bitton, Idan Szpektor, Kai-Wei Chang, and Aditya Grover. Videocon:
      Robust video-language alignment via contrast captions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10111,
      2023.
  [6] Hritik Bansal, Yonatan Bitton, Michal Yarom, Idan Szpektor, Aditya Grover, and Kai-Wei
      Chang. Talc: Time-aligned captions for multi-scene text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2405.04682, 2024.
  [7] Hritik Bansal, Ashima Suvarna, Gantavya Bhatt, Nanyun Peng, Kai-Wei Chang, and Aditya
      Grover. Comparing bad apples to good oranges: Aligning large language models via joint
      preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00530, 2024.
  [8] Omer Bar-Tal, Hila Chefer, Omer Tov, Charles Herrmann, Roni Paiss, Shiran Zada, Ariel
      Ephrat, Junhwa Hur, Yuanzhen Li, Tomer Michaeli, et al. Lumiere: A space-time diffusion
      model for video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12945, 2024.
  [9] David Baraff. An introduction to physically based modeling: rigid body simulation
      i—unconstrained rigid body dynamics. SIGGRAPH course notes, 82, 1997.
 [10] Christopher Batty, Florence Bertails, and Robert Bridson. A fast variational framework for
      accurate solid-fluid coupling. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 26(3):100–es, 2007.
 [11] Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Jianfeng Gao, Yejin Choi, et al. Piqa: Reasoning about physical
      commonsense in natural language. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
      intelligence, volume 34, pp. 7432–7439, 2020.
 [12] Yonatan Bitton, Hritik Bansal, Jack Hessel, Rulin Shao, Wanrong Zhu, Anas Awadalla, Josh
      Gardner, Rohan Taori, and Ludwig Schmidt. Visit-bench: A benchmark for vision-language
      instruction following inspired by real-world use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06595, 2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [13] Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Do-
      minik Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et al. Stable video diffusion:
      Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127,
      2023.

 [14] Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Do-
      minik Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et al. Stable video diffusion:
      Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127,
      2023.

 [15] Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja
      Fidler, and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent
      diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
      Pattern Recognition, pp. 22563–22575, 2023.

 [16] Robert Bridson. Fluid simulation for computer graphics. AK Peters/CRC Press, 2015.

 [17] Tim Brooks, Janne Hellsten, Miika Aittala, Ting-Chun Wang, Timo Aila, Jaakko Lehtinen,
      Ming-Yu Liu, Alexei Efros, and Tero Karras. Generating long videos of dynamic scenes.
      Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:31769–31781, 2022.

 [18] Tim Brooks, Bill Peebles, Connor Holmes, Will DePue, Yufei Guo, Li Jing, David Schnurr,
      Joe Taylor, Troy Luhman, Eric Luhman, Clarence Ng, Ricky Wang, and Aditya Ramesh. Video
      generation models as world simulators. 2024. URL https://openai.com/research/
      video-generation-models-as-world-simulators.

 [19] Jake Bruce, Michael Dennis, Ashley Edwards, Jack Parker-Holder, Yuge Shi, Edward Hughes,
      Matthew Lai, Aditi Mavalankar, Richie Steigerwald, Chris Apps, et al. Genie: Generative
      interactive environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15391, 2024.

 [20] Emanuele Bugliarello, H Hernan Moraldo, Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Moham-
      mad Taghi Saffar, Han Zhang, Dumitru Erhan, Vittorio Ferrari, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, and
      Paul Voigtlaender. Storybench: A multifaceted benchmark for continuous story visualization.
      Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

 [21] cerspense. cerspense/zeroscope_v2_576w · Hugging Face — huggingface.co. https:
      //huggingface.co/cerspense/zeroscope_v2_576w, 2023.

 [22] Haoxin Chen, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Menghan Xia, Xintao Wang, Chao Weng, and Ying
      Shan. Videocrafter2: Overcoming data limitations for high-quality video diffusion models.
      arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.09047, 2024.

 [23] Hsiao-Yu Chen, Arnav Sastry, Wim M van Rees, and Etienne Vouga. Physical simulation of
      environmentally induced thin shell deformation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 37
      (4):1–13, 2018.

 [24] Tsai-Shien Chen, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Willi Menapace, Ekaterina Deyneka, Hsiang-wei
      Chao, Byung Eun Jeon, Yuwei Fang, Hsin-Ying Lee, Jian Ren, Ming-Hsuan Yang, et al.
      Panda-70m: Captioning 70m videos with multiple cross-modality teachers. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2402.19479, 2024.

 [25] Yunuo Chen, Tianyi Xie, Cem Yuksel, Danny Kaufman, Yin Yang, Chenfanfu Jiang, and
      Minchen Li. Multi-layer thick shells. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, pp.
      1–9, 2023.

 [26] Yilun Du, Sherry Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Josh Tenenbaum, Dale Schuurmans,
      and Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. Advances in
      Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

 [27] Jiafei Duan, Arijit Dasgupta, Jason Fischer, and Cheston Tan. A survey on machine learning
      approaches for modelling intuitive physics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06481, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [28] Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution
      image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
      recognition, pp. 12873–12883, 2021.
 [29] Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and Anastasis Ger-
      manidis. Structure and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion models. In Proceedings
      of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7346–7356, 2023.
 [30] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini,
      Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow transform-
      ers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
      Learning, 2024.
 [31] Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto:
      Model alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01306, 2024.
 [32] Yu Fang, Ziyin Qu, Minchen Li, Xinxin Zhang, Yixin Zhu, Mridul Aanjaneya, and Chenfanfu
      Jiang. Iq-mpm: an interface quadrature material point method for non-sticky strongly two-way
      coupled nonlinear solids and fluids. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(4):51–1, 2020.
 [33] Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Gabriel Ilharco, Alex Fang, Jonathan Hayase, Georgios Smyrnis, Thao
      Nguyen, Ryan Marten, Mitchell Wortsman, Dhruba Ghosh, Jieyu Zhang, et al. Datacomp:
      In search of the next generation of multimodal datasets. Advances in Neural Information
      Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
 [34] genmo. Genmo. Create videos and images with AI. — genmo.ai. https://www.genmo.
      ai/.
 [35] Jiayuan Gu, Fanbo Xiang, Xuanlin Li, Zhan Ling, Xiqiang Liu, Tongzhou Mu, Yihe Tang,
      Stone Tao, Xinyue Wei, Yunchao Yao, et al. Maniskill2: A unified benchmark for generalizable
      manipulation skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04659, 2023.
 [36] Xuchen Han, Joseph Masterjohn, and Alejandro Castro. A convex formulation of frictional
      contact between rigid and deformable bodies. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2023.
 [37] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances
      in neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
 [38] Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale
      pretraining for text-to-video generation via transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15868,
      2022.
 [39] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang,
      Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
 [40] Tianyu Huang, Yihan Zeng, Hui Li, Wangmeng Zuo, and Rynson WH Lau. Dreamphysics:
      Learning physical properties of dynamic 3d gaussians with video diffusion priors. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2406.01476, 2024.
 [41] Zhiao Huang, Yuanming Hu, Tao Du, Siyuan Zhou, Hao Su, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Chuang
      Gan. Plasticinelab: A soft-body manipulation benchmark with differentiable physics. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2104.03311, 2021.
 [42] Ziqi Huang, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Fan Zhang, Chenyang Si, Yuming Jiang, Yuanhan Zhang,
      Tianxing Wu, Qingyang Jin, Nattapol Chanpaisit, et al. Vbench: Comprehensive benchmark
      suite for video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17982, 2023.
 [43] huggingfaceEulerDiscreteScheduler. EulerDiscreteScheduler — huggingface.co. https:
      //huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/en/api/schedulers/euler.
 [44] Xuan Ju, Yiming Gao, Zhaoyang Zhang, Ziyang Yuan, Xintao Wang, Ailing Zeng, Yu Xiong,
      Qiang Xu, and Ying Shan. Miradata: A large-scale video dataset with long durations and
      structured captions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06358, 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [45] Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tadevosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang
      Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion mod-
      els are zero-shot video generators. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
      on Computer Vision, pp. 15954–15964, 2023.

 [46] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

 [47] Gergely Klár, Theodore Gast, Andre Pradhana, Chuyuan Fu, Craig Schroeder, Chenfanfu Jiang,
      and Joseph Teran. Drucker-prager elastoplasticity for sand animation. ACM Transactions on
      Graphics (TOG), 35(4):1–12, 2016.

 [48] KlingAI. KLING AI — klingai.com. https://www.klingai.com/, 2024.

 [49] Dan Kondratyuk, Lijun Yu, Xiuye Gu, José Lezama, Jonathan Huang, Rachel Hornung,
      Hartwig Adam, Hassan Akbari, Yair Alon, Vighnesh Birodkar, et al. Videopoet: A large
      language model for zero-shot video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14125, 2023.

 [50] Dan Koschier, Jan Bender, Barbara Solenthaler, and Matthias Teschner. Smoothed particle
      hydrodynamics techniques for the physics based simulation of fluids and solids. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2009.06944, 2020.

 [51] Tengchuan Kou, Xiaohong Liu, Zicheng Zhang, Chunyi Li, Haoning Wu, Xiongkuo Min,
      Guangtao Zhai, and Ning Liu. Subjective-aligned dateset and metric for text-to-video quality
      assessment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11956, 2024.

 [52] LaionAI. GitHub - LAION-AI/aesthetic-predictor: A linear estimator on top of clip to predict
      the aesthetic quality of pictures — github.com. https://github.com/LAION-AI/
      aesthetic-predictor, 2022.

 [53] Egor Larionov, Christopher Batty, and Robert Bridson. Variational stokes: a unified pressure-
      viscosity solver for accurate viscous liquids. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 36(4):
      1–11, 2017.

 [54] Kimin Lee, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Craig Boutilier, Pieter
      Abbeel, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Aligning text-to-image models
      using human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12192, 2023.

 [55] James R Lewis and Oğuzhan Erdinç. User experience rating scales with 7, 11, or 101 points:
      does it matter? Journal of Usability Studies, 12(2), 2017.

 [56] Minchen Li, Zachary Ferguson, Teseo Schneider, Timothy R Langlois, Denis Zorin, Daniele
      Panozzo, Chenfanfu Jiang, and Danny M Kaufman. Incremental potential contact: intersection-
      and inversion-free, large-deformation dynamics. ACM Trans. Graph., 39(4):49, 2020.

 [57] Minchen Li, Danny M Kaufman, and Chenfanfu Jiang. Codimensional incremental potential
      contact. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.04457, 2020.

 [58] Shufan Li, Konstantinos Kallidromitis, Akash Gokul, Yusuke Kato, and Kazuki Kozuka.
      Aligning diffusion models by optimizing human utility. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04465,
      2024.

 [59] Xuan Li, Minchen Li, and Chenfanfu Jiang. Energetically consistent inelasticity for optimiza-
      tion time integration. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–16, 2022.

 [60] Jacky Liang, Viktor Makoviychuk, Ankur Handa, Nuttapong Chentanez, Miles Macklin, and
      Dieter Fox. Gpu-accelerated robotic simulation for distributed reinforcement learning. In
      Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 270–282. PMLR, 2018.

 [61] Zhiqiu Lin, Deepak Pathak, Baiqi Li, Jiayao Li, Xide Xia, Graham Neubig, Pengchuan Zhang,
      and Deva Ramanan. Evaluating text-to-visual generation with image-to-text generation. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2404.01291, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [62] Zongyu Lin, Wei Liu, Chen Chen, Jiasen Lu, Wenze Hu, Tsu-Jui Fu, Jesse Allardice,
      Zhengfeng Lai, Liangchen Song, Bowen Zhang, et al. Stiv: Scalable text and image condi-
      tioned video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.07730, 2024.

 [63] Zongyu Lin, Yao Tang, Xingcheng Yao, Da Yin, Ziniu Hu, Yizhou Sun, and Kai-Wei Chang.
      Qlass: Boosting language agent inference via q-guided stepwise search. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2502.02584, 2025.

 [64] Fangfu Liu, Hanyang Wang, Shunyu Yao, Shengjun Zhang, Jie Zhou, and Yueqi Duan.
      Physics3d: Learning physical properties of 3d gaussians via video diffusion. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2406.04338, 2024.

 [65] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning.
      Advances in neural information processing systems, 36, 2024.

 [66] Shaowei Liu, Zhongzheng Ren, Saurabh Gupta, and Shenlong Wang. Physgen: Rigid-body
      physics-grounded image-to-video generation.

 [67] Yaofang Liu, Xiaodong Cun, Xuebo Liu, Xintao Wang, Yong Zhang, Haoxin Chen, Yang Liu,
      Tieyong Zeng, Raymond Chan, and Ying Shan. Evalcrafter: Benchmarking and evaluating
      large video generation models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
      Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22139–22149, 2024.

 [68] Yixin Liu, Kai Zhang, Yuan Li, Zhiling Yan, Chujie Gao, Ruoxi Chen, Zhengqing Yuan,
      Yue Huang, Hanchi Sun, Jianfeng Gao, et al. Sora: A review on background, technology,
      limitations, and opportunities of large vision models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17177, 2024.

 [69] Luis M Lozano, Eduardo García-Cueto, and José Muñiz. Effect of the number of response
      categories on the reliability and validity of rating scales. Methodology, 4(2):73–79, 2008.

 [70] Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-
      solver++: Fast solver for guided sampling of diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2211.01095, 2022.

 [71] Mariem Mezghanni, Malika Boulkenafed, Andre Lieutier, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Physically-
      aware generative network for 3d shape modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
      on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9330–9341, 2021.

 [72] mplugowl. mplug-owl-video. https://github.com/X-PLUG/mPLUG-Owl/tree/
      main/mPLUG-Owl/mplug_owl_video.

 [73] Matthias Müller, Barbara Solenthaler, Richard Keiser, and Markus Gross. Particle-based
      fluid-fluid interaction. In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics symposium
      on Computer animation, pp. 237–244, 2005.

 [74] Tung Nguyen, Rohan Shah, Hritik Bansal, Troy Arcomano, Romit Maulik, Veerabhadra
      Kotamarthi, Ian Foster, Sandeep Madireddy, and Aditya Grover. Scaling transformer neu-
      ral networks for skillful and reliable medium-range weather forecasting. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2312.03876, 2023.

 [75] Junfeng Ni, Yixin Chen, Bohan Jing, Nan Jiang, Bin Wang, Bo Dai, Yixin Zhu, Song-Chun
      Zhu, and Siyuan Huang. Phyrecon: Physically plausible neural scene reconstruction. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2404.16666, 2024.

 [76] Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic
      models. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.

 [77] James F O’brien, Adam W Bargteil, and Jessica K Hodgins. Graphical modeling and animation
      of ductile fracture. In Proceedings of the 29th annual conference on Computer graphics and
      interactive techniques, pp. 291–294, 2002.

 [78] OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023a, 2023.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [79] OpenAI. Gpt-4v(ision) system card, 2023b.            https://openai.com/research/
      gpt-4v-system-card, 2023.

 [80] OpenSora. GitHub - hpcaitech/Open-Sora: Open-Sora: Democratizing Efficient Video Produc-
      tion for All — github.com. https://github.com/hpcaitech/Open-Sora, 2024.

 [81] Piotr Padlewski, Max Bain, Matthew Henderson, Zhongkai Zhu, Nishant Relan, Hai Pham,
      Donovan Ong, Kaloyan Aleksiev, Aitor Ormazabal, Samuel Phua, et al. Vibe-eval: A hard
      evaluation suite for measuring progress of multimodal language models. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2405.02287, 2024.

 [82] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings
      of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4195–4205, 2023.

 [83] pika. Pika — pika.art. https://pika.art/.

 [84] Luis S Piloto, Ari Weinstein, Peter Battaglia, and Matthew Botvinick. Intuitive physics learning
      in a deep-learning model inspired by developmental psychology. Nature human behaviour, 6
      (9):1257–1267, 2022.

 [85] Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller,
      Joe Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution
      image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.

 [86] Pranav Putta, Edmund Mills, Naman Garg, Sumeet Motwani, Chelsea Finn, Divyansh Garg,
      and Rafael Rafailov. Agent q: Advanced reasoning and learning for autonomous ai agents.
      arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07199, 2024.

 [87] Ziyin Qu, Minchen Li, Yin Yang, Chenfanfu Jiang, and Fernando De Goes. Power plastics:
      A hybrid lagrangian/eulerian solver for mesoscale inelastic flows. ACM Transactions on
      Graphics (TOG), 42(6):1–11, 2023.

 [88] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
      Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
      models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning,
      pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

 [89] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and
      Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model.
      Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

 [90] Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin, Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy Lillicrap, Jean-
      baptiste Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, Julian Schrittwieser, et al.
      Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.

 [91] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer.
      High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
      conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

 [92] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer.
      High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
      conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

 [93] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton,
      Kamyar Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al.
      Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in
      neural information processing systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.

 [94] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal
      policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 [95] Soshi Shimada, Vladislav Golyanik, Weipeng Xu, and Christian Theobalt. Physcap: Physically
      plausible monocular 3d motion capture in real time. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 39
      (6):1–16, 2020.
 [96] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Re-
      flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
      Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
 [97] Eftychios Sifakis and Jernej Barbic. Fem simulation of 3d deformable solids: a practitioner’s
      guide to theory, discretization and model reduction. In Acm siggraph 2012 courses, pp. 1–50.
      2012.
 [98] Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu,
      Harry Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without
      text-video data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792, 2022.
 [99] Ivan Skorokhodov, Sergey Tulyakov, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Stylegan-v: A continuous
      video generator with the price, image quality and perks of stylegan2. In Proceedings of the
      IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3626–3636, 2022.
[100] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
[101] Alexey Stomakhin, Craig Schroeder, Lawrence Chai, Joseph Teran, and Andrew Selle. A
      material point method for snow simulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 32(4):
      1–10, 2013.
[102] Keqiang Sun, Junting Pan, Yuying Ge, Hao Li, Haodong Duan, Xiaoshi Wu, Renrui Zhang,
      Aojun Zhou, Zipeng Qin, Yi Wang, et al. Journeydb: A benchmark for generative image
      understanding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
[103] Tetsuya Takahashi, Tomoyuki Nishita, and Issei Fujishiro. Fast simulation of viscous fluids with
      elasticity and thermal conductivity using position-based dynamics. Computers & Graphics,
      43:21–30, 2014.
[104] Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In
      Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020,
      Proceedings, Part II 16, pp. 402–419. Springer, 2020.
[105] Tristan Thrush, Ryan Jiang, Max Bartolo, Amanpreet Singh, Adina Williams, Douwe Kiela,
      and Candace Ross. Winoground: Probing vision and language models for visio-linguistic
      compositionality. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
      Pattern Recognition, pp. 5238–5248, 2022.
[106] Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin Michal-
      ski, and Sylvain Gelly. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric &
      challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01717, 2018.
[107] Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han
      Zhang, Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan. Phenaki:
      Variable length video generation from open domain textual descriptions. In International
      Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
[108] Bram Wallace, Meihua Dang, Rafael Rafailov, Linqi Zhou, Aaron Lou, Senthil Purushwalkam,
      Stefano Ermon, Caiming Xiong, Shafiq Joty, and Nikhil Naik. Diffusion model alignment
      using direct preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12908, 2023.
[109] Yixin Wan, Arjun Subramonian, Anaelia Ovalle, Zongyu Lin, Ashima Suvarna, Christina
      Chance, Hritik Bansal, Rebecca Pattichis, and Kai-Wei Chang. Survey of bias in text-to-image
      generation: Definition, evaluation, and mitigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01030, 2024.
[110] Jiuniu Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Xiang Wang, and Shiwei Zhang.
      Modelscope text-to-video technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06571, 2023.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[111] Wenjing Wang, Huan Yang, Zixi Tuo, Huiguo He, Junchen Zhu, Jianlong Fu, and Jiaying Liu.
      Videofactory: Swap attention in spatiotemporal diffusions for text-to-video generation. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2305.10874, 2023.

[112] Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Xin Ma, Shangchen Zhou, Ziqi Huang, Yi Wang, Ceyuan Yang,
      Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Peiqing Yang, et al. Lavie: High-quality video generation with cascaded
      latent diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15103, 2023.

[113] Yi Wang, Yinan He, Yizhuo Li, Kunchang Li, Jiashuo Yu, Xin Ma, Xinhao Li, Guo Chen,
      Xinyuan Chen, Yaohui Wang, et al. Internvid: A large-scale video-text dataset for multimodal
      understanding and generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06942, 2023.

[114] Mariusz Witczak, Lesław Juszczak, and Dorota Gałkowska. Non-newtonian behaviour of
      heather honey. Journal of Food Engineering, 104(4):532–537, 2011.

[115] Joshuah Wolper, Yunuo Chen, Minchen Li, Yu Fang, Ziyin Qu, Jiecong Lu, Meggie Cheng,
      and Chenfanfu Jiang. Anisompm: Animating anisotropic damage mechanics: Supplemental
      document. ACM Trans. Graph, 39(4), 2020.

[116] Xueqing Wu, Yuheng Ding, Bingxuan Li, Pan Lu, Da Yin, Kai-Wei Chang, and Nanyun Peng.
      Visco: Benchmarking fine-grained critique and correction towards self-improvement in visual
      reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.02172, 2024.

[117] Xueqing Wu, Zongyu Lin, Songyan Zhao, Te-Lin Wu, Pan Lu, Nanyun Peng, and Kai-Wei
      Chang. Vdebugger: Harnessing execution feedback for debugging visual programs. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2406.13444, 2024.

[118] Tianyi Xie, Minchen Li, Yin Yang, and Chenfanfu Jiang. A contact proxy splitting method for
      lagrangian solid-fluid coupling. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–14, 2023.

[119] Tianyi Xie, Zeshun Zong, Yuxin Qiu, Xuan Li, Yutao Feng, Yin Yang, and Chenfanfu Jiang.
      Physgaussian: Physics-integrated 3d gaussians for generative dynamics. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2311.12198, 2023.

[120] Haike Xu, Zongyu Lin, Jing Zhou, Yanan Zheng, and Zhilin Yang. A universal discriminator
      for zero-shot generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.08099, 2022.

[121] Sirui Xu, Zhengyuan Li, Yu-Xiong Wang, and Liang-Yan Gui. Interdiff: Generating 3d
      human-object interactions with physics-informed diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
      International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 14928–14940, 2023.

[122] Hongwei Xue, Tiankai Hang, Yanhong Zeng, Yuchong Sun, Bei Liu, Huan Yang, Jianlong Fu,
      and Baining Guo. Advancing high-resolution video-language representation with large-scale
      video transcriptions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
      Pattern Recognition, pp. 5036–5045, 2022.

[123] Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming
      Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion
      models with an expert transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072, 2024.

[124] Hanrong Ye, Haotian Zhang, Erik Daxberger, Lin Chen, Zongyu Lin, Yanghao Li, Bowen
      Zhang, Haoxuan You, Dan Xu, Zhe Gan, et al. Mm-ego: Towards building egocentric
      multimodal llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07177, 2024.

[125] Qinghao Ye, Haiyang Xu, Guohai Xu, Jiabo Ye, Ming Yan, Yiyang Zhou, Junyang Wang,
      Anwen Hu, Pengcheng Shi, Yaya Shi, et al. mplug-owl: Modularization empowers large
      language models with multimodality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14178, 2023.

[126] Ilker Yildirim, Max H Siegel, Amir A Soltani, Shraman Ray Chaudhuri, and Joshua B
      Tenenbaum. Perception of 3d shape integrates intuitive physics and analysis-by-synthesis.
      Nature Human Behaviour, 8(2):320–335, 2024.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[127] Lijun Yu, José Lezama, Nitesh B Gundavarapu, Luca Versari, Kihyuk Sohn, David Minnen,
      Yong Cheng, Agrim Gupta, Xiuye Gu, Alexander G Hauptmann, et al. Language model beats
      diffusion–tokenizer is key to visual generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05737, 2023.
[128] Ye Yuan, Jiaming Song, Umar Iqbal, Arash Vahdat, and Jan Kautz. Physdiff: Physics-guided
      human motion diffusion model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
      Computer Vision, pp. 16010–16021, 2023.
[129] Yonghao Yue, Breannan Smith, Christopher Batty, Changxi Zheng, and Eitan Grinspun.
      Continuum foam: A material point method for shear-dependent flows. ACM Transactions on
      Graphics (TOG), 34(5):1–20, 2015.
[130] Tianyuan Zhang, Hong-Xing Yu, Rundi Wu, Brandon Y Feng, Changxi Zheng, Noah Snavely,
      Jiajun Wu, and William T Freeman. Physdreamer: Physics-based interaction with 3d objects
      via video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13026, 2024.
[131] Jing Zhou, Zongyu Lin, Yanan Zheng, Jian Li, and Zhilin Yang. Not all tasks are born equal:
      Understanding zero-shot generalization. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
      Representations, 2022.
[132] Zeshun Zong, Xuan Li, Minchen Li, Maurizio M Chiaramonte, Wojciech Matusik, Eitan
      Grinspun, Kevin Carlberg, Chenfanfu Jiang, and Peter Yichen Chen. Neural stress fields for
      reduced-order elastoplasticity and fracture. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2023 Conference Papers, pp.
      1–11, 2023.
[133] Zeshun Zong, Chenfanfu Jiang, and Xuchen Han. A convex formulation of frictional contact
      for the material point method and rigid bodies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13783, 2024.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATED W ORK


Video Generation Models. Recent advancements in video generation models have emerged
from two primary architectures: diffusion-based models [29, 14, 68, 15, 112, 110, 22, 45, 62] and
autoregressive modeling-based approaches [127, 49, 38, 107]. Among these, diffusion models have
garnered significant attention. The model known as SVD [14], built on a Latent Diffusion Model
(LDM) [91], proposes a three-stage training process for video LDMs: text-to-image pretraining,
video pretraining, and video finetuning. Sora [68] represents a state-of-the-art in video generation,
utilizing a diffusion-transformer architecture with unified training recipes and enhancements in
language description processing for video generation. ModelScope [110] is also a diffusion-based
text-to-video model which combines a VQGAN [28], a text-encoder, and a denoising UNet. Another
diffusion model, VideoCrafter2 [22], leverages low-quality videos and high-quality videos to generate
high-quality videos. LaVIE [112] is composed of a base text-to-video model, a temporal interpolation
model, and a video super-resolution model, indicating that joint image and video training and temporal
self-attention with rotary positional embeddings are key components to boost performance. Given the
rapid development of video generation technology, an effective evaluation method for the generated
videos becomes crucial. Our paper focuses on evaluating text-to-video generation models for their
physical commonsense capabilities.



Evaluating Video Generation Models. To evaluate the quality of a T2V generative model, Fréchet
video distance (FVD) is traditionally used to measure the similarity between real and generated video
distributions [106, 20]. However, FVD has several limitations for assessing physical commonsense
including the requirement for a reference video that is difficult to obtain for novel scenes, bias
towards video quality, and failure to detect unrealistic motions [17, 99]. Similarly, CLIPScore [88]
measures semantic similarity between generated video frames and the conditioning text in a shared
representation space, making it unsuitable for evaluating physical commonsense in generated videos.
However, there is a growing consensus on the need for more comprehensive metrics to assess the
performance of video generation models [42, 67, 51, 61]. V-Bench [42] offers a detailed benchmark
suite that introduces a hierarchical evaluation protocol, breaking down ‘video generation quality’ into
various granular perspectives. Another framework, EvalCrafter [67], proposes 17 objective metrics.
Despite these advancements, existing methods largely overlook the fundamental aspect of physical
commonsense. Unlike static images, videos incorporate a temporal dimension, embedding physical
commonsense information across frames. Our research dives into the measurement of physical
commonsense [11] in videos. Additionally, we introduce a V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS auto-evaluator and
analyze specific physical laws that are violated in the generated videos through qualitative analysis.



Physics Modeling. Simulating physical behaviors of solids and fluids has always been an important
and popular topic in computer graphics. For solid materials, the simplest physical model is the
long-established rigid body simulation [9], where solids are assumed not to deform. Simulation of
deformable solids [97], on the other hand, takes into account the strain and stress during deformation.
To capture more complicated materials, researchers have been proposing increasingly intricate
models for different materials, such as metal [77], sand [47], and snow [101]. In contrast, most of
the common fluids [16] in daily life can be broadly categorized as inviscid [50], e.g., water and air,
and viscous fluids [103, 53], e.g., honey and oil. Additionally, an orthogonal research direction is to
accurately, efficiently, and robustly model contact and interaction between different materials. These
include solid-solid [56, 57], solid-fluid [10, 118], and fluid-fluid interactions [73]. Further, recent
advancements in computer vision have started exploring incorporating physics priors into various
3D-aware generation tasks to enhance physical plausibility, such as human animation [128, 95, 121]
and 3D/4D generation [71, 119, 130]. However, these approaches often depend on high-quality
3D reconstructions from multi-view images. Some efforts [66] have also integrated physics-based
simulations into video generative models, but the simulations are performed in 2D space due to the
lack of 3D information, resulting in limited dynamics. In this work, instead of generating, we focus
on identifying whether the generated video adheres to physical laws.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    D ISCUSSION ON CATEGORIZATION

In this work, group various types of solids into a single, unified ‘solid’ category. In theory, all
solids can be prescribed as a universal constitutive model governed by the conservation of mass and
momentum. Nevertheless, graphics researchers typically model certain materials using simplified
constitutive models to lower computational costs. For instance, a rigid body, in reality, is a deformable
body with a very high stiffness. In fact, exact rigidity does not exist in the real world. Similarly,
researchers propose other solid constitutive models (e.g. fabrics, granular materials) to simplify
computation for some specific material behaviors. Our choice of solid, as a broad categorization,
serves as a basis for generalization beyond specific simulation techniques used in graphics research.
Our benchmark is designed to capture a wide spectrum of physically plausible behaviors, rather than
isolating specific graphics sub-domains.
The interactions between solid-solid pairs primarily focus on resolving contact constraints to prevent
penetration. In contrast, solid-fluid interactions exhibit more diversity. For example, water can
be repelled by an umbrella but can be absorbed by a sponge. Such behaviors, including perme-
ability, adhesion, and absorption, are not available in solid-solid interactions. Given the diversity
of solid-fluid interactions, we choose to balance the sample counts for solid-solid and solid-fluid
interactions to ensure our benchmark does not overemphasize simpler contact-based interactions
while underrepresenting more complex and varied solid-fluid dynamics.
Our current design prioritizes simplicity and broad applicability, especially for non-experts who
may use the benchmark across various disciplines. Future work can consider more fine-grained
categorization to better measure the ability of generative models to handle specific properties (e.g.,
plasticity, viscosity) if desired.

C    M ORE D ISCUSSION ON USING B INARY F EEDBACK

We highlight that binary feedback (0/1) is quite popular in aligning generative models such as large
language models [31, 120]. Further, we observe that binary feedback is much easier to collect at
industrial scale by big generative model providers (e.g., ChatGPT). For instance, we note that the
ChatGPT user interface asks binary preference after generating the response to a simple query. Similar
extensions exist in the field of text-to-image generative models [58, 54]. Hence, the binary feedback
protocol is quite powerful in studying and improving the generative models.
We highlight that a dense feedback system would capture more nuanced mistakes of the video
generative models (e.g., completing 8 movements versus 6 movements). However, designing such
prompts is non-trivial, and evaluating the generated videos in such scenarios is much more challenging,
labor-extensive, and expensive (especially with limited academic budgets). Further, we note that the
collection of diverse and denser forms of feedback is a crucial future work.
In this work, we do not report posterior physical commonsense performance (PC = 1 given SA = 1)
since they can be inferred from the joint and marginal scores. In addition, we note that a bad model
can easily game the posterior metric. For example, a bad model can generate a video which aligns
with the prompt for 1 out of 700 prompts in the dataset. Now, assume that this video is also accurate
in terms of physical commonsense. Hence, the posterior performance of this model will be 100%.
This can be quite misleading for the practitioners.

D    L IMITATIONS

In this work, we evaluate the physical commonsense capabilities of T2V generative models. Specifi-
cally, we curated the V IDEO P HY dataset, consisting of 688 captions. We argue that the captions are
comprehensive and high-quality after going through our three-stage data curation pipeline. In the
future, it will be pertinent to expand the physical commonsense understanding to more branches of
physics, including projective geometry. Also, as the recent trend of LLM [86, 63] begins to study
the power of process reward modeling, we give up exploring more fine-grained evaluation signals
like frame level alignment score of physics due to the heavy cost and leave it for future work. It
can be interesting to study using fine-grained language feedback to update video generation model
just like the reflection mechanism in LLM / VLM [96, 117, 116]. Additionally, we test a diverse


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


set of T2V generative models, including both open and closed models. While it is financially and
computationally challenging to evaluate an exhaustive list of models, we have aimed to incorporate
models with diverse architectures, training datasets, and inference strategies. In the future, it will be
important to gain access to and include new high-performance T2V models in our study.
In addition, we perform human annotations using Amazon Mechanical Turkers (AMT), where most
of the workers primarily belong to the US and Canada. Hence, the human annotations in this work
do not represent the diverse demographics around the globe. As a result, our human annotations
reflect the perceptual biases of the annotators from Western cultures. In the future, it will be pertinent
to assess the impact of diverse groups on our human evaluations. Finally, we acknowledge that
text-to-video generative models can perpetrate societal biases in their generated content [109, 4]. It is
critical that future work quantifies this bias in the generated videos and provides methods for the safe
deployment of the models. Also, since our video just covers the domain of physics-specific videos, it
is interesting to see whether it can generalize and evaluate the videos with other properties such as
long, egocentric, embodied related [44, 124, 1], etc.


E    DATA L ICENSING

The V IDEO P HY dataset comprises videos generated by various T2V (Text-to-Video) generative
models, detailed in Section F. The licensing terms for these videos will align with those specified by
the respective model owners, as cited in this work. The curated captions and human annotations will
be licensed under the MIT License.


F    V IDEO G ENERATIVE M ODELS

For the open models, we benchmark Zeroscope [21, 110], a latent diffusion-based text-to-video model
that adapts the text-to-image generative model [92] for video generation by training on high-quality
video and image data for enhanced visual quality. Further, we benchmark LaVIE [112], a cascaded
video latent diffusion model instead of a single diffusion model. Specifically, the LaVIE model
is trained with a specialized curated dataset for enhanced visual quality and diversity. In addition,
we test VideoCrafter2, a latent diffusion T2V model that enhances video generation quality by
training on high-quality image-text data [102]. In our study, we also benchmark OpenSora [80], an
open-source effort to replicate Sora [18], a high-performant closed latent diffusion model that uses
diffusion transformers [82] for text-to-video generation. Finally, we include StableVideoDiffusion
(SVD) [13], a latent diffusion model that can generate high resolution videos conditioned on a text or
image. Since SVD-I2V (Image-to-Video) is publicly available, we utilize that to generate the videos.
Specifically, we utilize SD-XL-Base-1.0 [85] to generate the conditioning images from the captions
in the V IDEO P HY dataset. We term the entire pipeline as SVD-T2I2V.
For the closed models, we include Gen-2 [29], a closed latent video diffusion model from Runway.
In addition, we include Pika [83] with undisclosed information about the underlying generative
model. Specifically, we wrote a custom API to acquire Gen-2 and Pika videos after paying for
their monthly subscription for a total of $225. Finally, we include two versions of the Lumiere
[8] from Google research. Specifically, Lumiere-T2V generates a video conditioned on the text,
while Lumiere-T2I2V generates a video conditioned on an image, that is in-turn generated with the
caption using a text-to-image generative model [93]. CogVideoX [123] is a most recent open-sourced
state-of-the-art video generation models, which uses a MMDiT [30]-like architecture, and achieves
very good text-to-video alignment and video quality performance.


G    Q UERYING GPT-4 FOR P ROMPT G ENERATION

In this section we discuss the prompt we utilized to generate all the prompts including three physical
interaction categories: solid-solid, solid-fluid, fluid-fluid for video generation, which is displayed in
Table 6, Table 7 and Table 8.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Develop unique and imaginative captions, each briefly describing the interaction between two different solid materials in a realistic
 scene. Each caption should consist of 7-10 words and clearly indicate the solids involved in the action.

 Guidelines:

 1. Focus on common solids used in everyday scenarios, avoiding rare or seldom-used materials.

 2. Exclude actions like ‘celebrating’, ‘arguing’, or ‘laughing’ that do not clearly involve physical interaction between materials.

 3. Avoid generating static scenes (e.g., ‘Lid covers pot to retain heat’, ‘Stack of paper sits on the desk’).

 4. Avoid adding participle phrases (e.g., ‘sweetening it’, ‘a creamy swirl’, ‘fizzing energetically’) in the caption.

 5. The captions should focus on the actions that require contact forces, or friction forces. Do not focus on the actions that require
 penetration forces.

 6. Format each caption as follows: ‘action’: ACTION, ‘solid 1’: SOLID, ‘solid 2’: SOLID, ‘caption’: CAPTION

 Bad Examples Of Captions (Do Not Generate Such Captions):
 A diamond scratching glass. ## Scratching action that requires penetration
 A key scratches the surface of a wooden table. ## Scratching action that requires penetration

 Good Examples Of Captions:
 A brick presses down on a metal can.
 A snowball falls to the ground and splits apart.
 A small red elastic ball stuck to the wall.

                           Figure 6: GPT-4 Prompt to Generate Solid-Solid Captions.


 Develop unique and imaginative captions, showcasing interaction between a solid material with a fluid material, for generating a
 video. After crafting the caption, list the entities that act as solid and fluid in the caption.

 Guidelines:

 1. Focus on common solids and fluids used in everyday scenarios, avoiding rare or seldom-used materials.

 2. Exclude actions like ‘celebrating’, ‘arguing’, or ‘laughing’ that do not clearly involve physical interaction between materials.

 3. Avoid actions that execute state change from solid to fluid or vice-versa.

 4. Avoid generating static scenes (e.g., ‘Lid covers pot to retain heat’).

 5. Avoid adding participle phrases (e.g., ‘sweetening it’, ‘a creamy swirl’, ‘fizzing energetically’) in the caption.

 6. The captions should focus on the actions that require contact forces, or friction forces. Do not focus on the actions that require
 penetration forces.

 7. Format each caption as follows: ‘action’: ACTION, ‘solid’: SOLID, ‘fluid’: FLUID, ‘caption’: CAPTION

 Bad Examples Of Captions (Do Not Generate Such Captions):
 Sugar dissolves in water. ## dissolving action will not be visible in video
 Sulfuric acid corroding metal. ## corrosion will not be visible in video
 Water boiling in a pot. ## boiling action will not be visible in video

 Good Examples Of Captions:
 A dam break releases a massive flood.
 An iron rod falls into the water.
 A metal spoon stirs the honey in a cup.

                           Figure 7: GPT-4 Prompt to Generate Solid-Fluid Captions.


                                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Develop unique and imaginative captions, each briefly describing the interaction between two different fluid materials in a realistic
    scene. Each caption should consist of 7-10 words and clearly indicate the fluids involved in the action.

    Guidelines:

    1. Focus on common fluids used in everyday scenarios, avoiding rare or seldom-used materials.

    2. Exclude actions like ‘celebrating’, ‘arguing’, or ‘laughing’ that do not clearly involve physical interaction between materials.

    3. Avoid generating static scenes (e.g., ‘Lid covers pot to retain heat’).

    4. Avoid adding participle phrases (e.g., ‘sweetening it’, ‘a creamy swirl’, ‘fizzing energetically’) in the caption.

    5. The captions should focus on the actions that require mixing and laying for liquid-liquid interactions, or some contact forces
    between liquid and gas.

    6. Format each caption as follows: ‘action’: ACTION, ‘fluid 1’: FLUID, ‘fluid 2’: FLUID, ‘caption’: CAPTION

    Bad Examples Of Captions (Do Not Generate Such Captions):
    Juice solidifies around water in ice trays. ## solidification won’t be visible in the video
    Sugar disappears into stirring water. ## dissolving won‘t be visible in the video An acid and a base react to neutralize each other,
    forming water. ## chemical reactions are not visible in the video

    Good Examples Of Captions:
    The wind creating ripples across the surface of the lake.
    Milk falls into a transparent cup of water.
    Oil falls into a transparent cup of water.

                              Figure 8: GPT-4 Prompt to Generate Fluid-Fluid Captions.


H        H UMAN A NNOTATION S CREENSHOT
We display the screenshot of our human annotation system in Figure 9 .


                             Figure 9: The screenshot of the human annotation interface.


I      V IDEOCON DETAILS
We prompt V IDEOCON to generate a text response (Yes/No) conditioned on the multimodal template
Tt (x) for semantic adherence and physical commonsense tasks. Formally,

                                            TSA (V, C), t = SA
                                Tt (x) =                                                    (1)
                                            TP C (V ),  t = PC
where t is either semantic adherence to the caption or physical commonsense task, C is the condition-
ing caption and V is the generated video for the caption C. We provide the multimodal templates


                                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(TSA (V, C), TP C (V )). We compute the score from the V IDEOCON model pθ :
                                                       pθ (Yes|Tt (x))
                              sθ (Tt (x)) =                                    ,                            (2)
                                              pθ (Yes|Tt (x)) + pθ (No|Tt (x))
where pθ (Yes|Tt (x)) is the probability of ‘Yes’ conditioned on Tt (x), and t ∈ {SA, P C}. 8
We present the prompts used for the GPT4V, Gemini-1.5-Pro-Vision, VideoCon baselines, and
V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS for semantic adherence evaluation in Figure 10 and physical commonsense
alignment in Figure 11.

             Semantic adherence:

             Given: V (Video), T (Caption)

             Instruction (I): [V] Does this video entail the description [T]?
             Response (R): Yes or No

           Figure 10: Template used assessing semantic adherence for a generated video.


             Physical Commonsense:

             Given: V (Video)

             Instruction (I): [V] Does this video follow physical laws?
             Response (R): Yes or No
Figure 11: Template for assessing physical commonsense. We note that the physical commonsense is
independent of the conditioning caption. Hence, it is not present in this template.


J   F INE -G RAINED D IVERSITY A NALYSIS
In this section, we visualize the fine-grained statistics of collections across different physical interac-
tion categories (Figure 12 - Figure 14).

K     R ESULTS FOR TASK COMPLEXITY
We compare the performance of various video generative models across different task complexity in
Table 6.

L    F INE -G RAINED R ESULTS
In this section, we report the fine-grained performance of semantic adherence and physical com-
monsense scores from all video generation models and compute the scores across different physical
interaction categories (solid-solid, solid-fluid and fluid-fluid), as well as difficulty levels (0 and 1).

M     AUTOMATIC E VALUATION BASELINES
Similar to [6], we utilize the capability of GPT-4Vision [79] to reason over multiple images in a
zero-shot manner. Specifically, we prompt the GPT-4V model with the caption and 8 video frames
   8
     As a large video multimodal model, V IDEOCON predicts a token distribution over the entire token vocabulary
conditioned on the multimodal template. Therefore, pθ (Yes|Tt (x)) + pθ (No|Tt (x)) is not equal to 1.


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Top 20 most frequently occurring verbs (inner circle) and their top 4 direct nouns (outer
circle) in our curated captions that consists of interaction between solid-solid states of matter.


Figure 13: Top 20 most frequently occurring verbs (inner circle) and their top 4 direct nouns (outer
circle) in our curated captions that consists of interaction between solid-fluid states of matter.


sampled uniformly from the generated video. Here, we instruct the model to provide the semantic
adherence (0 or 1) and physical commonsense score (0 or 1). Since GPT-4V does not process videos
natively, we assess the automatic evaluation using Gemini-Pro-Vision-1.5, which can input the
caption and the entire generated video. Specifically, we instruct it to provide the semantic adherence
(0 or 1) and physical commonsense (0 or 1) of the input video, identical to the GPT-4V analysis. We
provide the prompts used in the experiments in Figure 10 and 11.

N    I NFERENCE D ETAILS
We add the inference configurations for different video generation models in Table 9.

O    T RAINING D ETAILS FOR V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS
To create V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS, we use low-rank adaptation (LoRA) [39] of the V IDEOCON applied
to all the layers of the attention blocks including QKVO, gate, up and down projection matrices. We
set the LoRA r = 32 and α = 32 and dropout = 0.05. The finetuning is performed for 5 epochs using


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: Top 20 most frequently occurring verbs (inner circle) and their top 4 direct nouns (outer
circle) in curated captions that consists of interaction between fluid-fluid states of matter.

Table 6: Fine-grained performance across caption complexity using human evaluation. We find
that T2V models struggle more on the harder captions than the easier captions in both the semantic
adherence (SA) and physical commonsense (PC) metrics.

                                               Easy (%)      Hard (%)
                           Model               SA    PC      SA    PC
                           Open Models
                           CogVideoX-5B       63.8   55.3    62.5   50.3
                           VideoCrafter2      53.4   38.1    42.6   30.3
                           CogVideoX-2B       51.1   38.3    42.6   29.0
                           LaVIE              51.9   31.2    44.8   24.0
                           SVD-T2I2V          41.8   37.6    43.2   22.6
                           ZeroScope          32.3   33.9    27.7   31.0
                           OpenSora           20.1   25.4     5.2   21.3
                           Closed Model
                           Pika               45.7   39.9    35.1   32.1
                           Dream Machine      65.2   29.4    57.8   12.5
                           Lumiere-T2I2V      56.6   29.1    38.7   20.0
                           Lumiere-T2V        38.6   34.9    38.1   19.4
                           Gen-2              26.6   31.8    26.6   21.6


Adam [46] optimizer with a linear warmup of 50 steps followed by linear decay. Similar to [5], we
chose the peak learning rate as 1e − 4. We utilized 2 A6000 GPUs with the total batch size of 32. In
addition, we finetune our model with 32 frames in the video and the frames are resized to 224 × 224
by image processor. Similar to [72, 125], we create 32 segments of the video, and sample the middle
frame for each segment.


P    AUTOMATIC AND H UMAN L EADERBOARD

We compute the physical commonsense and semantic adherence scores for the models on the testing
set using V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS. Subsequently, we take their average and create a rankings of the
models. We have a similar ranking of the models using the joint performance metrics (SA=1, PC=1)
from human evaluation. We present the human and automatic leaderboard for the open and closed
models in Table 10. Our analysis reveals that the average rank of the models in the automatic
leaderboard is 0.66 above or below the expected rank of the model in the human leaderboard. This
indicates V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS is reliable for evaluating the future models on our dataset.


                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Fine-grained performance of T2V models for the interaction between diverse states of matter
using human evaluation. Ideally, we want the T2V models to achieve a high score on the SA = 1
and PC = 1 metric while reduce the score on the SA=0 and PC=0, SA=1 and PC=0, and SA=0 and
PC=1 metrics.

     Source       Category      SA (%)   PC (%)   SA=1 and PC=1 (%)      SA=1 and PC=0 (%)   SA=0 and PC=1 (%)   SA=0 and PC=0 (%)
                                                               Open Models
                  Fluid-Fluid    61.8     43.6          18.2                   18.2                18.2                20.0
 CogVideoX-5B     Solid-Fluid    76.6     59.3          53.1                   23.4                 6.2                17.2
                  Solid-Solid    50.3     24.5          25.9                   18.9                18.9                30.8
                  Fluid-Fluid    34.5     47.3          25.5                    9.1                21.8                43.6
 CogVideoX-2B     Solid-Fluid    56.2     34.9          21.9                   34.2                13.0                30.8
                  Solid-Solid    43.0     28.2          12.7                   30.3                15.5                41.5
                  Fluid-Fluid    69.1     43.6          34.5                   34.5                 9.1                21.8
     LaVIE        Solid-Fluid    52.1     30.8          15.8                   36.3                15.1                32.9
                  Solid-Solid    37.3     19.0           8.5                   28.9                10.6                52.1
                  Fluid-Fluid    12.7     27.3           7.3                    5.5                20.0                67.3
   OpenSora       Solid-Fluid    30.1     21.9           7.5                   22.6                14.4                55.5
                  Solid-Solid     7.7     23.8           1.4                    6.3                22.4                69.9
                  Fluid-Fluid    69.1     43.6          32.7                   36.4                10.9                20.0
  VideoCrafter2   Solid-Fluid    57.5     41.8          27.4                   30.1                14.4                28.1
                  Solid-Solid    31.5     23.8           4.9                   26.6                18.9                49.7
                  Fluid-Fluid    58.2     34.5          18.2                   40.0                16.4                25.5
  SVD-T2I2V       Solid-Fluid    52.7     32.9          17.1                   35.6                15.8                25.5
                  Solid-Solid    25.9     27.3           4.2                   21.7                23.1                51.0
                  Fluid-Fluid    36.4     47.3          20.0                   16.4                27.3                36.4
   ZeroScope      Solid-Fluid    40.4     37.0          14.4                   26.0                22.6                37.0
                  Solid-Solid    17.5     22.4           6.3                   11.2                16.1                66.4
                                                           Closed Models
                  Fluid-Fluid    76.4     10.9           9.1                   67.3                 1.8                21.8
 Dream Machine    Solid-Fluid    68.1     23.6          16.7                   51.4                 6.9                25.0
                  Solid-Solid    50.0     24.3          12.1                   37.9                12.1                37.9
                  Fluid-Fluid    37.7     26.4          15.1                   22.6                11.3                50.9
     Gen-2        Solid-Fluid    38.5     18.5           8.1                   30.4                10.4                51.1
                  Solid-Solid     8.9     37.1           4.0                   4.8                 33.1                58.1
                  Fluid-Fluid    45.4     34.5           9.1                   36.4                25.5                29.1
  Lumiere-T2V     Solid-Fluid    47.2     26.0           9.6                   37.7                16.4                36.3
                  Solid-Solid    26.5     27.3           8.4                   18.2                18.9                54.5
                  Fluid-Fluid    49.5     21.8          10.9                   38.2                10.9                40.0
 Lumiere-T2I2V    Solid-Fluid    59.6     26.0          17.1                   42.5                 8.9                31.5
                  Solid-Solid    37.1     25.2           8.4                   28.7                16.8                46.2
                  Fluid-Fluid    68.0     58.0          44.0                   24.0                14.0                18.0
      Pika        Solid-Fluid    46.5     27.9          16.3                   30.2                11.6                41.9
                  Solid-Solid    24.8     36.8          13.6                   11.2                23.2                52.0


                                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Fine-grained performance of T2V models for the complexity of the captions using human
evaluation. Ideally, we want the T2V models to achieve a high score on the SA = 1 and PC = 1 metric
while reduce the score on the SA=0 and PC=0, SA=1 and PC=0, and SA=0 and PC=1 metrics.

     Source      Category   SA (%)   PC (%)    SA=1 and PC=1 (%)       SA=1 and PC=0 (%)    SA=0 and PC=1 (%)    SA=0 and PC=0 (%)
                                                            Open Models
                  EASY       63.8     40.9           22.9                     14.4                14.4                  21.8
 CogVideoX-5B
                  HARD       62.6     38.1           24.5                     12.3                12.3                  25.2
                  EASY       51.1     38.3           20.7                     17.6                17.6                  31.4
 CogVideoX-2B
                  HARD       42.6     29.0           16.1                     12.9                12.9                  44.5
                  EASY       51.9     31.2           19.6                     32.3                11.6                  36.5
      LaVIE
                  HARD       44.8     24.0           11.0                     33.8                13.0                  42.2
                  EASY       20.1     25.4            4.8                     15.3                20.6                  59.3
    OpenSora
                  HARD       15.5     21.3            5.2                     10.3                16.1                  68.4
                  EASY       53.4     38.1           21.2                     32.3                16.9                  29.6
 VideoCrafter2
                  HARD       42.6     30.3           16.1                     26.5                14.2                  43.2
                  EASY       42.0     38.0           16.0                     25.0                21.0                  37.0
    SVD-T2I2V
                  HARD       43.0     23.0            6.0                     37.0                16.0                  41.0
                  EASY       32.3     33.9           13.8                     18.5                20.1                  47.6
    ZeroScope
                  HARD       27.7     31.0            9.7                     18.1                21.3                  51.0
                                                            Closed Models
                  EASY       65.2     29.4           19.8                     45.5                 9.6                  25.1
 Dream Machine
                  HARD       57.9     12.5           5.9                      52.0                 6.6                  35.5
                  EASY       26.6     31.8           10.4                     16.2                21.4                  52.0
      Gen-2
                  HARD       26.6     21.6            4.3                     22.3                17.3                  56.1
                  EASY       38.6     34.9           11.1                     27.5                23.8                  37.6
  Lumiere-T2V
                  HARD       38.1     19.3            6.5                     31.6                12.9                  49.0
                  EASY       56.6     29.1           16.4                     40.2                12.7                  30.7
 Lumiere-T2I2V
                  HARD       38.7     20.0            7.7                     31.0                12.3                  49.0
                  EASY       45.7     39.9           23.7                     22.0                16.2                  38.2
      Pika
                  HARD       35.1     32.1           14.5                     20.6                17.6                  47.3


Table 9: Inference details for models in our testbed. Here, NA indicates that the information is not
available for the closed models.
 Model               Resolution      # of Video Frames        Guidance Scale         Sampling Steps          Noise Scheduler
 Open Models
 CogVideoX           480 × 720                25                      7.5                   50                DDPM [37]
 ZeroScope           320 × 576                32                        9                   50           DPMSolverMultiStep [70]
 VideoCrafter2       320 × 512                32                       12                   50               DDIM [100]
 LaVIE               320 × 512                32                      7.5                   50                DDPM [37]
 OpenSora            240 × 426                32                        7                  100               IDDPM [76]
 SVD-T2I2V           1024 × 576               25                     (1, 3)                25              EulerDiscrete [43]
 Closed Models
 Lumiere-T2V        1024 × 1024               80                       8                   256                     NA
 Lumiere-T2I2V      1024 × 1024               80                       6                   256                     NA
 Gen-2              720 × 1280                32                      8.5                  100                     NA
 Dream Machine       1280 × 720               24                      NA                   NA                      NA
 Pika               640 × 1088                72                      12                   NA                      NA


Q      A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT: R ELATIVE R ANKINGS

In this work, we focus on collecting the absolute (0/1) feedback from the human annotators. Here,
we aim to understand the effect of changing the feedback acquisition protocol to relative rankings
for physical commonsense evaluation. Specifically, we ask the three workers to look at two videos
simultaneously and pick the one with better physical commonsense. In particular, we got 500 pairwise
comparisons for 4 video generative models (CogVideoX-5B, Pika, Gen2, OpenSora). It costs us $360
to run this human evaluation. Subsequently, we computed the ELO scores of these models based on
the human annotations. We present the results in Table 12.
Interestingly, we find that the relative ranking of these models remains unchanged under both the
feedback methods. Specifically, CogVideoX-5B and OpenSora are still the best and worst models on
the VideoPhy dataset, respectively. We note that the open (usually smaller) video generative models
will be penalized for losing to close (usually larger) video generative models in the ranking-based


                                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: Human and Automatic leaderboard for open and closed video generative models. We
compute the joint performance metrics (SA = 1, PC = 1) from human evaluation, and average the SA
and PC scores from automatic evaluation to construct the leaderboard. The models are ranked from
best to worst (descending order). We find that the automatic leaderboard reliably tracks the human
leaderboard.

                    Open models                                          Closed models
    Human         V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS   Rank diff.       Human        V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS    Rank diff.
 CogVideoX-5B         CogVideoX-5B           0               Pika          Dream Machine            3
 VideoCrafter2        VideoCrafter2          0          Dream Machine       Lumiere-T2I2V           1
 CogVideoX-2B            LaVIE               1          Lumiere-T2I2V        SVD-T2I2V              1
    LaVIE             CogVideoX-2B           1           Lumiere-T2V             Pika               1
  SVD-T2I2V            SVD-T2I2V             0              Gen-2               Gen-2               0
   ZeroScope            ZeroScope            0                 -                   -                -
   OpenSora             OpenSora             0                 -                   -                -

                 Table 11: Automatic Leaderboard on Video Generation Models.

    #      Open Models       PC    SA     Avg.
    1    CogVideo-xl         41    57      49
    2    VideoCrafter-2      36    47      42
                                                            #      Closed Models       PC       SA   Avg.
    3    LaVIE               35    46      41
                                                            1   Luma Dreamer T2i2V     30       45    38
    4    Mochi               30    42      36
                                                            2   Lamma T2i2V            25       36    31
    5    CogVideo (Base)     29    40      35
                                                            3   Pika                   23       34    29
    6    SDXV-T2i2V          28    38      33
                                                            4   Gen-2 (Runway)         31       26    29
    7    Hunyuan Video       26    38      32
    8    ZeroScope           24    35      29
    9    Pika                23    34      29



setup. The absolute feedback operates independently across all video generative models, and helps in
better contextualizing the capability of the models with similar scales.

R    A PPLICATIONS OF V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS
In this work, we propose V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS, an auto-evaluator that judges the semantic adherence
and physical commonsense of the generated videos for a given caption. Here, we describe the
potential usecases of the model for future work.

Video Generative Model Selection: The ability to perform model verification on downstream tasks
cheaply and reliably is critical. In this regard, the model builders can utilize V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS to
evaluate their candidate models on the V IDEO P HY dataset at scale. The top candidate models can
then be evaluated with the human workers for more accurate evaluation.

Data Filtering: With the advent of foundation models that are trained on the internet data, high-
quality filtering has emerged as a crucial step in the pipeline [33, 131, 62]. Here, the data builders can
utilize V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS to filter low-quality video-text data that lacks in semantic adherence
and physical commonsense.

Post-training: Recently, aligning the generative models with human or AI feedback has become
pivotal for high-quality generations [94, 89, 7, 108, 58]. Here, the post-training pipeline of the video
generative models can leverage the V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS model as an reward model that provides
feedback to the model generated content. Subsequently, this feedback can be utilized to refine the
model for better generations.

S    C ORRELATION WITH VIDEO QUALITY AND MOTION
There are several works that focus on assessing the generated video quality and motions [42, 67].
Here, we aim to assess the correlation between the semantic adherence and physical commonsense


                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 12: Results with relative feedback acquisition protocol. We present the ELO score of a few
selected model by asking human annotators to compare the two videos side-by-side, and pick the one
that follows physical commonsense more. We also mention that the binary ratings that the videos
get under the absolute feedback acquisition protocol. We find that the rankings of the models are
identical under both the setups.

                             Model              ELO      Binary ratings
                             CogVideoX-5B       1081          53
                             Pika               1048         36.5
                             Gen2               1010         27.2
                             OpenSora            860         23.5


scores and these metrics. Specifically, we calculate the video quality using LAION aesthetic classifier
[52] and video motion using the RAFT optical flow model [104]. Subsequently, we calculate the
pearson correlation between video quality and motion with physical commonsense and semantic
adherence. We present the results in Table 13.
We find that physical commonsense and semantic adherence are correlated positively with the video
quality, albeit the correlation is not very strong. In addition, we find that physical commonsense and
semantic adherence are negatively correlated with the video motions. This indicates that the video
models tend to make more mistakes in the semantic adherence and physical commonsense when
more motions are depicted in them. In this work, we consider a wide breadth of video generative
models – open and closed. The closed models (Dream Machine/Gen-2/Pika) contribute to the higher
end of the video quality while open models (Zeroscope/OpenSora) contribute to the lower end. While
the high quality is ‘correlated’ with the better physical commonsense, we note that the absolute
performance of the models is quite poor on our benchmark. For instance, Gen-2 achieves the one of
the highest video quality score (5.8 on LAION aesthetics classifier) but has a poor semantic adherence
and physical commonsense score of 7.6 (Table 3).

Table 13: Correlation between video quality (Aesthetics) and optical flow (motion) with physical
commonsense and semantic adherence over V IDEO P HY dataset.

                         Metrics                                Correlation
                         Aesthetics-Physical Commonsense           0.3
                         Aesthetics-Semantic Adherence             0.5
                         Motion-Physical Commonsense               -0.8
                         Motion-Semantic Adherence                 -0.1



T    F INETUNING VIDEO MODEL WITH V IDEO P HY DATA

This work is centered around physical commonsense evaluation, and we trained an automatic evaluator
(V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS) using the training set. Here, we assess whether V IDEO P HY training set
instances can also be used for finetuning video models. Specifically, we finetune Lumiere-T2I2V
model on the instances from the training set of V IDEO P HY which achieve a score of 1 on physical
commonsense and a score of 1 on semantic adherence. In total, there are 1000 such (video, caption)
pairs in the dataset. Post-finetuning, we generate the videos for the test prompts and evaluate them
using our automatic evaluator, V IDEO C ON -P HYSICS.

Table 14: Finetuning Lumiere-T2I2V with the (video, text) pairs that achieve joint performance
score of 1 (i.e., PC = 1 and SA = 1) in the train set of V IDEO P HY data. While the training set of
the V IDEO P HY was primarily collected for training an automatic evaluator, we test whether it can
also improve the video generative models itself.

                       Model                           SA     PC      Average
                       Lumiere-T2I2V-Pretrained         46     25       35
                       Lumiere-T2I2V-Finetuned         36.5   24.6     30.5


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We present the results in Table 14. We find that the semantic adherence (video-text alignment)
reduces by a large margin and physical commonsense remains unchanged after finetuning. This
can be due to several factors: (a) the number of training samples is not enough, (b) optimization
difficulties since the training videos are generated from several generative models (mix of on-policy
and off-policy videos), and (c) vanilla finetuning being a bad algorithm for learning from these
samples. Since post-training of video generative models is a less explored direction, there can be
many ways to improve the generative model’s physical commonsense. These results also show that
mere finetuning with the samples in the training set of VideoPhy does not lead to large gains in the
automatic evaluation on the test set. Future work will focus on training better physical commonsense
models using the insights provided in our work.

U    M ORE Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES OF P OOR P HYSICAL C OMMONSENSE
We present more examples from each generative model where one or more physical laws are violated
in Figure 15 - Figure 26.


                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            (a) A paddle mixes wet cement in a bucket


                     (b) A whisk whips cream to a perfect fluffy consistency


                             (c) Hands rub luscious lotion on dry skin


                          (d) The net catches the fast-moving soccer ball


                            (e) Yogurt merging with strawberry puree

Figure 15: Unphysical Generated Examples of LaVIE. (a) Solid Constitutive Laws Violation: the
metal spoon should not deform; Nonphysical Penetration: the spoon unnaturally passes through the
liquid. (b) Solid Constitutive Laws Violation: the whisk exhibits abnormal shape deformation. (c)
Solid Constitutive Laws Violation: the two hands show abnormal shape deformation; Nonphysical
Penetration: fingers penetrate each other; Conservation of Mass Violation: the geometry (plus texture)
of the two hands are inconsistent over time. (d) Conservation of Mass Violation: the geometry (plus
texture) of the soccer is inconsistent over time; Newton’s Second Law Violation: the soccer does
not fall under gravity. (e) Conservation of Mass Violation: the volume of yogurt in the cup does not
increase as more yogurt is added.


V    E XAMPLES FROM DIVERSE STATES OF MATTER AND COMPLEXITY
We present a few qualitative examples highlighting instances of good physical commonsense and bad
physical commonsense in Figure 27-Figure 29.


                                                 33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     (a) A blender spins, mixing squeezed juice within it


                       (b) A teaspoon stirs sugar into a cup of coffee


                             (c) Hand flipping open book cover


                           (d) Soap washes grime off dirty hands


                     (e) Water pouring from a watering can onto plants

Figure 16: Unphysical Generated Examples of Gen-2. (a) Conservation of Mass Violation: the
volume of juice in the blender increases over time without new substances being added. (b) Solid
Constitutive Laws Violation: the metal spoon should not deform. (c) Conservation of Mass Violation:
the volume of the book increases over time; Nonphysical Penetration: the fingers pass through the
book. (d) Nonphysical Penetration: fingers penetrate into each other. (e) Newton’s Second Law
Violation: the flowing water appears to be static, ignoring the effect of gravity.


                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             (a) A foot crushing an empty soda can


                           (b) A spinning wheel sprays muddy water


                 (c) Mustard squirting out of a plastic bottle onto a hotdog


                         (d) Plastic frisbee lands on a lush grass lawn


                                  (e) Pouring milk into still tea

Figure 17: Unphysical Generated Examples of VideoCrafter2. (a) Newton’s Second Law Violation:
the metal can deforms without being pressed. (b) Newton’s Second Law Violation: Water splashes
while the rolling wheel remains static. (c) Newton’s Second Law Violation: the bottle floats in the air,
ignoring the effect of gravity; Fluid Constitutive Law Violation: the dripping and flowing of mustard
are unnatural. (d) Conservation of Mass Violation: the geometry (plus texture) of the frisbee is not
consistent over time. (e) Conservation of Mass Violation: the total volume of milk in the glass does
not increase as more milk is poured into; Nonphysical Penetration: milk penetrates the glass.


                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     (a) A futuristic hoverboard hovers just above the water


                            (b) A swimmer splashing in the sea water


                          (c) Frog leaping from one lilypad to another


                        (d) Plastic fidget spinner rotating on rubber mat


                  (e) The eraser rubs against the paper, removing pencil marks

Figure 18: Unphysical Generated Examples of ZeroScope. (a) Newton’s Second Law Violation:
the motion of the hoverboard does not satisfy the momentum equation. (b) Newton’s Second Law
Violation: the motion of the arm of the swimmer is unnatural. (c) Conservation of Mass Violation:
the geometry (texture) of the frog is inconsistent over time. (d) Newton’s First Law Violation: the
velocity of the fidget spinner changes despite being in a balanced state. (e) Solid Constitutive Laws
Violation: the paper is torn apart without external forces but recovers later.


                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      (a) A blender spins, mixing squeezed juice within it


                       (b) A car gliding over a road slick with rainwater


                       (c) A shaker mixes a delightful cocktail at the bar


                    (d) A shiny coin takes a dive into a clear water fountain


                          (e) A stroller wheels through a large puddle

Figure 19: Unphysical Generated Examples of OpenSora. (a) Solid Constitutive Laws Violation:
the metal blender should not deform. (b) Newton’s Second Law Violation: the car moves backward,
violating the momentum equation (c) Solid Constitutive Laws Violation: the metal spoon deforms
when stirring the cocktail. (d) Newton’s First Law Violation: the coin moves on the ground back and
forth without horizontal forces. (e) Conservation of Mass Violation: the left rear wheel disappears
over time.


                                                37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        (a) A perfume bottle spritzes fragrance into the air


                              (b) Lemon juice drops splash into water


                             (c) Loose sneaker swings on dangling foot


                            (d) Detergent flowing into a bucket of water


                     (e) The screwdriver tightens the metal screw in the wood

Figure 20: Unphysical Generated Examples of SVD-T2I2V. (a) Newton’s Second Law Violation:
the perfume spreads back and forth, violating the momentum equation. (b) Newton’s Second Law
Violation: the water drops float in the air, ignoring gravity. (c) Solid Constitutive Laws Violation: the
leg exhibits unnatural deformation. (d) Newton’s Second Law Violation: the water flows upward into
the air without external forces. (e) Solid Constitutive Laws Violation: the screwdriver head deforms
unnaturally.


                                                   38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         (a) Plastic fidget spinner rotating on rubber mat


                              (b) Clasping a necklace around a neck


                      (c) A whisk churns heavy cream into whipped cream


                        (d) A sailboat cuts through the choppy sea waves


                       (e) A diver plunges headlong into a sparkling pool

Figure 21: Unphysical Generated Examples of Pika. (a) Solid Constitutive Laws Violation: the fidget
spinner should not deform. (b) Solid Constitutive Laws Violation: the necklace should not deform.
(c) Conservation of Mass Violation: the volume of cream increases over time without additional input.
(d) Fluid constitutive Law Violation: unnatural waves on the sea surface. (e) Solid Constitutive Law
Violation: one diving shoe splits into two and detaches from the feet.


                                                 39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           (a) A spoon stirs a pot of vegetable soup


                  (b) A whisk spins in the egg mixture, mixing it thoroughly


                           (c) Coin spins rapidly on a wooden table


                           (d) Squeezing lemon drops into warm tea


                                (e) Tea accepts stream of milk

Figure 22: Unphysical Generated Examples of Lumiere-T2V. (a) Conservation of Mass Violation:
the vegetable appears on the spoon out of nowhere. (b) Solid Constitutive Laws Violation: the whisk
should not deform. (c) Solid Constitutive Laws Violation: the coin splits into two and then merges
back into one. (d) Solid Constitutive Laws Violation: the lemon shows an unnatural appearance
change; Fluid Constitutive Laws Violation: the lemon juice appears like static glue. (e) Nonphysical
Penetration: the tea flows through the cup.


                                                40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          (a) A drum vibrating from the beating stick


                      (b) A leaf falls delicately into a slow-moving river


                          (c) A wooden spoon stirring soup in a pot


                                   (d) Hand folds the paper


                            (e) Skateboard glides on the pavement

Figure 23: Unphysical Generated Examples of Lumiere-T2I2V. (a) Solid Constitutive Laws Violation:
the drum stick head should not deform (b) Newton’s Second Law Violation: the leaf floats in the
air, ignoring gravity. (c) Conservation of Mass Violation: the vegetable appears on the spoon out
of nowhere. (d) Nonphysical Penetration: hands penetrate each other. (e) Solid Constitutive Laws
Violation: one leg on the skateboard transforms into a person.


                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            (a) A diver splashing into the pool water


                                    (b) Peeler peels an apple


                                 (c) Shoveling sand into a bucket


                           (d) The pickaxe digs into the hard grounds


                      (e) The rock topples the carefully stacked pile of cans

Figure 24: Unphysical Generated Examples of CogVideoX-2B. a) Newton’s Second Law Violation:
the splash appears without any external force, violating the principle of momentum conservation.
(b) Solid Constitutive Law Violation: the apple undergoes deformation, which should not occur.
(c) Conservation of Mass Violation: the sand’s volume changes over time without the addition
of new material. (d) Conservation of Mass Violation: the geometry and texture of the pickaxe
change inconsistently over time. (e) Solid Constitutive Law Violation: the cans exhibit unnatural
deformations.


                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            (a) A spinning wheel sprays muddy water


                      (b) Dominoes toppling one after another on the table


                           (c) Leather glove catching a hard baseball


                              (d) Milk blending seamlessly into tea


                         (e) The net catches the fast-moving soccer ball

Figure 25: Unphysical Generated Examples of CogVideoX-5B. (a) Newton’s Second Law Violation:
the wave dynamics are discontinuous over time, violating the momentum conservation principle. (b)
Conservation of Mass Violation: the geometry and texture of the dominoes change inconsistently
over time. (c) Solid Constitutive Law Violation: the leather glove exhibits unnatural deformations.
(d) Conservation of Mass Violation: the volume of tea remains unchanged despite the addition of
milk to the glass cup. (e) Solid Constitutive Law Violation: the soccer ball displays unnatural and
discontinuous deformations over time.


                                                43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     (a) A brave diver splashes into a pool from a great height


                            (b) Coin flicking into a sparkling fountain


                              (c) Metal grinder crushing coffee beans


                           (d) Oil cascades into vinegar for vinaigrette


                                 (e) Water streams into fresh juice

Figure 26: Unphysical Generated Examples of Dream Machine. (a) Newton’s Second Law Violation:
the diver floats in mid-air, defying gravity. (b) Newton’s Second Law Violation: the coin hovers,
disregarding gravitational forces. (c) Conservation of Mass Violation: numerous coffee beans appear
spontaneously without a source. (d) Nonphysical Penetration: oil and vinegar pass through the glass
cup. (e) Conservation of Mass Violation: the juice volume remains unchanged despite the addition of
water.


                                                44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           PC = 0                                              PC = 1
Easy


         (a) Rain creates concentric ripples in water.           (c) Rain splashing on a still pond.


       (b) Water droplet bouncing on a water surface.           (d) Raindrops disturb quiet puddles.
Hard


             (e) Juice and fizz shake in a bottle.            (g) Perfume mist diffusing through the air.


          (f) Yogurt merging with strawberry puree.                 (h) Pouring milk into still tea.

Figure 27: Qualitative examples in the fluid-fluid category. Videos in the left column have a majority
PC score of 0, while videos in the right column have a majority PC score of 1. (a) The central ripple
does not vanish even in absence of raindrops. (b) The water droplet is floating upwards, defying
gravity. (e) The total volume of juice is increasing. (f) The color of the yogurt is not consistent over
time.


                                                         45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               PC = 0                                                   PC = 1
Easy


       (a) The wristwatch knob winds the inner spring tightly.       (c) Cloth banner hanging from wooden twig.


                     (b) Tying a rope to a pole.                 (d) Wooden swing dangles over the sand in the sandpit.
Hard


        (e) Darts lands in the middle of the cork dartboard.           (g) Metal grinder crushing coffee beans.


                  (f) Ripping paper sheet by hand.                          (h) Shoveling sand into a bucket.

Figure 28: Qualitative examples in the solid-solid category. Videos in the left column have a majority
PC score of 0, while videos in the right column have a majority PC score of 1. (a) The hands of the
clock have illogical motion. (b) One piece of the robe disappears. (e) The geometry and texture of
the dart are not consistent over time. (f) The total volume of the sheet of paper is not consistent over
time.


                                                           46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              PC = 0                                                PC = 1
Easy


       (a) A toy duck floats on a tranquil neighborhood pond.       (c) A leaf floating on the stream water.


         (b) Chopsticks dipping a sushi roll into soy sauce.     (d) A small paper boat drifts along a stream.
Hard


           (e) Feet kick and splash about in a rain puddle.     (g) A wine bottle pours a red blend into a glass.


        (f) Water spraying from a garden hose onto plants.        (h) Foot kicks water in the swimming pool.

Figure 29: Qualitative examples in the fluid-fluid category. Videos in the left column have a majority
PC score of 0, while videos in the right column have a majority PC score of 1. (a) The geometry and
color of the duck head changes over time. (b) One chopstick appears from nowhere. (e) One leg
appears from nowhere. (f) The geometry and texture of the leaves are not consistent over time.


                                                          47
