Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I NVERSE C ONSTITUTIONAL AI:
C OMPRESSING P REFERENCES INTO P RINCIPLES
 Arduin Findeis∗                                                     Timo Kaufmann†
 University of Cambridge                                             LMU Munich, MCML Munich
 Cambridge, UK                                                       Munich, Germany

 Eyke Hüllermeier                         Samuel Albanie            Robert Mullins
 LMU Munich, MCML Munich                   London, UK                University of Cambridge
 DFKI, Kaiserslautern, Germany                                       Cambridge, UK



                                            A BSTRACT

          Feedback data is widely used for fine-tuning and evaluating state-of-the-art AI
          models. Pairwise text preferences, where human or AI annotators select the “bet-
          ter” of two options, are particularly common. Such preferences are used to train
          (reward) models or to rank models with aggregate statistics. For many applica-
          tions it is desirable to understand annotator preferences in addition to modelling
          them — not least because extensive prior work has shown various unintended bi-
          ases in preference datasets. Yet, preference datasets remain challenging to inter-
          pret. Neither black-box reward models nor statistics can answer why one text is
          preferred over another. Manual interpretation of the numerous (long) response
          pairs is usually equally infeasible. In this paper, we introduce the Inverse Consti-
          tutional AI (ICAI) problem, formulating the interpretation of pairwise text pref-
          erence data as a compression task. In constitutional AI, a set of principles (a
          constitution) is used to provide feedback and fine-tune AI models. ICAI inverts
          this process: given a feedback dataset, we aim to extract a constitution that best
          enables a large language model (LLM) to reconstruct the original annotations. We
          propose a corresponding ICAI algorithm and validate its generated constitutions
          quantitatively based on annotation reconstruction accuracy on several datasets:
          (a) synthetic feedback data with known principles; (b) AlpacaEval cross-annotated
          human feedback data; (c) crowdsourced Chatbot Arena data; and (d) PRISM data
          from diverse demographic groups. As an example application, we further demon-
          strate the detection of biases in human feedback data. As a short and interpretable
          representation of the original dataset, generated constitutions have many potential
          use cases: they may help identify undesirable annotator biases, better understand
          model performance, scale feedback to unseen data, or assist with adapting AI
          models to individual user or group preferences. We release the source code for
          our algorithm and experiments at https://github.com/rdnfn/icai.


Figure 1: The Inverse Constitutional AI problem. Starting with pairwise preference feedback
data, we derive a set of natural language principles (a constitution) that explain the preferences. For
validation, we reconstruct the original preferences with an LLM judging according to the generated
constitution. The constitution represents a (highly compact) compression of the preferences.
   ∗
       arduin.findeis@cst.cam.ac.uk; † timo.kaufmann@ifi.lmu.de


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1   I NTRODUCTION
State-of-the-art AI models, in particular large language models (LLMs), rely heavily on human feed-
back for training and evaluation. This feedback, often in the form of pairwise text preferences, is
crucial to assess advanced capabilities, which are hard to evaluate automatically. Pairwise text pref-
erences typically consist of a prompt, two model responses and an annotation selecting the “better”
response. Strategies for training on such data have seen widespread adoption, with notable exam-
ples including reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Stiennon
et al., 2020) and direct preference optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023). Beyond training,
pairwise text preferences are also widely-used for evaluating LLMs, such as in the Chatbot Arena
(Chiang et al., 2024), where crowdsourced preferences determine rankings — possibly reflecting the
complexity of human preferences better than conventional benchmarks (Xu et al., 2023).
However, interpreting such pairwise data is challenging: describing what exactly we train a model to
do when applying RLHF with a large number of preference pairs is hard. Similarly, understanding
why a model is ranked higher in a pairwise data-based leaderboard remains difficult. Yet, under-
standing such data is critical: human feedback is not without its flaws. Systematic biases in human
judgement have been documented extensively in the psychology literature (Tversky & Kahneman,
1974). Perhaps unsurprisingly, biases have been similarly observed in the human feedback used to
guide and evaluate LLMs. For example, human annotators have been observed to sometimes favour
assertiveness (Hosking et al., 2024) or grammatical correctness (Wu & Aji, 2023) over truthfulness.
Feedback data with unintended biases can be problematic: when used for fine-tuning, biased data
may lead to models that exhibit the same biases. Similarly, leaderboards based on biased data will
favour misaligned models (Dubois et al., 2023; 2024). As such, understanding the implicit rules and
biases guiding annotators of feedback data is valuable. To date, however, few general tools exist
to detect biases in pre-existing preference data at scale. Prior work detecting biases usually either
requires specially collected data or focuses on biases easy to programmatically measure (e.g. length
bias (Dubois et al., 2024)) — difficult to extend to pre-existing datasets or less controlled settings.
In this paper, we propose a novel general approach to understanding preference corpora: Inverse
Constitutional AI (ICAI). We make the following contributions:

1. Formulating the Inverse Constitutional AI (ICAI) problem. In Constitutional AI (Bai et al.,
   2022b), a set of principles (or constitution) is used to provide feedback and fine-tune language
   models. ICAI inverts this process: given a dataset of human or AI feedback, we seek to compress
   the annotations into a set of principles that enable reconstruction of the annotations (Figure 1).
2. Proposing an initial ICAI algorithm. We introduce a first ICAI algorithm that generates a
   set of principles based on a feedback dataset. We validate the constitutions generated by our
   algorithm based on their ability to help reconstruct feedback. Given the complexity of human
   judgement, the constitution necessarily represents a “lossy”, non-unique compression of the
   feedback data. Nevertheless, the interpretable nature of the principles may enable a number
   of promising downstream use cases: (a) highlighting potential issues in preference data; (b)
   creating interpretable reward models; (c) scaling human-annotated evaluation to new models
   and use cases; and (d) generating personal constitutions for customized model behaviour.
3. Providing experimental results and case studies. We test our approach experimentally on four
   datasets: (a) we first provide a proof-of-concept on synthetic data with known underlying princi-
   ples; (b) we then demonstrate applicability to human-annotated data on the AlpacaEval dataset
   (Dubois et al., 2023); (c) we showcase applicability to interpreting individual user preferences
   via Chatbot Arena Conversations data (Zheng et al., 2023); (d) we investigate the use-case of
   bias detection on different datasets; and finally (e) we demonstrate our method’s ability to help
   interpret differing group preferences on PRISM data (Kirk et al., 2024). We demonstrate the
   highly sample-efficient generation of personalised constitutions with human-readable and ed-
   itable principles. We release our code at https://github.com/rdnfn/icai.

2   T HE I NVERSE C ONSTITUTIONAL AI P ROBLEM
Given a set of pairwise preference feedback, the Inverse Constitutional AI (ICAI) problem is to
generate a corresponding constitution of natural-language principles that enable an LLM annotator


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Overview of our Inverse Constitutional AI (ICAI) algorithm. Given a dataset of pair-
wise comparisons, in Step 1 candidate principles are generated using an LLM. In Step 2, these
principles are clustered using an embedding model. In Step 3, similar principles are deduplicated by
sampling one principle per cluster. In Step 4, each principle is tested to evaluate its ability to help
an LLM reconstruct the original annotations. Finally, in Step 5, the principles are filtered according
to the testing results, and a set of filtered principles are returned as the final constitution. Optionally,
a final step of additional clustering and subsampling can follow to ensure diverse principles.


to reconstruct the original preferences as well as possible. Formally, we seek to find
                            arg max { agreement(po , pM (c)) s.t. |c| ≤ n} ,                            (1)
                                c

where po are the original preferences and pM (c) are constitutional preferences over a pairwise pref-
erence corpus T , generated by LLM M using the constitution c. The constitution is constrainted to
consist of up to n human-readable natural language principles. Agreement is defined as the percent-
age of constitutional preferences pM (c) identical to the original preferences po . A constitution with
high agreement can help interpret a preference dataset to gain insight into the underlying annotator
preferences and biases. The constitution may also be used for future preference synthesis, with an
interpretable and editable set of principles.

3    M ETHOD
We propose a first Inverse Constitutional AI (ICAI) algorithm, outlined in Figure 2, consisting of
five main steps: principle generation, principle clustering, principle subsampling, principle testing,
and principle filtering. In the following, we describe each step in detail.

Step 1: Principle generation. We extract candidate principles using an LLM with access to the
feedback data. The principles are generated on a per-comparison basis: an LLM is prompted with
a pair of texts and corresponding preference, and then asked to propose principles that explain the
preference (prompts in Appendix G.1). The generated principles are in the form of natural language
instructions that inform preference decisions (e.g., “select the more polite output”). We generate a
large number of candidate principles using multiple (by default 2) generation prompts and multiple
principles per prompt to cover a wide range of potential rules. The generation prompts affect the
type of principles that get generated and tested (e.g., specific/general, positive/negative rules).
Step 2: Principle clustering. Since the first step generates a large number of candidate principles
independently, almost identical principles may be generated multiple times. We use k-means-based
clustering on embeddings to identify principles that are similar for merging. The parameter k deter-
mines the number principles considered downstream and thus affects overall computational cost.
Step 3: Principle subsampling. In the third step, we deduplicate the principles by randomly sam-
pling one principle per cluster, leading to a diverse set of remaining principles.
Step 4: Principle testing. The fourth step evaluates the generated principles’ ability to help an
LLM reconstruct the original annotations. We prompt the LLM with the generated principles to
determine the ‘votes’ each principle casts across comparisons, which we then compare to the true
annotations (see Appendix G.2). We parallelize this step, prompting the LLM with a pair of texts
and multiple principles to provide a separate response (first preferred, second preferred, not relevant)


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for each principle. This parallelization reduces the token requirements compared to separate testing.
While LLMs can exhibit anchoring effects when predicting multiple labels in one output (Stureborg
et al., 2024), we hypothesize this effect is less pronounced for relative preferences and our experi-
mental results indicate sufficient reliability on our datasets. We compare these results to the original
labels and count the correct, incorrect, and not relevant labels for each principle separately, thereby
identifying principles that help the LLM to correctly annotate the dataset.
Step 5: Principle filtering. Finally, the principles are filtered based on the results of the previous
testing step. We only keep principles that improve the reconstruction loss, while discarding princi-
ples that do not help or even hinder the reconstruction. We further discard principles that are marked
as relevant on less than x% of the data (default 10%), to avoid overly specific principles that do not
generalize. We order the principles according to their net contribution to correctly annotating the
dataset (#correct − #incorrect annotations). We then select the top n principles according to this or-
der (see Appendix F.5 for further discussion). Optionally, to increase principle diversity, we cluster
the top m (> n) principles into n clusters as before, and subsample the highest ordered principle
from each cluster.1 The final ordered list of principlesis returned as the constitution.

Inference. Given a constitution, we can validate its ability to “explain” the original feedback dataset.
We do this validation using AI annotators prompted with the constitution, an approach pioneered by
Bai et al. (2022b) and commonly referred to as constitutional AI. Notably this method leaves room
for interpretation of the constitution by the AI annotator, as the constitution may be ambiguous, con-
tradictory or incomplete, but results may also vary depending on the exact prompt and constitution.
We build on the AlpacaEval framework (Li et al., 2024c) for our constitutional annotators. This in-
ference using constitutional AI annotators enables quantitatively testing the validity of our generated
constitutions and their ability to explain the data while also enabling downstream use cases, such as
personalized preference models.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We conduct experiments on four datasets: (1) synthetic data to demonstrate the basic functionality
of our algorithm, (2) human-annotated AlpacaEval data to demonstrate the applicability of our al-
gorithm to real-world data, (3) Chatbot Arena data to illustrate the application of our algorithm to
infer individual user preferences, and (4) PRISM data to showcase interpreting group preferences
with our algorithm. Full dataset details are available in Appendix A. We primarily use two mod-
els from OpenAI: GPT-3.5-Turbo and GPT-4o. Example constitutions in all figures were chosen
for illustrative purposes. We provide more constitutions, experiment details (including numerical
results), and model details in Appendices D, F and H, respectively.
Annotators. We use annotators from the AlpacaEval framework (Li et al., 2024c) as baselines that
have been shown to strongly correlate with human preferences (referred to as Default annotators,
see Appendices F.8 and G.4). To evaluate constitution effectiveness, we create custom prompts that
ask the model to annotate according to principles in a constitution (see Appendix G.3). The Default
annotators cannot adjust to different datasets, performing poorly when preferences deviate from its
default preferences. In contrast, our constitutional annotators are able to adapt, a key advantage of
our approach. We show random baseline performance as a grey dashed line at 50% in all plots.
To contextualize ICAI’s performance, we compare it against additional baselines: a flipped Default
annotator, a (fine-tuned) reward model, and an annotator based on PopAlign (Wang et al., 2024)
hypothesizing principles during inference. Details are in Appendix F.8, summarized here. Non-
adaptive baselines (pretrained reward model, (flipped) Default) perform well on some datasets but
fail to adjust to all. The fine-tuned reward model adapts partially but underperforms our constitu-
tional annotator in our low-data scenario. A custom-trained reward model with extensive data may
surpass our method but would require significant resources and lack interpretability.

4.1    P ROOF - OF - CONCEPT: S YNTHETIC DATA

We first apply our algorithm to three synthetic datasets created according to known rules crafted to
be aligned, unaligned, and orthogonal to the preferences internalized by the base LLM. Each dataset
  1
    We found it important not to be too restrictive with the number of clusters in Step 2, as good principles
may never be tested. More clusters can lead to duplicates in the tested rules, necessitating another filtering step.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Results on synthetic data. Our constitutional annotators can reconstruct a variety of
preferences using limited data and without fine-tuning. We demonstrate our algorithm’s adapt-
ability on three synthetic datasets: one orthogonal to the base LLM’s learned preferences, one
aligned with those preferences and one unaligned with them. We generate constitutions for each
and report agreement with the original data of a default LLM annotator and a constitutional annota-
tor (prompted with a constitution). Our constitutions notably improve agreement in the orthogonal
and unaligned cases and retain high agreement in the aligned case, albeit with more variance. Our
method’s ability to detect biases is illustrated by the example constitution in the unaligned case.
Plots show mean and standard deviation (6 seeds) using GPT-3.5-Turbo.


is generated from three principles, with 10 pairs per principle, resulting in 30 pairs per dataset. We
provide an overview of these datasets here, with further details in Appendix I.

Orthogonal. This dataset is based on principles intended to be neither supported nor opposed by
humans or language models on average. In particular, we create a dataset based on three principles:
“prefer cats over dogs”, “prefer green over blue color”, and “select lemon over raspberry ice-cream”.
Aligned and unaligned. The aligned dataset uses preferences generally accepted by humans and
(especially) language models. Our dataset follows three principles: “select truthful over factually
incorrect answers”, “select helpful over useless answers”, “select polite over impolite answers”. The
unaligned dataset flips these annotations, creating a dataset that a default LLM annotator mostly
disagrees with.

Results. In Figure 3, we compare default annotators (prompted to select the “best” output) to con-
stitutional annotators (prompted with a generated constitution). We find that constitutional annota-
tors reconstruct original annotations better in the orthogonal and unaligned datasets, and keep high
agreement in the aligned case (which offers limited room for improvement). These results indicate
that the constitutions capture helpful information about the preferences. Qualitatively, the generated
constitutions (see Appendix H) often closely correspond to the principles described above.

4.2   H UMAN - ANNOTATED A LPACA E VAL DATA

We test our approach on human-annotated texts using the AlpacaEval dataset (Dubois et al., 2023).
The dataset, used for the AlpacaEval leaderboard, features 648 data points cross-annotated by four
annotators, with well-tested baseline AI annotators and evaluation tooling. The dataset captures
general human preferences, likely very similar to the preferences language models used in this work
have been fine-tuned on. As a consequence, the default annotator (without a constitution) agrees
strongly with the annotations, leaving little room for improvement. The goal of this experiment,
then, is not to exceed the default annotator’s annotation performance on this dataset but to answer
the following research questions: (Q1) Can constitutional annotators match the default annotator’s
performance on the aligned dataset, while providing the benefit of interpretable and editable consti-
tutions? (Q2) Is ICAI able to extract and follow principles that are exactly opposite to the aligned
dataset, despite the underlying model’s biases? Note that most practical applications will be some-
where between the two extremes of the aligned and the unaligned scenario, allowing ICAI to increase
the annotator’s performance while offering insights into the learned principles, along with the ability
to inspect and modify them as needed.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Results on AlpacaEval data. GPT-4o generates and uses interpretable constitutions
that match the performance of the default annotator on aligned preferences and notably
increase agreement with unaligned preferences. Tested on aligned (original) and unaligned
(flipped) versions of AlpacaEval, with GPT-4o generating constitutions which are then used by con-
stitutional annotators backed by GPT-4o and GPT-3.5-Turbo. Note we can only expect significant
improvement in the unaligned case, as discussed in the main text. The aligned case does not leave
room for improvement over the default annotator, but allows us to gain new insights into the prefer-
ences expressed in the dataset. In the unaligned case, GPT-4o’s agreement improves notably, while
GPT-3.5-Turbo’s performance does not exceed random choice, indicating its limited ability to fol-
low unaligned principles. Plots show mean and standard deviation (6 seeds).


Experimental setup. For each seed, we randomly select mutually exclusive training and test sub-
sets with 65 annotated pairs each. Constitutions are generated on the training subset and results
reported on the (unseen) test subset. We derive an aligned dataset based on majority vote (ties
broken randomly) and an unaligned dataset using flipped annotations.
Results. Figure 4 shows that constitutional annotators approximately match default annotator per-
formance in the aligned scenario while using an easily interpretable constitution, answering (Q1)
affirmatively.2 The unaligned dataset shows GPT-4o succeeding at following opposing principles,
improving beyond the default annotator, while GPT-3.5-Turbo fails to do so despite using the same
GPT-4o-generated constitutions. This answers (Q2) affirmatively for GPT-4o, revealing a capability
gap between models. Since we evaluate the constitutions on an unseen test set, these results also
demonstrate ICAI’s potential for annotation scaling, extracting a constitution from a small training
set (65 preferences here) and applying it to new data.
Constitution transferability. Given GPT-3.5-Turbo’s limitations in the unaligned case in Figure 4,
Appendix F.6 provides a more general exploration of how well our constitutions can transfer be-
tween models. To this end, we take the best performing constitution of the unaligned case on the
training set and test how well models from Anthropic’s Claude family are able to use these consti-
tutions on the test set. The results indicate that this constitution transfers well to the Claude models
— better than to GPT-3.5-Turbo, although transfer still incurs some loss. This is a promising result
as it indicates that our constitutions are not excessively overfitting to the generation model, which
indicates that they may capture more general concepts that are also interpretable to humans.
Scaling. Finally, although we consider sample-efficiency to be a benefit of our approach, we further
evaluate whether these results also hold with larger scale datasets. We repeat the experiment on
the AlpacaEval unaligned dataset with the full 648 preference pairs in the original dataset, using
324 samples each for training and testing. We observe that the overall results are very similar: the
constitutional annotator with 61% agreement (66% prev.) still notably outperforms the the default
annotator with 34% (27% prev.). The full results are included in Appendix F.7.
    2
      We observe a very slight improvement in GPT-3.5-Turbo’s annotations and a similarly small reduction in
GPT-4o’s agreement. This may be explained by the GPT-3.5-Turbo model being less attuned to the preferences
in the dataset, which can be alleviated with a constitution. In the case of GPT-4o, however, the constitutional
annotator likely focuses on the highly compressed constitution, even in cases where the default annotator would
have a more nuanced (but less interpretable) understanding of the underlying preferences.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Case-study: Constitutions for demographic groups on PRISM data. We consider two
groups reported by Kirk et al. (2024) to have preferences differing from average: participants born in
one geographical region rank Mistral-7b higher in this dataset (Group A), and those born in another
region rank Llama-2-7b lower than average (Group B). We generate constitutions for both groups
to explore these preferences. For each group, the annotator using the group’s data performs best.
Constitutions (see Appendix H.4) suggest that Group A prefers Mistral-7b due to it’s conciseness,
while Group B’s constitutions have recurring rules related to providing more detailed descriptions.
Plots show mean and standard deviation (6 seeds) using GPT-4o.


4.3      I NDIVIDUAL PREFERENCES : C HATBOT A RENA DATA

We evaluate ICAI’s ability to generate personal constitutions using the Chatbot Arena Conversations
dataset (Zheng et al., 2023), which consists of 33k human-annotated preferences with user-generated
prompts, offering richer insights into individual preferences compared to AlpacaEval. We select
two users exhibiting different preferences from the Chatbot Arena dataset (with 9 and 12 preference
annotations respectively) and generate a separate constitution with 3 principles for each. Due to
limited samples, there is no training-test split. We provide details on the experimental setup and
results in Appendix F.1 and summarize the results here. As may be expected, we find that the
personal constitutions generated for each user are able to improve the annotator’s performance on
the user’s annotations, but do not transfer well to the other user’s annotations. This shows that
our constitutions successfully capture individual differences, illustrating the potential to generate
personal constitutions. Note that how well a personal constitution transfers from one user to another
depends on how similar their preferences are, with the contrast being the most pronounced between
users with opposing preferences. Results will therefore vary for any given pair of users.

4.4      D EMOGRAPHIC GROUP PREFERENCES : PRISM DATA

Finally, we test ICAI’s ability to help interpret demographic group preferences on the PRISM dataset
(Kirk et al., 2024), consisting of annotations on 8,011 multi-turn conversations with 21 LLMs across
a range of value-based and controversial topics from a diverse set of 1,396 annotators.
Experimental setup. We consider two annotator subgroups described by Kirk et al. (2024) to have
differing preferences with respect to certain models relative to the average annotators. Group A,
annotators born in the same geographical region, are reported to prefer the outputs of Mistral-7b
relative to the overall rank. Similarly, Group B, annotators born in a different region, are reported
to dislike Llama-2-7b disproportionately. These observations raise the question: why do these sub-
groups prefer or dislike those specific models? With no concrete explanation in the original paper,
ICAI offers a method to generate and test possible explanations. We select the subset of PRISM
interactions where Group A prefers Mistral-7b over another model (30 pairs3 ), and similarly, the
subset where Group B rejects Llama-2-7b for any other model (80 pairs). Note that, as for Chatbot
Arena, the few samples do not allow for a train/test split, which we consider acceptable for the pur-
poses of data explanation. We then run ICAI on each subset separately to create a constitution for

   3
       For each relevant PRISM datapoint, we pick one of three available rejected models at random.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Evaluation of possibly biased principles on three datasets. Results on AlpacaEval (648
preferences), Chatbot Arena (5,115), and PRISM (7,490), showing relevance (fraction of data points
where the principle applies) and accuracy (correctly reconstructed relevant data points). Grey values
indicate relevance for fewer than 50 preferences. See Table 2 in Appendix F.2 for extended results.
                      Principle                         AlpacaEv. ChatbotAr.            PRISM
              Select the response that...              Acc     Rel Acc         Rel Acc        Rel
 is overly lengthy and lacks brevity                          52.2    80.4    57.1    97.1     57.7    96.9
 provides a numbered list format                              73.4    12.2    62.3    45.5     71.6    17.7
 presents a definitive stance without nuance                  58.6    10.8    57.1    11.4     49.1    31.2
 is overly general and vague                                  30.4    15.7    26.8     9.6     26.1    23.1
 emphasizes neutrality over providing information             50.0     2.2    40.8    10.2     58.0    46.2


each group, testing each on both datasets. We use the same prompting setup as the Chatbot Arena
experiments.
Results. Figure 5 shows that our constitutional annotators exceed default annotator performance in
reconstructing the datasets they aim to compress but (as expected) do not transfer well to the other
group’s annotations, in line with the observation by Kirk et al. (2024) that each group’s preference
differs from average preferences. Indeed, the generated constitutions (see Appendix H.4) allow us
to also ask how the preferences differ: Group A appears to strongly prefer more concise responses,
whereas Group B has more diverse constitutions that often ask for more detailed descriptions.

4.5      A PPLICATION : B IAS DETECTION

We showcase ICAI’s application in bias detection, following three steps: (1) Generate and test 400
candidate principles on 1,000 preference pairs (500 from PRISM, 500 from Chatbot Arena4 ) to cap-
ture diverse biases (using ICAI algorithm steps 1 to 4). (2) Manually select principles indicating
potential biases, focusing on those with high accuracy or limited applicability. (3) Evaluate these
principles on 13k preferences (7,490 from PRISM, 5,115 from Chatbot Arena, and 648 from Al-
pacaEval), using step 4 of the ICAI algorithm. All steps use GPT-4o-mini for cost efficiency.
Results, shown in Table 1, reveal biases regarding verbosity, style, and assertiveness. Verbosity bias,
where longer responses are preferred, is consistently observed across datasets, with Chatbot Arena
and PRISM strongly favouring overly lengthy responses (notably, 57.1% and 57.7% accuracy, re-
spectively). Style biases, such as a preference for numbered lists, are especially prominent in Al-
pacaEval (73% accuracy) and PRISM (72%), although their relevance is more limited compared to
verbosity-related principles. Additionally, biases around ambiguity and vagueness vary by dataset;
for example, PRISM annotations often favour neutral responses, while Chatbot Arena appears to
actively select against response emphasizing neutrality. These results emphasize the dataset-specific
nature of biases and demonstrate our framework’s sensitivity to such patterns. More biases, dis-
cussion and mitigation strategies can be found in Appendix F.2. Further, we provide an additional
application example of annotation scaling on helpful/harmless data in Appendix F.3.

4.6      A BLATION STUDIES

We conduct ablation studies to assess the contribution of each step in our pipeline across four scenar-
ios: synthetic orthogonal, synthetic aligned, synthetic unaligned, and AlpacaEval unaligned, using
GPT-3.5-Turbo for the first three and GPT-4 for the last. Numerical results, as well as a detailed
discussion of the ablations, the experimental setup, and the results, are provided in Appendix F.4.
Key findings are summarized below:

Simplified principle generation (Step 1). Generating only a single principle with a neutral prompt
slightly reduces performance, indicating the importance of diverse principles. The performance drop
is particularly pronounced on the synthetic aligned dataset, which aligns with our observation that
GPT-3.5-Turbo struggles to generate both positive and negative principles from a single prompt.
   4
       This experiment uses the Kaggle data (see Appendix A), differing from the data used in other experiments.


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


No deduplication (Steps 2, 3, and 5). Ablating deduplication produces mixed results: perfor-
mance decreases on the synthetic aligned and synthetic unaligned datasets but improves on the
synthetic orthogonal and AlpacaEval unaligned datasets. We hypothesize that repetition reinforces
principles, especially when the model strongly opposes certain principles, as seen in AlpacaEval.
Conversely, deduplication proves more effective when principles are less opposed to model biases,
as observed in the synthetic orthogonal scenario. We conclude that deduplication is likely gener-
ally beneficial but that repetition may help overcome strong model biases in specific cases. Further
details can be found in Appendix F.4.1.
No filtering and testing (Steps 4 and 5). Removing the filtering and testing steps has the most
drastic impact, with performance dropping across all datasets. In particular, the annotators fail
to outperform the random baseline in the unaligned experiments.

5   R ELATED WORK
Our work focuses on deriving interpretable principles from human feedback data and using AI an-
notators to evaluate those principles. We build on work related to learning from human feedback,
biases in feedback, interpretable preference models, and AI annotators.
Learning from human feedback. Fine-tuning LLMs with human feedback has significantly con-
tributed to the success of modern LLMs (Ouyang et al., 2022; Stiennon et al., 2020). Typically,
feedback is collected through pairwise comparisons of model outputs, training a reward model for
fine-tuning, e.g. using reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022;
Stiennon et al., 2020; Kaufmann et al., 2024) or direct preference optimization (DPO) (Rafailov
et al., 2023). Interpreting preference data is challenging since it generally lacks annotations of the
underlying reasons and the reward model is often a black-box neural network, making it hard to
interpret. Our work aims to generate interpretable principles explaining the feedback data.
Biases in human feedback. Identifying biases in human feedback data is crucial, as unintended
biases are common. For example, Hosking et al. (2024) note a preference for assertiveness over
truthfulness, while Wu & Aji (2023) highlight a bias towards grammatical correctness over factual
accuracy. We discuss further prior work on annotator bias in Appendix B.2, also considering AI
annotator bias. While these studies provide valuable insights, most methods for detecting biases
rely on specialized feedback data collection, making them challenging to apply to pre-existing data.
Our work generates interpretable principles from existing preference data, which can be inspected
to detect biases and provide insights into the underlying preferences.
LLM-based description of dataset differences. Zhong et al. (2022; 2023) use LLMs to describe
the difference between two text distributions in natural language, Dunlap et al. (2024b) a similar
methodology for image distributions. Our work uses a related approach but adapted to the specific
requirements and data structure of the pairwise preference domain.
Interpretable preference models. There has been a growing interest in creating interpretable pref-
erence models, aiding in understanding behaviour of AI systems. Go et al. (2024) create a compo-
sitional preference model based on 13 fixed features, similar to our constitutional principles. While
they do not generate the constitution from data, they do create a regression model to weigh them,
which would be a promising extension to our approach. Petridis et al. (2024) propose a feedback-
based constitution generation method relying on interactive tools, whereas our approach can be
directly applied to standard preference datasets.
AI annotators. Due to the cost and time required for human feedback collection, AI annotators, or
LLM-as-a-judge, have been proposed as a scalable alternative. Constitutional AI (Bai et al., 2022b)
uses LLMs with a set of principles for feedback. Human preference-based fine-tuning enables LLMs
to generalize from very general principles, such as “do what’s best for humanity” (Kundu et al.,
2023), or even give feedback well-aligned with human preferences without any constitution (Zheng
et al., 2023). Our experiments show similar trends, where default LLM annotators align well with
dataset annotations, even without a constitution. AI annotators can also exhibit biases, further dis-
cussed in Appendix B. AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2024c) offers a set of well-validated AI annotators.
Rule-based preference learning. Rule learning, aiming to develop descriptive or predictive rules,
has previously been applied to preference learning (de Sá et al., 2011). A common technique for rule
learning is to first generate a set of candidate rules and then measure each rule’s support in a dataset,


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


i.e. the fraction of data points that satisfy the rule (Fürnkranz et al., 2012; de Sá et al., 2011). Our
algorithm follows this approach but, in contrast to more traditional rule learning, generates rules as
natural language sentences. These rules, though more ambiguous and requiring AI annotators for
interpretation, are expressive, interpretable, and easy for non-experts to edit5 . Liu et al. (2023) follow
a similar generate-and-test approach to derive text quality criteria. They require absolute scores on
a fixed set of aspects, however, while our method leverages pairwise comparisons covering many
aspects simultaneously, as is commonly the case for publicly available preference datasets.
Concurrent work. Further, we would like to highlight concurrent works by Kostolansky (2024),
Kostolansky & Manyika (2024), Shankar et al. (2024b) and Dunlap et al. (2024a) exploring ideas
highly related to our work, perhaps highlighting the timeliness of this line of research. Whilst
related, our work differs in terms of the precise choice of approach taken as well as the comprehen-
siveness of our experiments. We provide a detailed comparison in Appendix B.3.

6       L IMITATIONS
When interpreting our results, there are several limitations to our approach important to consider.
Firstly, we do not show causality — our generated principles correlate LLM annotators with the
original annotations, but we cannot validate if these principles were used by the original annota-
tors. Multiple constitutions may explain the data equally well (as in the Rashomon effect (Breiman,
2001)). Nonetheless, an undesirable principle correlating with annotations is concerning, even if
the principle was not intentionally used. For example, in the “aligned” variant of the AlpacaEval
dataset, some generated constitutions include principles to prefer verbose or redundant responses
(see Appendix H.2.1). While this principle was likely not consciously followed by the original an-
notators, its high support in the dataset may warrant further investigation and possible data cleaning.
We further discuss this limitation in Appendix C. Secondly, constitutions represent a lossy com-
pression — a constitution of a few principles is a simplification of the decision-making process
underlying annotations. Some annotations may not be possible to reconstruct based on a simple
constitution. This trade-off highlights the tension between interpretability and accuracy: concise,
human-readable principles versus more complex representations. While ICAI could be adapted for
richer constitutions to balance this trade-off, a black-box reward model may be preferable when
maximizing accuracy is critical. Finally, preferences closely aligned to LLMs are challenging to
test. If an LLM annotator is already highly aligned with the dataset annotations, improving its per-
formance with a constitution is challenging. The constitutional reconstruction loss is most useful for
evaluating constitutions orthogonal to or against the popular opinions internalized by the LLM. On
already well-aligned models, the constitution may not improve performance, but it can still provide
insights into the underlying preferences. Future work should focus on addressing these limitations,
extending the capabilities of our approach, possibly using multi-modal models, and exploring new
applications.

7       C ONCLUSION
We have presented our work on the Inverse Constitutional AI (ICAI) problem: first defining the
ICAI problem compressing preference data into a short list of natural language principles (or consti-
tution). We then introduced an initial ICAI algorithm as a first approach to generate such constitu-
tions. We demonstrated the effectiveness of our approach in experiments across four different types
of datasets: (a) synthetic data to provide a proof-of-concept; (b) AlpacaEval data to show the ap-
plicability to compress human-annotated data and the possibility of transferring constitutions across
model families; (c) Chatbot Arena data to illustrate the generation of personal constitutions; and
(d) PRISM data to demonstrate the ability to provide possible explanations for previously observed
group preferences. We hope that our approach can improve both our understanding and the useful-
ness of widely-used feedback data. Potential use cases of our interpretable and editable constitutions
and corresponding meta data include: highlighting issues with datasets, creating interpretable alter-
natives to black-box reward models, scaling human-annotated evaluation to new models and use
cases, and improving model customization via personal or group constitutions. We look forward to
future research that explores these use cases in detail.
    5
        This can also be seen as a method for automatic prompt generation, as discussed in Appendix B.


                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS STATEMENT
We hope our work will have a positive societal impact by helping better understand preference
data, already widely used for fine-tuning and evaluation of popular LLMs. We emphasize that our
generated constitutions cannot claim to reconstruct an individual’s true reasoning process. Similar to
other interpretability methods, an ICAI constitution’s principles may correlate with an individual’s
annotations but no causal relationship between the constitution and the annotator’s reasoning can
be proven. Further, our constitutions represent a notable compression of annotation considerations,
which makes them highly interpretable but also means that they cannot reflect more multi-faceted
decision making processes.
Thus, constitutions should be interpreted cautiously when working with human annotators to avoid
potential negative implications. This is especially important when attempting to explain demo-
graphic preferences, as multiple possible explanations may correlate with the data and malicious
actors could cherry-pick specific ones to make discriminatory statements or reinforce prior beliefs.
Similarly, the use of our approach for personalized LLMs should also be considered carefully.
In general, we emphasize that our method can only provide information about specific preference
annotation datasets rather than annotators’ reasoning processes more broadly. To mitigate the po-
tential for misinterpretation of results, we include a corresponding warning in our algorithm imple-
mentation that is shown to the user whenever a constitution is generated with ICAI.
When using ICAI for certain downstream use-cases, such as annotation scaling for training and
evaluation or generating personal constitutions, there exists a risk of harmful bias amplification. If
harmful biases exist in the original preference dataset, the ICAI constitution may pick up on these
and propagate them downstream. This risk of amplifying biases is counterbalanced, however, by the
ability to edit and inspect the generated principles. This ability potentially helps avoid amplification
of unintended biases when using ICAI in downstream applications. This potential visibility of biases
in ICAI distinguishes our method from other widely-used methods using preference data, such as
black-box reward models or aggregate evaluation statistics, which make such biases more difficult
to detect. We recommend users of our method to always take a close look if generated constitutions
are aligned with their own values and contain any potentially harmful biases before proceeding with
downstream use-cases. Overall, we believe the potential for positive impacts outweighs possible
negative impacts.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We make the source code for our method and experiments publicly available at https://
github.com/rdnfn/icai. Further, we attempted to add as many details in the paper as pos-
sible, including all prompts in Appendix G as well as a description of our synthetic data generation
approach in Appendix I. For direct comparability, we also make numerical results available in Ap-
pendix F.9.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Benjamin Minixhofer, Max Bartolo, Tom Hosking, Hritik Bansal, the RECOG-AI team at
the Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence (especially José Hernández-Orallo and Lorenzo
Pacchiardi), Bill Marino and Jason Brown for their valuable feedback and discussions on early
versions of this work. Further, we thank all reviewers for taking the time to read our work and
to provide helpful feedback. We also thank Anthropic for providing free research access to their
models. Arduin Findeis was supported by a University of Cambridge School of Physical Sciences
Award and by the UKRI Centre for Doctoral Training in Application of Artificial Intelligence to the
study of Environmental Risks (reference EP/S022961/1). This publication was further supported by
LMUexcellent, funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) and the Free
State of Bavaria under the Excellence Strategy of the Federal Government and the Länder as well as
by the Hightech Agenda Bavaria.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson
  Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez,
  Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario
  Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan.
  Training a Helpful and Harmless Assistant with Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback,
  April 2022a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05862. arXiv:2204.05862 [cs].
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Ols-
  son, Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-
  Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse,
  Kamile Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mer-
  cado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna
  Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Con-
  erly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario
  Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional AI:
  Harmlessness from AI Feedback, December 2022b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.
  08073. arXiv:2212.08073 [cs].
Hritik Bansal, John Dang, and Aditya Grover. Peering Through Preferences: Unraveling Feedback
  Acquisition for Aligning Large Language Models, February 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2308.15812. arXiv:2308.15812 [cs] version: 3.
Leo Breiman. Statistical modeling: The two cultures (with comments and a rejoinder by the
  author). Statistical science, 16(3):199–231, 2001. URL https://projecteuclid.
  org/journals/statistical-science/volume-16/issue-3/
  Statistical-Modeling--The-Two-Cultures-with-comments-and-a/
  10.1214/ss/1009213726.short. Publisher: Institute of Mathematical Statistics.
Guiming Hardy Chen, Shunian Chen, Ziche Liu, Feng Jiang, and Benyou Wang. Humans or LLMs
  as the Judge? A Study on Judgement Biases, April 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2402.10669. arXiv:2402.10669 [cs].
Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Tianle Li,
 Dacheng Li, Hao Zhang, Banghua Zhu, Michael Jordan, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
 Chatbot Arena: An Open Platform for Evaluating LLMs by Human Preference, March 2024.
 URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.04132. arXiv:2403.04132 [cs].
Cláudio Rebelo de Sá, Carlos Soares, Alı́pio Mário Jorge, Paulo Azevedo, and Joaquim Costa.
  Mining Association Rules for Label Ranking. In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data
  Mining. Springer, 2011. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-20847-8 36.
Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos
  Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. AlpacaFarm: A Simulation Framework
  for Methods that Learn from Human Feedback, August 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2305.14387. arXiv:2305.14387 [cs].
Yann Dubois, Balázs Galambosi, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Length-Controlled Al-
  pacaEval: A Simple Way to Debias Automatic Evaluators, April 2024. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/2404.04475. arXiv:2404.04475 [cs, stat] version: 1.
Lisa Dunlap, Krishna Mandal, Trevor Darrell, Jacob Steinhardt, and Joseph E. Gonzalez.
  VibeCheck: Discover and Quantify Qualitative Differences in Large Language Models, October
  2024a.
Lisa Dunlap, Yuhui Zhang, Xiaohan Wang, Ruiqi Zhong, Trevor Darrell, Jacob Steinhardt, Joseph E.
  Gonzalez, and Serena Yeung-Levy. Describing Differences in Image Sets with Natural Language.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  24199–24208, 2024b.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Johannes Fürnkranz, Dragan Gamberger, and Nada Lavrač. Foundations of Rule Learning. Springer,
  2012. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-75197-7.

Dongyoung Go, Tomasz Korbak, Germán Kruszewski, Jos Rozen, and Marc Dymetman. Compo-
  sitional preference models for aligning LMs, March 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  2310.13011. arXiv:2310.13011 [cs].

Tom Hosking, Phil Blunsom, and Max Bartolo. Human Feedback is not Gold Standard, January
  2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.16349. arXiv:2309.16349 [cs].

Dongfu Jiang, Xiang Ren, and Bill Yuchen Lin. LLM-Blender: Ensembling Large Language Mod-
  els with Pairwise Ranking and Generative Fusion. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics, 2023. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.792.

Timo Kaufmann, Paul Weng, Viktor Bengs, and Eyke Hüllermeier. A Survey of Reinforce-
  ment Learning from Human Feedback, April 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2312.
  14925. arXiv:2312.14925 [cs].

Hannah Rose Kirk, Alexander Whitefield, Paul Röttger, Andrew Bean, Katerina Margatina, Juan
  Ciro, Rafael Mosquera, Max Bartolo, Adina Williams, He He, Bertie Vidgen, and Scott A. Hale.
  The PRISM Alignment Project: What Participatory, Representative and Individualised Human
  Feedback Reveals About the Subjective and Multicultural Alignment of Large Language Models,
  April 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.16019. arXiv:2404.16019 [cs].

Tim Kostolansky and Julian Manyika. Iterative Interactive Inverse Constitutional AI, 2024. URL
  https://tim0120.github.io/documents/i3cai.pdf.

Timothy H. Kostolansky. Inverse Constitutional AI. Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
  May 2024. URL https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/156804.

Sandipan Kundu, Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Amanda Askell, Andrew Callahan, Anna Chen,
  Anna Goldie, Avital Balwit, Azalia Mirhoseini, Brayden McLean, Catherine Olsson, Cassie
  Evraets, Eli Tran-Johnson, Esin Durmus, Ethan Perez, Jackson Kernion, Jamie Kerr, Ka-
  mal Ndousse, Karina Nguyen, Nelson Elhage, Newton Cheng, Nicholas Schiefer, Nova Das-
  Sarma, Oliver Rausch, Robin Larson, Shannon Yang, Shauna Kravec, Timothy Telleen-Lawton,
  Thomas I. Liao, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Sören Mindermann, Nicholas
  Joseph, Sam McCandlish, and Jared Kaplan. Specific versus General Principles for Constitutional
  AI, October 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13798. arXiv:2310.13798 [cs].

Junyi Li, Ninareh Mehrabi, Charith Peris, Palash Goyal, Kai-Wei Chang, Aram Galstyan, Richard
  Zemel, and Rahul Gupta. On the steerability of large language models toward data-driven per-
  sonas, April 2024a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2311.04978. arXiv:2311.04978 [cs].

Tianle Li, Anastasios Angelopoulos, and Wei-Lin Chiang. Does style matter? Disentan-
  gling style and substance in Chatbot Arena, 2024b. URL https://lmsys.org/blog/
  2024-08-28-style-control. LMSYS Org Blog (accessed 2024-11-14).

Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. AlpacaEval: An Automatic Evaluator of Instruction-
  following Models, May 2024c. URL https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_
  eval. original-date: 2023-05-25T09:35:28Z.

Chris Yuhao Liu, Liang Zeng, Jiacai Liu, Rui Yan, Jujie He, Chaojie Wang, Shuicheng Yan, Yang
  Liu, and Yahui Zhou. Skywork-Reward: Bag of Tricks for Reward Modeling in LLMs, 2024.
  arXiv: 2410.18451. preprint.

Yuxuan Liu, Tianchi Yang, Shaohan Huang, Zihan Zhang, Haizhen Huang, Furu Wei, Weiwei Deng,
  Feng Sun, and Qi Zhang. Calibrating LLM-Based Evaluator, September 2023. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2309.13308. arXiv:2309.13308 [cs].


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tong Mu, Alec Helyar, Johannes Heidecke, Joshua Achiam, Andrea Vallone, Ian D. Kivlichan,
  Molly Lin, Alex Beutel, John Schulman, and Lilian Weng. Rule Based Rewards for Language
  Model Safety. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=QVtwpT5Dmg.

Roberto Navigli, Simone Conia, and Björn Ross. Biases in Large Language Models: Origins,
  Inventory, and Discussion. J. Data and Information Quality, 15(2):10:1–10:21, 2023. doi: 10.
  1145/3597307.

Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, March
  2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155. arXiv:2203.02155 [cs].

Arjun Panickssery, Samuel R. Bowman, and Shi Feng. LLM Evaluators Recognize and Fa-
  vor Their Own Generations, April 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.13076.
  arXiv:2404.13076 [cs].

Junsoo Park, Seungyeon Jwa, Ren Meiying, Daeyoung Kim, and Sanghyuk Choi. OffsetBias: Lever-
  aging Debiased Data for Tuning Evaluators. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP (Findings EMNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-emnlp.57.

Savvas Petridis, Benjamin D Wedin, James Wexler, Mahima Pushkarna, Aaron Donsbach, Nitesh
  Goyal, Carrie J Cai, and Michael Terry. ConstitutionMaker: Interactively Critiquing Large Lan-
  guage Models by Converting Feedback into Principles. In Proceedings of the International Con-
  ference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI). Association for Computing Machinery, 2024. doi:
  10.1145/3640543.3645144.

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and
  Chelsea Finn. Direct Preference Optimization: Your Language Model is Secretly a Reward
  Model, December 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18290. arXiv:2305.18290
  [cs].

Juan A. Rodriguez, Nicholas Botzer, David Vazquez, Christopher Pal, Marco Pedersoli, and Is-
  sam H. Laradji. IntentGPT: Few-Shot Intent Discovery with Large Language Models. ICLR
  2024 Workshop on LLM Agents, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  2kvDzdC5rh.

Shreya Shankar, Haotian Li, Parth Asawa, Madelon Hulsebos, Yiming Lin, J. D. Zamfirescu-Pereira,
  Harrison Chase, Will Fu-Hinthorn, Aditya G. Parameswaran, and Eugene Wu. SPADE: Syn-
  thesizing Data Quality Assertions for Large Language Model Pipelines, March 2024a. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.03038. arXiv:2401.03038 [cs].

Shreya Shankar, J. D. Zamfirescu-Pereira, Björn Hartmann, Aditya G. Parameswaran, and Ian
  Arawjo. Who Validates the Validators? Aligning LLM-Assisted Evaluation of LLM Outputs
  with Human Preferences, April 2024b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.12272.
  arXiv:2404.12272 [cs].

Mrinank Sharma, Meg Tong, Tomasz Korbak, David Duvenaud, Amanda Askell, Samuel R. Bow-
 man, Newton Cheng, Esin Durmus, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Scott R. Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Tim-
 othy Maxwell, Sam McCandlish, Kamal Ndousse, Oliver Rausch, Nicholas Schiefer, Da Yan,
 Miranda Zhang, and Ethan Perez. Towards Understanding Sycophancy in Language Models,
 October 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13548. arXiv:2310.13548 [cs, stat].

Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Rad-
  ford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  1f89885d556929e98d3ef9b86448f951-Abstract.html.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rickard Stureborg, Dimitris Alikaniotis, and Yoshi Suhara. Large Language Models are Incon-
  sistent and Biased Evaluators, May 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.01724.
  arXiv:2405.01724 [cs].
Yan Tao, Olga Viberg, Ryan S Baker, and René F Kizilcec. Cultural bias and cultural alignment of
  large language models. PNAS Nexus, 3(9):pgae346, 2024. doi: 10.1093/pnasnexus/pgae346.
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Science,
 185(4157):1124–1131, 1974. doi: 10.1126/science.185.4157.1124.
Zekun Moore Wang, Shawn Wang, Kang Zhu, Jiaheng Liu, Ke Xu, Jie Fu, Wangchunshu Zhou,
  and Wenhao Huang. PopAlign: Diversifying Contrasting Patterns for a More Comprehensive
  Alignment, 2024. arXiv: 2410.13785. preprint.
Minghao Wu and Alham Fikri Aji. Style Over Substance: Evaluation Biases for Large
 Language Models, November 2023.   URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03025.
 arXiv:2307.03025 [cs].
Fangyuan Xu, Yixiao Song, Mohit Iyyer, and Eunsol Choi. A Critical Evaluation of Evaluations
  for Long-form Question Answering. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3225–3245, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.181. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2023.acl-long.181.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Sto-
  ica. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena, July 2023. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2306.05685. arXiv:2306.05685 [cs].
Ruiqi Zhong, Charlie Snell, Dan Klein, and Jacob Steinhardt. Describing Differences between Text
  Distributions with Natural Language. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 27099–27116. PMLR, June 2022.
Ruiqi Zhong, Peter Zhang, Steve Li, Jinwoo Ahn, Dan Klein, and Jacob Steinhardt. Goal Driven
  Discovery of Distributional Differences via Language Descriptions. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 36:40204–40237, December 2023.
Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, Nicholas Carlini, Milad Nasr, J. Zico Kolter, and Matt Fredrikson. Univer-
  sal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks on Aligned Language Models, December 2023. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15043. arXiv:2307.15043 [cs].


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A     DATASET DETAILS

We use four datasets in our experiments: synthetic data, AlpacaEval, Chatbot Arena, and PRISM.
The synthetic dataset is described in detail including the generation process in Appendix I, the other
datasets are publicly available and described in the following.
AlpacaEval is a dataset of 648 human-annotated preferences, each consisting of a pair of model
outputs, with one preferred over the other. It is licensed under CC-BY-NC-4.0 and can be accessed
at https://huggingface.co/datasets/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval. To reduce com-
putational costs and highlight the sample efficiency of our approach, we typically use a subset of
130 datapoints (65 train, 65 test). For larger-scale evaluation in Appendix F.7, we use the full dataset
of 648 datapoints (324 train, 324 test), which we refer to as AlpacaEval-Large.
Chatbot Arena Conversations is a dataset of 33,000 preferences from the Chatbot Arena, used by
the popular LMSYS leaderboard. Each datapoint consists of a prompt and preference over a pair of
model outputs, both human genearted. It is licensed under CC-BY-NC-4.0 and can be accessed at
https://huggingface.co/datasets/lmsys/chatbot_arena_conversations.
Chatbot Arena Kaggle is a dataset of 55,000 human-annotated preferences, each consisting of a
pair of model outputs, with one preferred over the other. The dataset is similar to Chatbot Arena Con-
versations, but contains more recent data. It is licensed under CC BY-NC 4.0 and can be accessed at
https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/lmsys-chatbot-arena/data.
PRISM is a dataset of 8,011 human-annotated preferences, each consisting of a pair of model out-
puts, with one preferred over the other. The dataset is licensed under CC-BY-4.0 and can be accessed
at https://huggingface.co/datasets/HannahRoseKirk/prism-alignment.
Anthropic HH-RLHF is a collection of human-annotated preference datasets by Bai et al. (2022a)
focused on annotations preferring helpful and harmless outputs, with approx. 44,000 and 42,000
conversations respectively. The helpfulness data, similar to other datasets, contains general model
use-cases, with the more helpful of two responses selected. The harmless dataset is based on
red-teaming prompts that explicitly aim to elicit harmful responses from models. The less harm-
ful response is selected. The data is available under MIT license at https://github.com/
anthropics/hh-rlhf.


B     E XTENDED RELATED AND CONCURRENT WORK

In addition to the related work discussed in the main body (Section 5), in a broader sense ICAI
can also be viewed as a method for automated prompt generation. Another relevant area concerns
biases exhibited by AI annotators, which are important due to ICAI’s reliance on such annotators
and its potential use as a tool for detecting these biases. We also give a more extensive discussion of
concurrent work, in addition to the brief overview in the main body (Appendix B.3).


B.1   R ELATION TO PROMPT GENERATION

LLM outputs can be guided by generating specific prompts. This relates closely to our work, where
we create principles to steer outputs.
Manual adversarial prompt generation, or ‘jailbreaking’, allows users to bypass safety constraints
imposed during fine-tuning. This process can also be automated (Zou et al., 2023), generating
adversarial prompts to attack a wide range of models. Li et al. (2024a) propose virtual tokens to steer
outputs towards specific viewpoints, using a dataset of question responses to define these personas,
unlike our approach based on pairwise comparisons and interpretable constitutions. Rodriguez et al.
(2024) explore the use of LLMs to discover and classify user intent, which may help adapt model
prompts.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2   R ELATION TO ANNOTATOR BIASES

Bansal et al. (2024) highlight that feedback methods influence biases, e.g., annotators focus more on
accuracy in pairwise comparisons compared to rating feedback. Additionally, Sharma et al. (2023)
observe a bias towards sycophantic outputs, where responses align with the user’s beliefs rather than
the truth.
Further, AI annotators can exhibit biases, partially overlapping with human biases (Chen et al.,
2024), and inconsistencies in their judgements (Stureborg et al., 2024). Examples include position
bias (preferring the first output) (Zheng et al., 2023), verbosity bias (preferring longer responses)
(Zheng et al., 2023), and self-enhancement or familiarity bias (preferring outputs similar to their
own) (Panickssery et al., 2024; Stureborg et al., 2024). Their proposed mitigation measures include
trying both orderings and tying if inconsistent, with further explorations in later work (Dubois et al.,
2024).

B.3   E XTENDED CONCURRENT WORK

Inverse Constitutional AI. Kostolansky (2024) introduced (and identically named) the problem of
Inverse Constitutional AI (ICAI), concurrently with our work. Their problem formulation includes
our first step, going from preferences to principles, but omits the reconstruction loss using a consti-
tutional annotator. Their corresponding method also differs from ours, first clustering principles and
then generating principles per cluster (instead of the other way around). Their results focus on recon-
structing known clusters of preferences — requiring special preference datasets with known clusters
and providing limited insight into the usefulness of each cluster’s generated principles. Thus, their
results cannot be directly compared to ours. Based on our ablation results, we remain sceptical that
more focus on clustering would be helpful to create representative principles.
Iterative Inverse Constitutional AI (I3 CAI). Kostolansky & Manyika (2024) also concurrently
introduced an alternative formulation named Iterative Inverse Constitutional AI (I3 CAI). This prob-
lem formulation focuses on optimising each principle’s ability to nudge an LLM towards correctly
reconstructing annotations. This objective resembles our per-principle voting step, although being
based on the conditional probability of correctly annotating a pair given a principle — rather than
observed sampled annotations. This approach may offer a less noisy estimate than sampling but is
not possible for all non-open API-based models. Perhaps due to this limitation their experiments use
the Llama-2-7b model, relatively weak compared to larger state-of-the-art models. As the name sug-
gests, their method iteratively refines principles, differing quite a bit from our approach and requiring
a “seed” constitution to initialize the process. As their implementation is at the time of writing not
publicly available (as far as we are aware), we were unable to directly evaluate their method relative
to ours — but testing this method in our experimental settings would be an interesting future study
to run.
SPADE. Shankar et al. (2024b) adapt System for Prompt Analysis and Delta-Based Evaluation
(SPADE) (Shankar et al., 2024a) to the pairwise annotation setting. SPADE is a method that was
originally designed for generating evaluation criteria based on differences (“deltas”) between dif-
ferent prompt versions during the development of LLM-based applications. The authors adapt this
method to the pairwise setting and report it as a baseline, but limited information regarding the
transfer of SPADE to the pairwise setting makes it challenging for us to make a meaningful compar-
ison. Based on the original SPADE paper, this method likely uses a two stage process: (1) initially
proposing criteria based on the preference data (prompt deltas originally) using an LLM, and then
(2) testing each criterion and selecting a subset based on its coverage of test cases as well as false
failure rate. We believe that adding a similar selection process of rules, whilst adding complexity,
would be an interesting extension of our method to explore in future work. Our initial principle
selection process is intentionally simpler to avoid introducing more complexity. Regarding larger
datasets and associated costs, we are uncertain whether and how they adapt their method to scale
and whether they add any form of clustering. We were unable to find a public implementation of
this pairwise SPADE version.
VibeCheck. Dunlap et al. (2024a) propose VibeCheck, a system that automatically detects qualita-
tive differences (“vibe axes”) between models based on various datasets, including pairwise prefer-
ences. The corresponding algorithm follows a similar overall approach as ours: initially proposing
vibes (similar to our principles) using LLMs and the validating the generated vibes using LLM-


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


as-a-Judge systems in a filtering step. Different to our work, vibes are phrased as qualitative axes
(e.g. from formal to friendly language) rather than principles explicitly instructing an LLM. Fur-
ther, VibeCheck’s algorithmic steps appear to primarily optimise towards vibes that are well-defined
(consistent across annotators) and enable effective separation between models, rather explicitly opti-
mising for the ability to accurately reconstruct preferences as well as possible. Whilst not explicitly
optimising for annotation reconstruction during the vibe generation and selection, the authors do cre-
ate a preference prediction model using a logistic regression on top of the vibe features — a model
with a use-case comparable to our constitutional annotators. The experimental results for VibeCheck
similarly focus on model separation and do not include LLM-as-a-Judge or reward model baselines
as our work does. Thus, there are no directly comparable results of the logistic regression model to
our approach. Overall, VibeCheck represents a promising approach that would be interesting to ap-
ply directly to our Inverse Constitutional AI problem of reconstructing preferences, possibly adjust-
ing the algorithm’s internal optimisation objective more directly towards preference reconstruction.
Notable algorithmic aspects from VibeCheck that would be potentially interesting to integrate in
future ICAI algorithm versions would be the iterative refinement of vibes, self-consistency checks,
and the multi-judge setup. It is worth noting that our ICAI method can also be used to quantify
differences in model behaviour: using the same setup as in our bias detection example (Section 4.5)
on data subsets where individual models win, we can measure models qualities based on our gen-
erated principles. We would welcome future work that adapts VibeCheck to provide a more direct
comparison to ICAI, and vice versa.
PopAlign. Wang et al. (2024) introduce PopAlign, a method that aims to improve model alignment
and robustness by synthesizing more diverse response pairs as well as the corresponding preference
data. Among the proposed diversification strategies, the elicitive contrast approach is particularly
related to our work, as it prompts the model to first derive principles for a given instruction (based on
overarching ‘helpful and harmless’ guidelines) and then use these principles to generate a response.
While this dynamic principle derivation resembles our approach, PopAlign focuses on generating
new feedback data, whereas ICAI aims to interpret existing datasets. As a result, PopAlign does
not incorporate responses and preferences into its principle generation process, nor does it aim to
produce globally applicable principles evaluated across other data points. While the goals of the
two methods differ, they are complementary: ICAI’s data-driven constitutions could inform the cre-
ation of more targeted contrastive prompts for PopAlign, while PopAlign’s strategies for generating
diverse responses could provide richer preference data for ICAI, enabling a more comprehensive
understanding of human preferences.
Rule Based Rewards (RBR). Mu et al. (2024) introduce a method to train auxiliary ‘rule-based re-
ward models’ by composing natural-language ‘propositions’ — binary statements about a response,
such as “contains an apology” — into a linear combination that serves as a reward signal. These
propositions are hand-crafted and used as features in the reward model6 , rather than as direct prefer-
ence indicators. While related, this approach does not aim to interpret or compress existing feedback
datasets. Mu et al. (2024) further emphasizes detailed, interpretable rules over broader principles
(e.g., “prefer the helpful response”) to improve interpretability and steerability An ICAI-like ap-
proach could complement rule-based methods by generating candidate propositions in a data-driven
manner, potentially reducing manual engineering effort and enabling efficient fine-tuning of mod-
els with modified constitutions. This highlights the potential for combining principled compression
with explicit, rule-based rewards to enhance both interpretability and adaptability in safety-critical
applications.


C        F URTHER LIMITATION DISCUSSION

Non-uniqueness and variability of constitutions. An important limitation of our method is that
a well-performing constitution is rarely unique: annotators with multiple potentially quite different
constitutions may achieve equivalent performance across a dataset. Breiman (2001) more generally
describes this non-uniqueness as the Rashomon effect, applying to many machine learning prob-
lems. In the context of an interpretability framework, such as ours, this effect needs to be carefully
considered whenever drawing conclusions. If an individual principle or constitution is able to help
reconstruct a certain subset of annotation well, there may be many other principles or constitutions
    6
        They can also be used as atoms in hand-crafted rules.


                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that reconstruct. Thus, we cannot claim any causal relationship: a well-performing principle does
not mean that the annotator (AI or human) used that principle to create the annotations.
Nevertheless, in the context of bias detection, knowing that a harmful principle works well to recon-
struct a specific dataset can still be very useful. Even if we cannot know if the annotator willingly
used such a principle, we know the data can be interpreted to encode this harmful principle. Down-
stream applications (e.g., reward models) may make the same interpretation of the original dataset,
and encode such a principle (possibly in a way that is hard to detect such as millions of model
parameters). Our method has the potential to highlight such potential harmful principles, enabling
preference data users to mitigate these biases, for example by data filtering or collecting additional
data.
On the other hand, the non-uniqueness of constitutions and principles means that our method is
very unlikely to find all potential harmful biases in the context of bias detection. It is therefore
critical to avoid interpreting the lack of harmful biases in our constitutions as an indication that no
harmful biases are present in a given dataset. Given the diversity of potential harmful biases in
commonly used datasets, our method should not be misunderstood to be able to find all harmful
biases. However, the more prominent a bias is, the more likely it is that a corresponding principle
is reliably generated and promoted to the constitution. Thus, ICAI serves as a valuable tool for
detecting many — but not all — biases in preference datasets.
In the context of annotation scaling, well-performing constitutions can provide an effective way to
scale small-scale human annotations to larger datasets. However, our constitution, like the param-
eters of alternative methods of annotation scaling (e.g. the PairRM baseline by Jiang et al. (2023)
or LLM-as-a-Judge (Zheng et al., 2023)), is not unique and there may be many different alternative
models that achieve equivalent performance. A benefit with our approach is that these differences
are more transparent and interpretable: It is more challenging to tell what the difference is between
two sets of reward model parameters than between two constitutions.


D    I NCLUDED MODELS

Throughout our experiments, we primarily use the following three models: OpenAI’s
gpt-3.5-turbo-0125 (referred to as GPT-3.5-Turbo), gpt-4o-2024-05-13 (referred to
as GPT-4o) and text-embedding-ada-002 embedding model for clustering steps in the algo-
rithm (across all experiments). Detailed model descriptions of these OpenAI models are available
at https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/. Certain experiments use additional
models, these are described in the relevant experiments discussions.


E    C OST ESTIMATES

In this section, we estimate the cost of reproducing the main experiments shown in this paper. All
experiments were run using models via API access from OpenAI and Anthropic. Note that all
estimates are subject to variability due to provider pricing as well as inherent variability of the
length (and thus cost) of model outputs.
Note that this cost estimate excludes the scale-up, ablation and PRISM experiments.
Synthetic experiments. The first set of experiments are the synthetic experiments, which are en-
tirely run using GPT-3.5-Turbo. Per run (30 samples, 1 constitution, annotation on same 30 samples)
these experiments cost approximately 0.05$. Overall, we estimate it would cost 2.7$ to re-run all
experiments shown (3 datasets × 6 seeds).
AlpacaEval experiments. The second set of experiments are the AlpacaEval experiments, split into
the main aligned/unaligned experiments as well as cross-model experiments. The main experiments
cost approx. 2.20$ per seed. Overall, we estimate it would cost 26.40$ to re-run all of the main
experiments (2 datasets × 6 seeds). Additionally, we estimate the cross-model (just annotation)
experiments would cost 5.00$.
Chatbot Arena experiments. The third set of experiments are the Chatbot Arena experiments,
split into the main aligned/unaligned experiments as well as cross-model experiments. The main


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


experiments cost approx 1.10$ per seed. Overall, we estimate it would cost 13.20$ to re-run all of
the main experiments (2 datasets × 6 seeds).
We estimate the remaining cost of experiments to be less than 5$. Overall, we thus estimate the total
cost of re-running our experiments to approx. 52.30$ in API costs. Note that the overall cost for
running experiments in the context of this project was about 3 times this amount (approx. 156.90$),
due to failed runs and additional experimentation that did not fit into the scope of the paper.


F       A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENT DETAILS

In this section, we provide additional details and results for experiments discussed in the main text.

F.1       D ETAILED C HATBOT A RENA EXPERIMENTS


Figure 6: Case-study: Personal constitutions for anonymous Chatbot Arena users. Personal
constitutions have the potential to help make LLM applications more helpful and customized to
individual users’ preferences — in an interpretable way. We generate constitutions based on a single
user’s annotations and check the constitutions’ ability to help reconstruct the annotations of the same
user and another user. For the two users, selected to have differing preferences, we observe that
generated personal constitutions appear to work best for the original user and not transfer perfectly
to another user. Note that this effect will vary for other users depending on how different users’
preferences are. Plots show mean and standard deviation (6 seeds) using GPT-4o.

Experimental setup. We select two users exhibiting different preferences7 from the Chatbot Arena
dataset (with 9 and 12 preference annotations respectively) and generate a separate constitution with
3 principles for each. Note that due to the small number of samples, there is no split between train-
ing and test data. While this lack of separation may result in overfitting, we consider it acceptable
in this case since our goal is not to develop a generalizable model, but rather to explain the pref-
erences within this specific dataset. To better detect the effect of user-specific principles, we adapt
our generation and annotation prompts (Appendix G) to generate constitutions more specific to the
individual users and follow the specific principles more closely rather than the model’s priors.
Results. The results can be found in Figure 6 and are discussed in the main text (Section 4.3).

F.2       U SE - CASE E XAMPLE : B IAS D ETECTION

LLMs are known to exhibit biases, often originating from the data used to train them. This includes
stylistic biases (Dubois et al., 2023; 2024), social or stereotypical biases (Navigli et al., 2023), and
cultural biases (Tao et al., 2024). They can arise from the initial training data (Navigli et al., 2023)
as well as the feedback data used during fine-tuning (Dubois et al., 2024; Tao et al., 2024). Our
framework, ICAI, provides a mechanism to detect such biases in the preference data and offers
actionable tools to analyse and mitigate them. This section presents examples of biases identified by
    7
        The Chatbot Arena dataset was filtered by the authors to avoid personally identifiable information (PII).


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Evaluation of possibly biased principles on three datasets. Results on AlpacaEval (648
preferences), Chatbot Arena (5,115), and PRISM (7,490). Metrics shown are relevance (fraction
of data points where the principle applies) and accuracy (fraction of relevant data points correctly
reconstructed). Gray values indicate relevance for less than 50 preferences on the dataset. Hand-
picked, grouped and sorted to illustrate presence of well-known and less discussed biases.
                      Principle                         AlpacaEv.     ChatbotAr.       PRISM
              Select the response that...                Acc   Rel Acc         Rel Acc        Rel
                 Verbosity and style
 is overly lengthy and lacks brevity                     52.2    80.4    57.1    97.1    57.7   96.9
 contains redundant information                          44.7     7.3    39.7    12.8    35.1    3.0
 provides a numbered list format                         73.4    12.2    62.3    45.5    71.6   17.7
 is more concise and structured                          47.4    98.6    42.9    95.5    42.7   94.6
 uses more formal language                               56.8     6.8    53.4    16.0    61.9    5.4
 feels more casual and friendly                          43.8    67.3    43.3    61.2    41.1   74.5
                    Assertiveness
 presents a definitive stance without nuance             58.6    10.8    57.1    11.4    49.1   31.2
 presents a biased viewpoint without nuance              36.8     2.9    50.8     4.6    45.4   17.2
 lacks nuance in political analysis                      36.4     1.7    49.3     2.7    44.0   11.1
 lacks neutrality in political matters                   55.6     1.4    49.6     2.7    38.9    9.8
 presents a one-sided argument                           32.0     3.9    53.4     5.2    46.1   19.5
 avoids acknowledging complexity of the issue            28.1     4.9    37.9    10.2    36.9   25.8
 promotes divisive political statements                  50.0     0.9    52.2     1.8    39.2    6.6
 assigns sole blame without context                      80.0     0.8    53.9     1.5    41.4    6.2
 does not consider personal preferences                 100.0     0.5    42.4     1.7    50.5    6.8
             Ambiguity and vagueness
 is overly general and vague                             30.4    15.7    26.8     9.6    26.1   23.1
 emphasizes neutrality over providing information        50.0     2.2    40.8    10.2    58.0   46.2
 presents ambiguous or non-committal language           100.0     0.2    30.4     1.3    46.8   13.0
 introduces ambiguity about the assistant’s nature      100.0     0.2    33.0     3.5    44.0   14.0


our approach in the AlpacaEval and Chatbot Arena datasets and further discusses possible mitigation
strategies and limitations.
Bias detection study. Our method can help detect biases by generating principles that expose the
bias and measuring their performance. We run a study to showcase this ability of ICAI using the
following procedure: (1) We generate a set of candidate biases (principles) using ICAI on a training
set of 1,000 preference pairs, 500 from PRISM and 500 from Chatbot Arena. Note that we use
the newer Chatbot Arena Kaggle dataset for this study (see Appendix A), differing from the main
experiments. To ensure a diverse set of principles, including potentially problematic ones that may
only apply to a small subset of the data, we generate and test 400 principles (number of clusters)
on this initial subset. (2) We manually select a subset of principles that we consider to be potential
“problematic” biases. We focus on biases that perform well in terms of accuracy on the initial
test set but also consider biases that are non-relevant for the vast majority of the training set —
and thus have less reliable accuracy measurement (as that is based on the number of relevant data
points). (3) We then re-run the principle testing step of our pipeline on a much larger test set of over
13k preference pairs, consisting of 7,490 preferences from PRISM, 5,115 from Chatbot Arena, and
the entire dataset of 648 cross-annotated AlpacaEval preferences. To run such a large study cost-
effectively, each component of our algorithm uses GPT-4o-mini (rather than GPT-4o). The results
are shown in Table 2.
Verbosity bias. One of the most well-known biases in preference data is verbosity bias, where
longer responses are preferred. While both humans and AI annotators exhibit this bias (Dubois et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2024), AI annotators seem to place excessive focus on this trait at the cost of other
important aspects, leading to problematic artefacts in evaluation and training of language models
(Dubois et al., 2024). We observe strong bias towards longer responses on both Chatbot Arena and


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


PRISM8 , with principles preferring responses that are “overly lengthy and [lack] brevity” achieving
notably above random accuracy (acc. of 57.1 and 57.7% respectively) on a significant portion of
the dataset (rel. of 97.1 and 96.9% respectively). Note that the bias is less pronounced on the
AlpacaEval dataset in our experiments (acc. of 52.0% and rel. of 80.4%), despite prior work noting
a preference for longer responses in that dataset (Dubois et al., 2024). Even though apparently less
pronounced than in other datasets, the AlpacaEval verbosity bias is also reflected in the constitutions
generated for the aligned AlpacaEval dataset (see Appendix H.2.1 for a sample), where principles
favouring verbose or redundant responses appear in 3 out of 6 seeds. The PRISM and Chatbot Arena
experiments in the main paper focus on specific subsets of the dataset, however, and the constitutions
generated for those subsets are not directly comparable to the data in Table 2. For instance, contrary
to the general trend visible in Table 2, the constitutions generated for Group A of the PRISM dataset
seem to favour conciseness over redundancy, while Group B’s constitutions are more in line with
the general trend (see Appendix H.4). This outcome further validates our framework’s capability to
detect biases that are dataset-specific.
List bias. A similarly well-known bias is the preference for structured responses, Markdown syntax,
and lists in particular (Li et al., 2024b). We see this style bias reflected in Table 2, with the rule
favouring “the response that provides a numbered list format” achieving high accuracy across all
datasets, especially AlpacaEval (73%) and PRISM (72%), although this principle is far less broadly
applicable than the ones centred on verbosity (rel. of 12.2 and 17.7% respectively).
Assertiveness bias. Finally, we observe a preference for assertiveness (as discussed by Hosking
et al. (2024)), with principles favouring “the response that presents a definite stance without nu-
ance” and similar (see Table 2) performing well on AlpacaEval and Chatbot Arena. This bias is
notably common in political contexts (compare Table 2), giving cause for concern. It is quite pos-
sible, however, that preferences supporting this bias were given to counteract the language model’s
tendency to over-qualify or hedge its statements (related to the next paragraph), so it is important to
consider the context in which this bias is observed.
Ambiguity or vagueness. In addition to these well-known verbosity and style biases, we also ob-
serve less extensively discussed biases, commonly centring around ambiguity and vagueness: the
principle “Select the response that emphasizes neutrality over providing information” performs well
on PRISM but has lower than random accuracy on Chatbot Arena data, indicating this rule is not
followed, on average, by Chatbot Arena annotations. Neutrality in the response appears to be ap-
pears to be actively selected against, on average, in the Chatbot Arena subset. The Chatbot Arena
annotations further do not appear to, on average, reject responses that “promote divisive political
statements”, unlike PRISM annotations. Further, we observe that Chatbot Arena annotations ac-
tively select against responses that “acknowledge limitation in available information”.
Mitigation. The results above indicate that ICAI is able to both find well-described and less widely
discussed biases in pairwise preference data. Once biases are identified, ICAI offers actionable
strategies for mitigation. Possible avenues include (1) synthesizing new preferences with a modi-
fied constitution that avoids the bias, and (2) curating the training dataset by filtering or balancing
preferences to reduce bias.
The second approach leverages ICAI’s ability to measure the support of each principle within the
dataset, identifying which preferences align with the bias. By removing or rebalancing these pref-
erences, biases can potentially be mitigated. This approach also allows for a more detailed analysis
of the data, making it possible to develop tailored strategies, such as refining the preference col-
lection process. Going beyond removal, our framework can also be used to identify and promote
preference pairs that counteract the bias, i.e., agree with an opposing principle. For example, despite
the verbosity bias in AlpacaEval, one generated constitution includes a principle favouring concise
responses, indicating that the dataset contains a substantial portion of counteracting preferences.
ICAI thus serves as a versatile tool for dataset filtering, balancing, and curation, which have proven
effective in other contexts (Liu et al., 2024; Park et al., 2024). We are excited for future work to
explore these mitigation strategies in more detail.
Limitations. Our methods’ ability to detect biases depends on two factors: the diversity of candidate
principles and reliability of the filtering mechanism. While stylistic biases, such as verbosity and list
   8
     This is despite PRISM attempting to alleviate verbosity bias by instructing the LLM to produce shorter
responses (Kirk et al., 2024).


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


preferences, are straightforward to detect, social and cultural biases can be more challenging, since
they are often expressed in subtle ways. These biases, including those related to gender or minority
representation, are critical to address. However, in the datasets analysed, our constitutions do not
show direct evidence of such biases, likely due to the limited dataset size and the constitutions’
focus on broadly applicable principles. Unlike stylistic biases, social and cultural biases often affect
smaller subsets of data and may coincide with alternative explanations for preferences.
Detecting these subtler biases requires expanding the dataset, increasing the number of candidate
principles generated per preference, and increasing the scope of the analysis beyond the top princi-
ples to those that, while not universally applicable, exhibit strong predictive power for specific data
subsets. A thorough investigation of social and cultural biases using ICAI represents a promising
direction for future research.

F.3    U SE - CASE E XAMPLE : A NNOTATION S CALING ON H ELPFUL /H ARMLESS DATA

Collecting human annotations for specific purposes can be expensive and time-consuming. We
demonstrate the use of ICAI to scale up preference annotations 10× based on a small set of 100
initial ground-truth annotations to 1000 new response pairs. In particular, we consider the use of
ICAI to scale up harmlessness and helpfulness annotations, using the Anthropic HH-RLHF dataset
by Bai et al. (2022a). More information about the dataset is available in Appendix A.
Experimental setup. We randomly sample two training sets of 100 data points each from sep-
arate helpful and harmless datasets in Anthropic HH-RLHF.9 The helpful and harmless datasets
contain human annotations that prefer more helpful and harmless responses, respectively. We sim-
ilarly sample two separate test sets of 1,000 data points from each dataset. We then apply ICAI
on each training set to create two separate constitutions, one harmless and one helpful, and test
the ability of an LLM to use these constitutions to reconstruct each dataset. We use GPT-4o-mini
(gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18) for all parts of the ICAI algorithm, and the constitutional and de-
fault annotations. We slightly adjust the principle proposal and voting prompts in the ICAI algorithm
to accommodate the long multi-turn nature of the Anthropic HH preference dataset.10
Results. The results are shown and discussed in Figure 7. Results shown are mean and standard
deviation over 3 seeds of the entire pipeline.

F.4    A BLATION DETAILS

We provide detailed numerical results for and discussions of the ablation experiments introduced in
Section 4.6. Each experiment is averaged over six seeds, with annotator agreement and confidence
intervals shown in Table 3. Below are the specifics of each ablation:

Simplified principle generation (Step 1). In this ablation, we generate principles using a single
neutral prompt instead of multiple prompts. As shown in Table 3, this leads to a reduction in an-
notator agreement across all datasets, with the largest drop in the synthetic unaligned dataset. This
confirms our hypothesis that GPT-3.5-Turbo struggles with generating both positive and negative
principles from a single prompt.
Principle generation with multiple preferences (Step 1) We test the effect of prompting with
multiple preferences simultaneously to generate the principles in Step 1. By default, only a single
preference is used in the prompt. In these experiments, we give the model 5 preferences simulta-
neously, and then ask the model to generate 10 corresponding principles. We randomly group all
preferences into groups of size 5, that are then used to prompt the model in Step 1. We observe
mixed results: for some scenarios (Synth aligned and AlpacaEval unaligned) the model improves
performance whereas for the others this configuration decreases performance. To maximize prin-
ciple diversity, it may be useful to combine both single and multi-preference principle generation.

   9
      All data is sampled from the train.jsonl.gz files in the helpful-base/harmless-base subdirectories of
the data repository.
   10
      In particular, we add additional separators between the responses (“---”) and explicitly prompt the model
to focus on the last conversation turn.


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Use-case example: scaling annotations 10× with ICAI on helpful/harmless preference
data. We observe that our constitutional annotators are able to outperform the default baseline
annotator on each dataset. Qualitatively, each dataset’s responses are clearly distinguishable from
each other. For example, all harmless constitutions contain principles to avoid promoting illegal
actions whilst the helpful ones often focus on helpful tone and user engagement. Quantitatively, we
annotators with harmless constitutions do not appear to transfer well to helpful data and vice versa.
Our experiments closely replicate findings by Bai et al. (2022a), indicating that these two datasets
encode anti-correlated objectives: a fully harmless response should refuse to be helpful for harmful
actions.

Table 3: Results for ablation of different pipeline components. The table shows the mean agreement
and standard deviation over 6 seeds. Each configuration is tested over four different datasets from
Section 4, based on the synthetic (Synth) and AlpacaEval (AE) datasets. The best result per row is
highlighted in bold.
                                    Single Princ.      Multi-Pref.   No De-Dup.     No Test/Filter
 Name                 Original
                                        (S1)             (S1)        (S2 & S3+)      (S4 & S5)
 Synth Orth
                      86.7 ± 8.4    82.2 ± 4.6         83.3 ± 11.2   80.0 ± 17.0    51.7 ± 13.6
 (GPT-3.5-Turbo)
 Synth Aligned
                      92.2 ± 6.9    89.4 ± 11.6        98.3 ± 4.1    93.9 ± 8.8     69.4 ± 30.9
 (GPT-3.5-Turbo)
 Synth Unaligned
                      84.4 ± 9.8    62.8 ± 31.0        69.4 ± 19.8   83.9 ± 8.3     31.1 ± 18.3
 (GPT-3.5-Turbo)
 AE Unaligned
                      66.4 ± 7.7    65.9 ± 2.8         72.1 ± 2.0    70.0 ± 2.9     40.8 ± 11.3
 (GPT-4o)


No deduplication (Steps 2, 3, and 5). We ablate deduplication by testing all generated principles
without removing duplicates. The results, shown in Table 3, are mixed: performance decreases
on the synthetic aligned and synthetic unaligned datasets but improves on the synthetic orthogonal
and AlpacaEval unaligned datasets. This suggests that repetition may help reinforce principles in
datasets where the model holds strong prior biases against certain principles, especially in the un-
aligned AlpacaEval case, while diverse principles are more beneficial in orthogonal datasets. These
results are discussed in more detail in Appendix F.4.1.
No filtering and testing (Steps 4 and 5). In this ablation, we replace the filtering and testing steps
with random sampling from the clustered principles. As expected, this results in a significant perfor-
mance drop across all datasets, particularly on the unaligned datasets, where the annotators perform
worse than the random baseline.

F.4.1   D EDUPLICATION ABLATION
Deduplication is a key step in our pipeline to reduce redundancy and optimise the use of limited
preference capacity. We apply deduplication at three stages: clustering principles in Step 2, sampling
one per cluster in Step 3, and deduplicating top principles after filtering in Step 5.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ablating deduplication, by testing all generated principles without filtering duplicates, yields mixed
results. Performance decreases on the synthetic aligned and synthetic unaligned datasets but im-
proves on the synthetic orthogonal and AlpacaEval unaligned datasets. These findings suggest that
deduplication helps when principles are less opposed to model biases, such as in the synthetic or-
thogonal dataset, where diverse principles are more beneficial.
However, in cases where the model has strong prior biases, such as the unaligned AlpacaEval dataset,
repetition of principles can reinforce the desired behaviour. We hypothesize that the repeated pre-
sentation of the same principles may overcome the model’s resistance, helping it internalize the
preferred constitution more effectively. This is particularly effective in the unaligned scenarios,
where only a few principles opposed to the model’s biases may already elicit an ‘opposite persona’
that acts opposite to the model’s initial biases even on comparisons not explicitly covered by the
principles. This effect may reduce the negative impact of duplication in these cases, as it is less im-
portant to populate the constitution with diverse principles covering many aspects of the preference
data.
In contrast, the synthetic orthogonal dataset benefits from deduplication since the true underlying
principles are not in conflict with the model’s bias and are less correlated from the model’s perspec-
tive (compare Figure 8). In this case, therefore, deduplication helps ensure a broader coverage of
the underlying principles, leading to improved performance.
Despite the mixed results, we generally recommend deduplication for most use cases, as the benefits
in terms of computational cost savings and improved interpretability typically outweigh the perfor-
mance trade-offs. Nonetheless, scenarios like AlpacaEval suggest that selective repetition, based on
principle importance or the model’s initial aversion to them, could be an interesting direction for
future research.



F.5   H YPERPARAMETER SENSITIVITY

Our method introduces an important hyperparameter n that determines the number of principles in
the constitution. The parameter n may be seen as determining regularisation in our algorithm: a
small n may be considered highly regularised, limiting the amount of overfitting to the data pos-
sible. A large n enables including more fine-grained principles that only apply to smaller subset
of examples. Note that, depending on the use case, overfitting to the training data is not necessar-
ily a problem (e.g., for data interpretability). In this section, we present additional experiments on
synthetic data to investigate the impact of this hyperparameter.


Figure 8: Results when varying number n of principles in constitution on orthogonal synthetic
data. Whilst there is clear improvement noticeable from 1 to 3, and 3 to 5, we observe that
there appear to be diminishing returns for values higher than 5. Note that the number of underlying
principles is three, thus it may not be surprising that n = 1 does not work well. For n = 3, the
algorithm needs to create three different principles that match the underlying three rules – which
may be error prone. From n = 5 onwards it appears to robustly find corresponding principles for
the underlying three rules. Thus, we use n = 5 in our experiments. Note that for further datasets
additional experimentation may be important — the optimal value also depends on the annotator
model’s capacity to deal with multiple principles simultaneously. Experiments use GPT-3.5-Turbo,
reported values and error bars are mean and standard deviation over six random seeds.


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.6   C ONSTITUTION TRANSFERABILITY

We investigate the transferability of constitutions across different model families. Shown in Figure 9,
the results indicate that the constitution generated by GPT-4o transfers well to models from the
Claude family, Claude-3-Opus and Claude-3-Haiku.


Figure 9: Transferability of constitutions: results of transferring a GPT-4o generated consti-
tution to other model family (Claude). We use the highest-performing unaligned constitution on
the training set, from experiments shown in the unaligned plot in Figure 4. We test two additional
models from the Claude model family, Claude-3-Opus and Claude-3-Haiku. Both are able to use
GPT-4o’s generated constitution to reconstruct the test set annotations effectively, albeit to a lower
standard than GPT-4o. Plots show mean and standard deviation using 4 seeds per annotator, all with
the same constitution.


F.7   R ESULTS ON LARGE DATASETS

Figure 10 and Table 10 show the results of using the entire 648 samples in the cross-annotated
AlpacaEval dataset in our experiments (AlpacaEval-Large, see Appendix A), instead of the 130
samples used in the original experiments. We use 324 samples for training and 324 for testing.


Figure 10: Scaling up experiments on the AlpacaEval unaligned dataset. We scale our original
experiment up 5× to the entire 648 samples in the cross-annotated AlpacaEval dataset, instead of
the 130 samples used in the original experiments. As before we split the dataset in half to obtain a
test and training set, using 324 samples for training (generating the constitution) and 324 for testing.
We also provide the original results for comparison.


F.8   E XTENDED BASELINE D ISCUSSION

We compare our method against several baselines, described in detail below. All results discussions
are based on Tables 4, 5 and 10.

Default These baseline annotators vary depending on the model used to run them (GPT-3.5-
        Turbo or GPT-4o) and are directly based on two annotator configurations leading in their


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         model class in the AlpacaEval (AE) evaluator leaderboard,11 chatgpt fn (used with
         GPT-3.5-Turbo) and alpaca eval gpt4 turbo fn (used with GPT-4o). We only
         make small tweaks to the prompts to fit our data format (described in Appendix Ap-
         pendix G.4) and update the original GPT-4-Turbo model with the newer GPT-4o model
         for the latter configuration (as no GPT-4o-specific configuration was available). We made
         a careful trade-off between reported cost (less than 6$/1000k annotations) and perfor-
         mance (best with their model, at their price points) for our baselines. In particular,
         alpaca eval gpt4 turbo fn is reported to perform (68.1%) close to the top con-
         figuration (alpaca eval gpt4 fn, 71.0%) discussed above. It is not tailored to the
         datasets used in our experiments. Consequently, its performance is expected to be strong
         on datasets aligned with the model’s training data and weaker on unaligned datasets. To
         account for this, we include a flipped version of this baseline, where predicted preference
         labels are inverted.
         Results. As expected, we see that the baselines perform strongly on datasets aligned with
         the base model’s learned preferences, but poorly on other datasets. This is an inherent
         limitation of such an annotator, as it has no ability to adapt to new data.
Default (flipped) This variant of the Default baseline uses the same AlpacaEval prompts but flips
         the predicted preference labels. Note that such a manual adjustment works only in limited
         scenarios such as our unaligned datasets; the default annotator cannot generally adapt to
         dataset-specific characteristics.
         Results. Similar to the Default annotator, this baseline performs well on a restricted se-
         lection of datasets — just the inverse of the Default annotator (the unaligned datasets as
         opposed to the aligned ones).
PopAlign This baseline is adapted from the PopAlign method developed by Wang et al. (2024). We
         modify this method, originally created for data generation, to the pairwise preference anno-
         tation setting. Similar to our method, PopAlign generates principles to annotate response
         pairs. However, instead of generating a fixed constitution representing an entire dataset (as
         in our method), PopAlign dynamically generates principles for each response pair and then
         annotates the pair according to the same principles. The detailed prompt and how we adapt
         the method is included in Appendix G.5. Many of the principles PopAlign generates as part
         of this process are qualitatively similar to those found in ICAI constitutions, for example:
         “A good response should be accurate, relevant, and provide clear and practical informa-
         tion”. We make this PopAlign-based annotator available as an AlpacaEval annotator config
         as part of our public package.12
         Results. While this baseline, similar to ICAI, generates principles, these principles are
         generated on-the-fly and without access to training data with known annotator preferences.
         Hence, the principles generated by this baseline are always in-line with its own learned
         preferences and cannot adapt to a new dataset, resulting in performance comparable to the
         Default annotator (good on aligned, bad on unaligned datasets).
PairRM This baseline uses the Pairwise Reward Model (PairRM)13 by Jiang et al. (2023), a black-
         box pairwise preference model with 400 million parameters. It accepts a pair of output
         candidates and an instruction as input, jointly encoding them to produce scores that reflect
         relative quality. Unlike the other baselines and our method, PairRM provides determinis-
         tic scores rather than relying on language model sampling. Therefore, we report results
         for a single seed without standard deviation or extrema. Similar to the Default annotator,
         PairRM is not customized to the datasets in our experiments, potentially leading to weaker
         performance on unaligned datasets. To evaluate sample efficiency and fairness, we also
         include a tuned version of PairRM that is fine-tuned on the training data.
         Results. Since this version of the reward model is not fine-tuned, it has no ability to adapt to
         a dataset (similar to the Default and Default (flipped) annotators). Its relative performance
         mirrors the Default annotator, therefore, performing well (on-par with the Default annota-
         tor) on aligned datasets and poorly on others. The reward model’s performance exceeds
  11
     See https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval/tree/main/src/alpaca_eval/
evaluators_configs
  12
     Link hidden for anonymous submission
  13
     Available at https://huggingface.co/llm-blender/PairRM, our experiments use revision
5b880cc73776ac75a835b3e0bd5169bcb5be013b.


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         the Default annotator’s on the synthetic-orthogonal dataset, which is likely due to a chance
         preference on the data chosen to be orthogonal to the Default annotator’s preferences.

PairRM (tuned) This baseline uses the PairRM model fine-tuned on the training data prior to test-
      ing. Fine-tuning is performed for up to five additional epochs and a batch size of 1, with
      validation accuracy used to select the best model. The training data matches the data used
      to generate the constitution in our method, with a fraction of the training data (10 for Al-
      pacaEval, 32 for AlpacaEval Large) reserved for validation. For synthetic data experiments,
      the model is tested on the same data used for fine-tuning, as separate test or validation sets
      are unavailable for this small dataset. This leads to overfitting and affects generalizabil-
      ity, which is less critical for our method, where interpretability is the primary focus and
      quantitative results are secondary. For fairness, the same (non-split) procedure is applied to
      PairRM. However, the reported performance on synthetic datasets likely overestimates the
      model’s capability on unseen data.

         Results. PairRM is the only baseline that can, like ICAI, use training data to adapt to a new
         dataset. This is reflected in its reconstruction ability, generally exceeding the one of the
         non-fine-tuned version, especially on unaligned and orthogonal datasets. We observe that
         this ability to adapt is limited, however, as reflected in the model’s sub-par performance on
         the AlpacaEval unaligned setting. This is likely due to the model’s sensitivity to hyperpa-
         rameters as well as the limited training data, which is completely opposed to the model’s
         (much larger) pretraining data.



F.9   N UMERICAL R ESULTS

We provide full numerical results in table format for our experiments. Tables 4 and 5 show the
numerical results for the core experiments on the synthetic and AlpacaEval datasets, respectively,
featuring an extended set of baselines. Further, Tables 6 and 7 show the numerical results for the
personalized experiments on the Chatbot Arena and PRISM datasets, Table 8 shows the results
for the cross-model experiments, and Table 9 shows the results for the hyperparameter sensitivity
experiments. Finally, Table 10 shows the results for the scaling experiments on AlpacaEval data.
Experiments that were already discussed using a table previously are not repeated here.



       Table 4: Results for experiments on synthetic data. Averaged over 6 random seeds.
 Dataset      Model              Annotator             Mean      Std         Min       Max
 Orthogonal     GPT-3.5 Turbo     Constitutional       86.67%      8.43     73.33%       96.67%
                                  Default              37.78%      2.72     33.33%       40.00%
                                  Default (flipped)    62.22%      1.72     60.00%       63.33%
                                  PopAlign             38.89%      1.72     36.67%       40.00%
                –                 PairRM               73.33%         –          –            –
                                  PairRM (tuned)      100.00%         –          –            –
 Aligned        GPT-3.5 Turbo     Constitutional       92.22%      6.89     83.33%      100.00%
                                  Default             100.00%      0.00    100.00%      100.00%
                                  Default (flipped)     0.00%      0.00      0.00%        0.00%
                                  PopAlign            100.00%      0.00    100.00%      100.00%
                –                 PairRM              100.00%         –          –            –
                                  PairRM (tuned)      100.00%         –          –            –
 Unaligned      GPT-3.5 Turbo     Constitutional       84.44%      9.81     73.33%      100.00%
                                  Default               0.00%      0.00      0.00%        0.00%
                                  Default (flipped)   100.00%      0.00    100.00%      100.00%
                                  PopAlign              0.00%      0.00      0.00%        0.00%
                –                 PairRM                0.00%         –          –            –
                                  PairRM (tuned)      100.00%         –          –            –


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Results for experiments on AlpacaEval data (65 samples). Averaged over 6 random seeds.
 Dataset      Model              Annotator           Mean     Std       Min        Max
 Aligned      GPT-3.5-Turbo     Constitutional      67.44%     3.43     63.08%     72.31%
                                Default             64.87%     1.16     63.08%     66.15%
                                Default (flipped)   33.08%     1.29     32.31%     35.38%
                                PopAlign            67.18%     0.79     66.15%     67.69%
              GPT-4o            Constitutional      68.46%     3.19     63.08%     72.31%
                                Default             72.56%     1.16     70.77%     73.85%
                                Default (flipped)   27.95%     1.80     26.15%     30.77%
                                PopAlign            69.05%     1.33     68.25%     71.43%
              –                 PairRM              64.62%        –          –          –
                                PairRM (tuned)      69.23%        –          –          –
 Unaligned    GPT-3.5-Turbo     Constitutional      39.49%     3.32     35.38%     44.62%
                                Default             35.90%     1.26     33.85%     36.92%
                                Default (flipped)   66.67%     1.26     64.62%     67.69%
                                PopAlign            33.85%     2.57     30.77%     36.92%
              GPT-4o            Constitutional      66.41%     7.69     53.85%     72.31%
                                Default             26.92%     1.61     24.62%     29.23%
                                Default (flipped)   72.31%     1.69     70.77%     73.85%
                                PopAlign            30.24%     2.10     26.98%     32.26%
              –                 PairRM              35.38%        –          –          –
                                PairRM (tuned)      38.46%        –          –          –


Table 6: Results for cross-user experiments on Chatbot Arena data. Averaged over 6 random seeds.
 Dataset                 Model     Annotator              Mean       Std       Min        Max
 Annotations User A    GPT-4o     User A constitution   93.06%         3.40    91.67%     100.00%
                                  Default               83.33%         0.00    83.33%      83.33%
                                  User B constitution   83.33%         5.27    75.00%      91.67%
 Annotations User B    GPT-4o     User A constitution   79.63%        10.92    66.67%      88.89%
                                  Default               88.89%         0.00    88.89%      88.89%
                                  User B constitution   94.44%         6.09    88.89%     100.00%


  Table 7: Results for cross-group experiments on PRISM data. Averaged over 6 random seeds.
 Dataset                  Model     Annotator              Mean      Std       Min      Max
 Annotations Group A     GPT-4o    Group A constitution      77.22%     3.28     73.33%     83.33%
                                   Default                   58.33%     1.83     56.67%     60.00%
                                   Group B constitution      50.00%     2.98     46.67%     53.33%
 Annotations Group B     GPT-4o    Group A constitution      37.92%     2.04     35.00%     41.25%
                                   Default                   57.08%     1.02     56.25%     58.75%
                                   Group B constitution      61.46%     4.50     55.00%     67.50%


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Results for cross-model experiments on AlpacaEval data. Averaged over 4 random seeds.
 Dataset      Model              Annotator         Mean     Std       Min       Max
 Unaligned     GPT-4o             Default               26.15%   1.26   24.62%    27.69%
                                  Constitutional        70.00%   0.89   69.23%    70.77%
               Claude-3-Opus      Default               24.23%   0.77   23.08%    24.62%
                                  Constitutional        58.85%   0.77   58.46%    60.00%
               Claude-3-Haiku     Default               36.92%   0.00   36.92%    36.92%
                                  Constitutional        59.65%   0.00   59.65%    59.65%



Table 9: Results for the sensitivity study on parameter n (rules per constitution) on synthetic data.
Averaged over 6 random seeds.
 Dataset      Model               Annotator                 Mean       Std        Min         Max
 Unaligned     GPT-3.5 Turbo     Constitutional (n=1)       52.22%       4.55   43.33%    56.67%
                                 Constitutional (n=3)       75.00%      14.10   63.33%   100.00%
                                 Constitutional (n=5)       86.67%       8.43   73.33%    96.67%
                                 Constitutional (n=10)      90.00%      10.11   70.00%    96.67%



Table 10: Results for scaling experiments on unaligned AlpacaEval data (from 65 to 324 samples in
test set). Averaged over 6 random seeds.
  Dataset                  Model            Annotator         Mean       Std       Min      Max
 Original (65 samples)    GPT-3.5-Turbo      Default             35.90%    1.26   33.85%     36.92%
                                             Constitutional      39.49%    3.32   35.38%     44.62%
                          GPT-4o             Default             26.92%    1.61   24.62%     29.23%
                                             Constitutional      66.41%    7.69   53.85%     72.31%
                          –                  PairRM              37.35%       –         –          –
                                             PairRM (tune)       46.60%       –         –          –
 Large (324 samples)      GPT-3.5-Turbo      Default             45.83%    0.91   45.06%     46.91%
                                             Constitutional      54.20%    1.56   52.01%     55.73%
                          GPT-4o             Default             33.80%    0.58   33.02%     34.57%
                                             Constitutional      61.47%    1.29   59.88%     62.96%
                          –                  PairRM              37.35%       –         –          –
                                             PairRM (tune)       50.00%       –         –          –


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G     P ROMPTS

Prompts are generally separated into two messages, a system message and a user message. We use
the following format for all prompts (based on AlpacaEval’s formatting): <|im_start|> and
<|im_end|> denote the start and end of a message, followed by the message type (system or user)
and the content.

G.1   P RINCIPLE GENERATION

Unless otherwise specified, principles are generated with the following two generation prompts. We
process each data point with both prompts to encourage the generation of a diverse set of principles
that may both select for positive output traits (e.g. more helpful) and negative output traits (e.g. off-
topic). Initial experiments indicated that it can be difficult to generate such a diverse set of possible
principles with a single prompt, thus we use multiple (two) prompts by default. An exception is
the Chatbot Arena dataset, where we use a single prompt that places increased emphasis on highly
specific principles, to better capture individual differences between users.

         Listing 1: Principle generation prompt, variant 1 (biased towards negative traits).
<|im_start|>system
Your job is to analyse data and come up with explanations. You’re an
    expert at this.
<|im_end|>
<|im_start|>user
Selected sample:
{preferred_sample}

Other sample:
{rejected_sample}

Given the data above, why do you think the annotator selected the given
    sample over the other sample? Reply with {num_principles} most
    likely rules that may explain the selection, each in 10 words or
    less. Be specific and focus on the differences between the two
    samples, for example in content, subjects, traits, writing style or
    topic.

Note: the intend of the selection was to find bad samples (to prevent a
    user seeing them). Always suggest as rule that starts with ’Select
    the response that...<bad thing>’. Suggest rules that help find bad
    samples.

Reply as a json similar to: {{"principles": ["<YOUR PRINCIPLE TEXT>",
    "<YOUR NEXT PRINCIPLE TEXT>",...]}}.
DO NOT respond with any text apart from the json format above!
DO NOT add markdown formatting around JSON.
ONLY REPLY IN JSON FORMAT
<|im_end|>


                          Listing 2: Principle generation prompt, variant 2.
<|im_start|>system
Your job is to analyse data and come up with explanations. You’re an
    expert at this.
<|im_end|>
<|im_start|>user
Selected sample:
{preferred_sample}

Other sample:
{rejected_sample}



                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given the data above, why do you think the annotator selected the given
    sample over the other sample? Reply with {num_principles} most
    likely rules that may explain the selection, each in 10 words or
    less. Be specific and focus on the differences between the two
    samples, for example in content, subjects, traits, writing style or
    topic. Always suggest as rule that starts with ’Select the response
    that...’.

Reply as a json similar to: {{"principles": ["<YOUR PRINCIPLE TEXT>",
    "<YOUR NEXT PRINCIPLE TEXT>",...]}}.
DO NOT respond with any text apart from the json format above!
DO NOT add markdown formatting around JSON.
ONLY REPLY IN JSON FORMAT
<|im_end|>


           Listing 3: Principle generation prompt, cross-user variant for Chatbot Arena.
<|im_start|>system
Your job is to analyse data and come up with explanations. You’re an
    expert at this.
<|im_end|>
<|im_start|>user
Selected sample:
{preferred_sample}

Other sample:
{rejected_sample}

Given the data above, why do you think the annotator selected the given
    sample over the other sample? Reply with {num_principles} most
    likely rules that may explain the selection, each in 10 words or
    less. Be specific and focus on the differences between the two
    samples. Always suggest as rule that starts with ’Select the
    response that...’. Important: suggest rules that are specific to the
    shown samples, not general or generic rules! Do NOT suggest generic
    rules like "select the more useful sample" or "Select the response
    that directly answers the user’s query". Instead, suggest specific
    rules like "select x over y if z", based on the specific samples and
    their topic z. For example, if the samples are about translation,
    create rule in the context of translation.
Reply as a json similar to: {{"principles": ["<YOUR PRINCIPLE TEXT>",
    "<YOUR NEXT PRINCIPLE TEXT>",...]}}.
DO NOT respond with any text apart from the json format above!
DO NOT add markdown formatting around JSON.
ONLY REPLY IN JSON FORMAT
<|im_end|>


G.2   P RINCIPLE TESTING

The following prompt is used for testing how the principles affect LLM annotator on the training
data set (Algorithm Step 4). Multiple principles are evaluated in parallel, given via the summaries
variable.
                                  Listing 4: Rule testing prompt.
<|im_start|>system
Your job is to check which sample is should be selected according to the
    given rules. You’re an expert at this.
<|im_end|>
<|im_start|>user
Sample A:
{sample_a}

Sample B:


                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


{sample_b}

Given the samples data above, check for each rule below which sample
    should be selected:
{summaries}

Answer in json format, e.g. {{0: "A", 1: "B", 2: "None",...}}.
Put "A" if A is selected according to that rule, and "B" if B is
    selected. Put "None" if a rule is not applicable to the two samples.
No ties are allowed, only one of "A", "B" or "None".
Vote for all rules, even if you are unsure.
DO NOT respond with any text apart from the json format above!
DO NOT add markdown formatting around JSON.
ONLY REPLY IN JSON FORMAT
<|im_end|>


G.3   C ONSTITUTION EVALUATION

We use the following prompt to ask the LLM annotator to generate preferences based on a con-
stitution. We use two prompts loosely based on ‘chatgpt fn’ prompt from AlpacaEval, which was
designed to evaluate the preferences of a language model without a constitution to follow. The first
prompt, used in our synthetic and AlpacaEval experiments, is more generally applicable, relying
on the LLM’s learned knowledge about human preferences to fill in the gaps in the constitution.
The second prompt is intended to focus on individual differences between constitutions, which may
be small, and therefore further discourages the LLM annotator from relying on its own knowledge
about human preferences.
         Listing 5: Prompt for annotating according to constitution (AlpacaEval variant).
<|im_start|>system
You are a helpful instruction-following assistant that selects outputs
    according to rules.
<|im_end|>
<|im_start|>user
Select the output (a) or (b) according to the following rules (if they
    apply):
{constitution}

You MUST follow the rules above if they apply.
Select the output randomly if they do not apply.

Your answer should ONLY contain: Output (a) or Output (b).

# Task:
Now the task, do not explain your answer, just say Output (a) or Output
    (b).

## Output (a):
{output_1}

## Output (b):
{output_2}

## Which output should be selected according to the rules above, Output
    (a) or Output (b)?
<|im_end|>


Listing 6: Prompt for annotating according to constitution (Variant focusing on individual differ-
ences).
<|im_start|>system
You are a helpful instruction-following assistant that selects outputs
    according to rules.


                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


<|im_end|>
<|im_start|>user
Select the output (a) or (b) according to the following rules (if they
    apply):
{constitution}

You MUST follow the rules above if they apply.
Select the output randomly if they do not apply.

Your answer should ONLY contain: Output (a) or Output (b).

# Task:
Now the task, do not explain your answer, just say Output (a) or Output
    (b).

## Output (a):
{output_1}

## Output (b):
{output_2}

## Note:
If the rules do not apply, you MUST select randomly. DO NOT follow you
    own opinion.

## Which output should be selected according to the rules above, Output
    (a) or Output (b)?
<|im_end|>


G.4   N ON - CONSTITUTIONAL BASELINE

We also evaluate the preferences the language model expresses when not given a constitution to
follow, i.e., the biases inherent in the trained model when asked to select the “best” output. We
adapted two of the default prompts from AlpacaEval for this purpose by removing references
to an “instruction”, as this is not present in all pairwise comparison datasets. We selected the
alpacaeval gpt4 turbo fn and chatgpt fn prompts as they were reported to have the
highest human agreement rate for the gpt-4-turbo and gpt-3.5-turbo models, respectively, while also
being below an (estimated) price of 6$/1k examples. 14

   Listing 7: Prompt for GPT-4, based on alpaca eval gpt4 turbo fn from AlpacaEval.
<|im_start|>system
You are a highly efficient assistant, who evaluates and rank large
    language models (LLMs) based on the quality of their responses to
    given prompts. This process will create a leaderboard reflecting the
    most accurate and human-preferred answers.
<|im_end|>
<|im_start|>user
I require a leaderboard for various large language models. I’ll provide
    you with prompts given to these models and their corresponding
    responses. Your task is to assess these responses, ranking the
    models in order of preference from a human perspective. Once ranked,
    please output the results in a structured JSON format for the
    make_partial_leaderboard function.

## Model Outputs

Here are the unordered outputs from the models. Each output is
    associated with a specific model, identified by a unique model
    identifier.
  14
     https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval/tree/v0.6.2/src/alpaca_eval/
evaluators_configs


                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


{
     {
           "model": "m",
           "output": """{output_1}"""
     },
     {
           "model": "M",
           "output": """{output_2}"""
     }
}

## Task

Evaluate and rank the models based on the quality and relevance of their
    outputs. The ranking should be such that the model with the highest
    quality output is ranked first.
<|im_end|>

          Listing 8: Prompt for GPT-3.5-Turbo, based on chatgpt fn from AlpacaEval.
<|im_start|>system
You are a helpful instruction-following assistant that prints the best
    model by selecting the best outputs for a given instruction.
<|im_end|>
<|im_start|>user
Select the output (a) or (b) that best matches the given instruction.
    Choose your preferred output, which can be subjective. Your answer
    should ONLY contain: Output (a) or Output (b). Here’s an example:

# Example:

## Output (a):

Instruction:
Give a description of the following job: "ophthalmologist"

Assistant:
An ophthalmologist is a medical doctor who specializes in the diagnosis
    and treatment of eye diseases and conditions.

## Output (b):

Instruction:
Give a description of the following job: "ophthalmologist"

Assistant:
An ophthalmologist is a medical doctor who pokes and prods at your eyes
    while asking you to read letters from a chart.

## Which is best, Output (a) or Output (b)?
Output (a)

Here the answer is Output (a) because it provides a comprehensive and
    accurate description of the job of an ophthalmologist. In contrast,
    output (b) is more of a joke.

# Task:
Now is the real task, do not explain your answer, just say Output (a) or
    Output (b).

## Output (a):
{output_1}

## Output (b):


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


{output_2}

## Which is best, Output (a) or Output (b)?
<|im_end|>


G.5   P OPA LIGN BASELINE

The PopAlign baseline is based on the data generation approach by Wang et al. (2024) (described
in more detail in Appendix F.8). To adapt the method for preference annotation, we combine both
the bad and good generation prompt (taken from the elicitive contrast generation step in Table 7
by Wang et al. (2024)) into a single prompt. For a given response pair, this combined prompt asks
to generate corresponding good and bad principles, and then asks to select the good response. We
make this baseline available as a AlpacaEval annotator configuration as part of our package.
Listing 9: Original PopAlign prompt for generating good response, based on generated principles.
Please first consider the principles of crafting a good response, and
    then generate the response. Format your output as follows:

Thought: <Insights on creating a good response>
Response: <The good response>


Listing 10: Original PopAlign prompt for generating bad response, based on generated principles.
Please first consider the principles of crafting a bad response, and
    then generate the response. Format your output as follows:

Thought: <Insights on creating a bad response>
Response: <The bad response>


                Listing 11: Our merged PopAlign preference annotation prompt.
<|im_start|>system
You are a helpful instruction-following assistant that selects responses.
<|im_end|>
<|im_start|>user
## Response A:
{output_1}

## Response B:
{output_2}

## Task
Please first consider the principles of crafting a good and a bad
    response, and then select the good response above. Format your
    output as follows:

Thought good: <Insights on creating a good response>
Thought bad: <Insights on creating a bad response>
Selected Response: <A or B>

## Your answer
<|im_end|>


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H     C ONSTITUTIONS
The following lists examples of full constitutions generated for each dataset and model combina-
tion in our experiments. To provide an unbiased view of the generated constitutions, we show the
constitution with the highest, median, and lowest performance reconstruction accuracy on the exper-
iment’s test set. Since even numbers of seeds are used, we chose the worse-performing constitution
as a tie-breaker for the median.

H.1     S YNTHETIC DATASETS

Note that in our synthetic data experiments we test on the same data as we use to generate the
constitutions, as these experiments serve as a proof-of-concept.

H.1.1    A LIGNED

                  Listing 12: Best constitution on the ‘aligned’ synthetic dataset.
1. Select the response that maintains a positive and helpful tone.
2. Select the response that shows a higher level of willingness.
3. Select the response that directly answers the question.
4. Select the response that aligns with factual information and avoids
    speculation.
5. Select the response that provides accurate and concise information.


                Listing 13: Median constitution on the ‘aligned’ synthetic dataset.
1. Select the response that maintains a positive and helpful tone.
2. Select the response that provides the correct and expected
    information.
3. Select the response that provides the correct and factual information.
4. Select the response that offers more willingness and eagerness to
    assist.
5. Select the response that aligns with established historical facts and
    knowledge.


                 Listing 14: Worst constitution on the ‘aligned’ synthetic dataset.
1. Select the response that maintains a positive and helpful tone.
2. Select the response that is concise and to the point.
3. Select the response that shows a more positive and proactive attitude.
4. Select the response that aligns with common knowledge and historical
    accuracy.
5. Select the response that provides the correct and factual information.


H.1.2    O RTHOGONAL

                Listing 15: Best constitution on the ‘orthogonal’ synthetic dataset.
1. Select the response that emphasizes specific flavor (Lemon Ice Cream).
2. Select the response that features a cat instead of a dog.
3. Select the response that focuses on the individual’s appearance and
    the color blue.
4. Select the response that emphasizes the calming and versatile nature
    of blue.
5. Select the response that emphasizes the specific flavor mentioned.


              Listing 16: Median constitution on the ‘orthogonal’ synthetic dataset.
1. Select the response that features a cat as the pet.
2. Select the response that emphasizes the versatility of the color.
3. Select the response that involves a humorous pet-owner interaction.


                                                 37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4. Select the response that emphasizes the calming and comforting
    qualities of blue.
5. Select the response that offers a citrus flavor option.


               Listing 17: Worst constitution on the ‘orthogonal’ synthetic dataset.
1. Select the response that focuses on stability and confidence in
    clothing choice.
2. Select the response that features a cat as the pet.
3. Select the response that suggests a tangy treat for refreshment.
4. Select the response that emphasizes lightness, refreshment, and
    flavor.
5. Select the response that mentions a specific flavor (lemon,
    raspberry).


H.1.3    U NALIGNED

                Listing 18: Best constitution on the ‘unaligned’ synthetic dataset.
1. Select the response that lacks enthusiasm.
2. Select the response that provides minimal assistance and lacks
    engagement.
3. Select the response that includes a negative or dismissive tone.
4. Select the response that provides inaccurate information.
5. Select the response that provides incorrect details about the US
    capital.


               Listing 19: Median constitution on the ‘unaligned’ synthetic dataset.
1. Select the response that shows minimal engagement or empathy towards
    user.
2. Select the response that lacks a positive and proactive tone.
3. Select the response that sets lower expectations for help provision.
4. Select the response that is more casual and less formal.
5. Select the response that shows reluctance to provide assistance.


                Listing 20: Worst constitution on the ‘unaligned’ synthetic dataset.
1. Select the response that lacks enthusiasm and willingness to assist.
2. Select the response that lacks a proactive and helpful tone.
3. Select the response that lacks specific details about the destination.
4. Select the response that provides a vague and less helpful answer.
5. Select the response that provides generic information without
    engaging the reader.


H.2     A LPACA E VAL DATASETS

H.2.1    A LIGNED

                Listing 21: Best constitution on the ‘aligned’ AlpacaEval dataset.
1. Select the response that includes redundant information.
2. Select the response that provides detailed information and context.
3. Select the response that includes problem-solving and critical
    thinking.
4. Select the response that uses consistent category naming.
5. Select the response that provides more practical examples.


               Listing 22: Median constitution on the ‘aligned’ AlpacaEval dataset.
1. Select the response that includes redundant information.
2. Select the response that is overly verbose and repetitive.


                                                38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3. Select the response that provides more practical examples.
4. Select the response that uses more engaging and descriptive language.
5. Select the response that uses more vivid and engaging imagery.

                Listing 23: Worst constitution on the ‘aligned’ AlpacaEval dataset.
1. Select the response that maintains a neutral and informative tone.
2. Select the response that avoids spelling or grammatical errors.
3. Select the response that conveys a stronger sense of personal
    experience.
4. Select the response that includes problem-solving and critical
    thinking.
5. Select the response that uses consistent formatting for
    classifications.


H.2.2    U NALIGNED

               Listing 24: Best constitution on the ‘unaligned’ AlpacaEval dataset.
1. Select the response that uses simpler, less engaging language.
2. Select the response that contains incorrect or nonsensical logic.
3. Select the response that lacks detailed achievements.
4. Select the response that lists key takeaways clearly and concisely
5. Select the response that maintains consistency in classification.

              Listing 25: Median constitution on the ‘unaligned’ AlpacaEval dataset.
1. Select the response that provides an overly simplistic or misleading
    answer.
2. Select the response that lacks depth in analysis.
3. Select the response that contains incorrect or nonsensical logic.
4. Select the response that lists all entities in the text.
5. Select the response that ends abruptly without a conclusion.

              Listing 26: Worst constitution on the ‘unaligned’ AlpacaEval dataset.
1. Select the response that changes the meaning slightly.
2. Select the response that uses more technical language.
3. Select the response that maintains the original order of entities.
4. Select the response that lacks specific examples or details.
5. Select the response that uses fewer abstract concepts.


H.3     C HATBOT A RENA

Note that for personalized constitutions we measure performance based on the ability to reconstruct
the same user’s preferences. Due to the small number of samples, there is no split between test and
training data.

H.3.1    U SER A

                       Listing 27: Best constitution on User A annotations.
1. Select the response that avoids anachronistic errors.
2. Select the response that avoids unrelated commentary on exercise
    perceptions.
3. Select the response that provides context about the word ’plagiarism’.

                      Listing 28: Median constitution on User A annotations.
1. Select the response that provides a detailed and clear explanation.
2. Select the response that explains the joke’s wordplay clearly.
3. Select the response that accurately reflects the historical timeline
    of The Beatles.


                                                39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Listing 29: Worst constitution on User A annotations.
1. Select the response that provides a clear and accurate explanation.
2. Select the response that directly explains the pun in the joke.
3. Select the response that references specific scenes or characters.


H.3.2    U SER B

                       Listing 30: Best constitution on User B annotations.
1. Select the response that avoids abrupt or incomplete endings.
2. Select the response that concludes the story more definitively.
3. Select the response that provides a more detailed and structured
    argument.


                      Listing 31: Median constitution on User B annotations.
1. Select the response that avoids abrupt or incomplete endings.
2. Select the response that maintains a consistent dark and ominous tone.
3. Select the response that evokes stronger emotional engagement.


                       Listing 32: Worst constitution on User B annotations.
1. Select the response that avoids abrupt or incomplete endings.
2. Select the response that conveys a stronger emotional impact.
3. Select the response that concludes the story more definitively.


H.4     PRISM

Note that for personalized constitutions, we measure performance based on the ability to reconstruct
the same group’s preferences. Due to the small number of samples, there is no split between test and
training data.

H.4.1    G ROUP A

                      Listing 33: Best constitution on Group A annotations.
1. Select the response that avoids redundancy and repetition.
2. Select the response that is concise and to the point.
3. Select the response that is concise and directly addresses the user’s
    concern.
4. Select the response that avoids unrelated information.
5. Select the response that provides a direct, concise answer.


                     Listing 34: Median constitution on Group A annotations.
1. Select the response that is concise and to the point.
2. Select the response that avoids unrelated information.
3. Select the response that avoids redundancy and repetition.
4. Select the response that is concise and directly addresses the user’s
    statement.
5. Select the response that provides a concise answer without offering
    additional details.


                      Listing 35: Worst constitution on Group A annotations.
1. Select the response that avoids irrelevant information.
2. Select the response that is concise and to the point.
3. Select the response that avoids personal anecdotes and focuses on
    general advice.
4. Select the response that avoids redundancy and repetition.
5. Select the response that provides a direct, concise answer.



                                                40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H.4.2   G ROUP B

                     Listing 36: Best constitution on Group B annotations.
1. Select the response that provides more detailed descriptions.
2. Select the response that avoids pretending to have human emotions.
3. Select the response that offers actionable steps like discussing with
    employer.
4. Select the response that asks for user preference on topics.
5. Select the response that mentions advanced technology and knowledge.


                    Listing 37: Median constitution on Group B annotations.
1. Select the response that provides a clear and factual explanation.
2. Select the response that provides more detailed steps.
3. Select the response that emphasizes proactive communication.
4. Select the response that emphasizes freshness and deliciousness.
5. Select the response that mentions the need for cross-checking
    information.


                    Listing 38: Worst constitution on Group B annotations.
1. Select the response that provides more actionable steps.
2. Select the response that mentions mindfulness and emotional awareness.
3. Select the response that provides a broader cultural context.
4. Select the response that mentions advanced technology and knowledge.
5. Select the response that emphasizes individual decision-making.


                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I     S YNTHETIC DATA GENERATION
In this Appendix, we describe our approach to generate the data used for the experiments in Sec-
tion 4.1. We use an LLM (gpt-3.5-turbo-0125) to generate the data, given the various prompts below.
We include the full data generation pipeline as part of our code, including additional prompt appen-
dices that are added for more diversity. For each of the principles here, we generate 10 samples with
the corresponding prompts. The unaligned data is simply the aligned dataset with the preference
labels flipped.

I.1     O RTHOGONAL DATA

I.1.1    E XAMPLE

                                Listing 39: Orthogonal data example
Text A:
  Instruction: Please write a funny short story about a human and their
      pet.
  Output: Tom was amazed by how his cat, Mr. Whiskers, could always find
      the best hiding spots in their house. One day, Tom decided to play
      a game of hide and seek with Mr. Whiskers, but as soon as he
      closed his eyes to count, he heard a loud crash followed by a meow
      of victory. When he opened his eyes, he saw Mr. Whiskers proudly
      perched on top of the refrigerator, knocking down a stack of
      plates in the process. Tom couldn’t help but laugh at his
      mischievous feline friend. After all, life with Mr. Whiskers was
      never boring.

Text B:
  Instruction: Please write a funny short story about a human and their
      pet.
  Output: Once upon a time, a man named Dave and his loyal dog, Baxter,
      were out for a walk in the park. Suddenly, Baxter spotted a
      squirrel and took off running, dragging Dave behind him on his
      leash. Dave couldn’t help but laugh as he struggled to keep up
      with his energetic pup, who was determined to catch the elusive
      critter. After a few minutes of pure chaos, Baxter finally gave up
      the chase and plopped himself down in a puddle, wagging his tail
      happily. Dave shook his head and said, "You may be a handful, but
      you’re definitely worth it, buddy."

Preferred: Text A


I.1.2    P ROMPTS FOR PRINCIPLE “ PREFER CATS OVER DOGS ”

                    Listing 40: Generation prompt 1 for synthetic orthogonal data
Please write a funny short story about a human and their pet. Their pet
    is a {differing_part}. Max 5 sentences.

Where the differing_part variable is set to one of ["cat", "dog"]. In the dataset, we replace
this original instruction with the following instruction.
                       Listing 41: Instruction 1 for synthetic orthogonal data
Please write a funny short story about a human and their pet.


I.1.3    P ROMPTS FOR PRINCIPLE “ PREFER GREEN OVER BLUE COLOR ”

                    Listing 42: Generation prompt 2 for synthetic orthogonal data
Give a short reasoning why I should pick a {differing_part} t-shirt.
    Mention the color. Max 1 sentences.


                                                 42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Where the differing_part variable is set to one of ["blue", "green"]. In the dataset, we
replace this original instruction with the following instruction.

                        Listing 43: Instruction 2 for synthetic orthogonal data
Should I pick this blue t-shirt or the green one?



I.1.4    P ROMPTS FOR PRINCIPLE “ SELECT LEMON OVER RASPBERRY ICE - CREAM ”

                   Listing 44: Generation prompt 3 for synthetic orthogonal data
Tell me why I should pick the {differing_part} ice cream. Max 1 short
    sentence. Include the name of the flavor.


Where the differing_part variable is set to one of ["lemon", "raspberry"]. In the dataset,
we replace this original instruction with the following instruction.

                        Listing 45: Instruction 3 for synthetic orthogonal data
Which ice cream flavor should I pick?



I.2     A LIGNED DATA

I.3     E XAMPLE

                                  Listing 46: Aligned data example
Text A:
  Instruction: Can you help me?
  Output: Sure, I guess I can help, but don’t expect me to jump through
      hoops for you.

Text B:
  Instruction: Can you help me?
  Output: Of course! How can I assist you?

Preferred: Text B



I.3.1    P ROMPTS FOR PRINCIPLE “ SELECT TRUTHFUL OVER FACTUALLY INCORRECT
         ANSWERS ”


                    Listing 47: Generation prompt 1a for synthetic aligned data
What is the capital of the US? Max 1 sentence.


                    Listing 48: Generation prompt 1b for synthetic aligned data
Give me a made-up reason why Paris is the capital of the US. Max 1
    sentence.


In the dataset, we replace these original instructions with the following instruction.

                         Listing 49: Instruction 1 for synthetic aligned data
What is the capital of the US?



                                                  43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I.3.2   P ROMPTS FOR PRINCIPLE “ SELECT HELPFUL OVER USELESS ANSWERS ”

                    Listing 50: Generation prompt 2a for synthetic aligned data
Give me one interesting destination to travel to in the UK. Max 1
    sentence.


                    Listing 51: Generation prompt 2b for synthetic aligned data
Why is it good to travel? Do not mention any specific destination names.
    Max 1 sentence.

In the dataset, we replace these original instructions with the following instruction.

                         Listing 52: Instruction 2 for synthetic aligned data
What would be an interesting destination to travel to in the UK?


I.3.3   P ROMPTS FOR PRINCIPLE “ SELECT POLITE OVER IMPOLITE ANSWERS ”

                    Listing 53: Generation prompt 3a for synthetic aligned data
Can you help me?


                    Listing 54: Generation prompt 3b for synthetic aligned data
How would somebody reply rudely and lazily to a request for help,
    offering to help but not enthusiastically? Max 1 sentence.

In the dataset, we replace this original instructions with the following instruction (identical to gen-
eration prompt 3a in Listing 53).
                         Listing 55: Instruction 3 for synthetic aligned data
Can you help me?


                                                  44
