Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


SIMPL: S CALABLE AND HASSLE - FREE OPTIMISATION
OF NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS FROM BEHAVIOUR

 Tom M George                                       Pierre Glaser
 Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, UCL                     Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, UCL
 tom.george.20@ucl.ac.uk

 Kimberly Stachenfeld                               Caswell Barry
 Google DeepMind & Columbia University              Dept. of Cell and Developmental Biology, UCL

 Claudia Clopath
 Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, UCL & Imperial College London
 c.clopath@imperial.ac.uk



                                            A BSTRACT
         Neural activity in the brain is known to encode low-dimensional, time-evolving,
         behaviour-related variables. A long-standing goal of neural data analysis has been
         to identify these variables and their mapping to neural activity. A productive and
         canonical approach has been to simply visualise neural “tuning curves” as a func-
         tion of behaviour. In reality, significant discrepancies between behaviour and the
         true latent variables—such as an agent thinking of position Y whilst located at
         position X—distort and blur the tuning curves, decreasing their interpretability.
         To address this, latent variable models propose to learn the latent variable from
         data; these are typically expensive, hard to tune, or scale poorly, complicating
         their adoption. Here we propose SIMPL (Scalable Iterative Maximization of
         Population-coded Latents), an EM-style algorithm which iteratively optimises la-
         tent variables and tuning curves. SIMPL is fast, scalable and exploits behaviour
         as an initial condition to further improve convergence and identifiability. It can
         accurately recover latent variables in spatial and non-spatial tasks. When applied
         to a large hippocampal dataset SIMPL converges on smaller, more numerous, and
         more uniformly sized place fields than those based on behaviour, suggesting the
         brain may encode space with greater resolution than previously thought.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large neural populations in the brain are known to encode low-dimensional, time-evolving latent
variables which are, oftentimes, closely related to behaviour (Afshar et al., 2011; Harvey et al., 2012;
Mante et al., 2013; Carnevale et al., 2015). Coupled with the advent of modern neural recording
techniques (Jun et al., 2017; Wilt et al., 2009) focus has shifted from single-cell studies to the joint
analysis of hundreds of neurons across long time windows, where the goal is to extract latents using
a variety of statistical (Yu et al., 2008a; Cunningham & Yu, 2014; Kobak et al., 2016; Zhao & Park,
2017; Williams et al., 2020; Bjerke et al., 2023) and computational (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008;
Pandarinath et al., 2018; Mackevicius et al., 2019) methods.
This paradigm shift is particularly pertinent in mammalian spatial memory and motor systems where
celebrated discoveries have identified cells whose neural activity depends on behavioural variables
such as position (O’Keefe & Dostrovsky, 1971; Hafting et al., 2005), heading direction (Taube
et al., 1990), speed (McNaughton et al., 1983), distance to environmental boundaries/objects (Lever
et al., 2009; Høydal et al., 2019) and limb movement direction(Georgopoulos et al., 1986) through
complex and non-linear tuning curves. Characterising neural activity in terms of behaviour remains
a cornerstone practice in these fields however the implicit assumption supporting it — that the latent
variable encoded by neural activity is and only is the behavioural variable — is increasingly being
called into question (Sanders et al., 2015; Whittington et al., 2020; George et al., 2024b).


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The brain is not a passive observer of the world. The same neurons which encode an animal’s current
position/behavioural state are also used to plan a future routes (Spiers & Maguire, 2006), predict up-
coming states (Muller & Kubie, 1989; Mehta et al., 1997; Stachenfeld et al., 2017) or recall/“replay”
past positions (Squire et al., 2010; Carr et al., 2011), necesarily causing the encoded latent variables
to deviate from behaviour. Nor is the brain a perfect observer; uncertainty due to limited, noisy or
ambiguous sensory data can lead to similar discrepancies. Measurement inaccuracies can contribute
further. These hypotheses are supported by analyses which show that it is rarely, if ever, possible to
perfectly decode “behaviour” from neural data (Glaser et al., 2020) and the observation that neurons
show high variability under identical behavioural conditions (Fenton & Muller, 1998; Low et al.,
2018). All combined, these facts hint at a richer and more complex internal neural code. When this
is not accounted for tuning curves will be blurred, distorted or mischaracterised relative to their true
form. For example, consider an animal situated at position X ‘imagining’ or ‘anticipating’ a remote
position, Y, for which a place cell is tuned. This might trigger the cell to fire leading to the mistaken
conclusion that the cell has a place field at location X.
Nonetheless, the fact that behaviour is often a close-but-imperfect proxy for the true latent motivates
searching for techniques which exploit this link. Most existing methods for latent discovery don’t ex-
ploit behaviour (Gao et al., 2016; Gondur et al., 2023) at the cost of complexity and interpretability.
Others don’t model temporal dynamics(Zhou & Wei, 2020; Schneider et al., 2023; Lawrence, 2003),
don’t scale to large datasets (Wang et al., 2005; Nam, 2015; Wu et al., 2017), can’t model complex
non-linear tuning curves (Pandarinath et al., 2018; Hurwitz et al., 2021; Duncker et al., 2019; Lin-
derman et al., 2016; Gondur et al., 2023), or aren’t designed for spiking datasets(Lawrence, 2003;
Krishnan et al., 2015). Moreover, many of these methods are conceptually complex, lack usable
code implementations, or necessitate GPUs limiting their accessibility.
Contributions Here we introduce SIMPL (Scalable Iterative Maximisation of Population-coded
Latents), a straightforward yet effective enhancement to the current paradigm. Our approach fits
tuning curves to observed behaviour and refines these by iterating a two-step process. First the
latent trajectory is decoded from the current tuning curves then, the tuning curves are refitted based
on this decoded latent trajectory. SIMPL imposes minimal constraints on the tuning curve structure,
scales well to large datasets without relying on neural networks which can be expensive to train.
Theoretical analysis establishes formal connections to expectation-maximisation (EM, Dempster
et al. 1977) for a flexible class of generative models. By exploiting behaviour as an initialisation,
SIMPL converges fast and helps mitigate local minima and identifiability (Hyvärinen & Pajunen,
1999; Locatello et al., 2019) issues. This allows it to reliably return refined tuning curves and
latents which remain close to, but improve upon, their behavioural analogues readily admitting
direct comparison. All in all, SIMPL is able to identify temporally smooth latents and complex
tuning curves related to behaviour, while remaining cheap and natively supporting spiking data — a
distinguishing set of features in the field of latent variable models for neural data analysis.
We first validate SIMPL on a dataset of synthetically generated 2D grid cells. Next, we apply
SIMPL to rodent electrophysiological hippocampal data (Tanni et al., 2022) and show it modi-
fies the latent space in an incremental but significant way: optimised tuning curves are better at
explaining held-out neural data and contain sharper, more numerous place fields allowing for a rein-
terpretation of previous experimental results. Finally, we apply SIMPL to somatosensory dataset
for a monkey performing a centre-out reaching task (Chowdhury et al., 2020). SIMPL, with a 4D
latent space, provides a good account of the data with the latent variables initialised to (and remain-
ing correlated with) the monkeys hand-position and hand-velocity. With only two hyperparameters,
SIMPL can be run quickly on large neural datasets 1 without requiring a GPU. It outperforms pop-
ular alternative techniques based on neural networks (Schneider et al., 2023; Zhao & Park, 2017)
or Gaussian processes(Lawrence, 2003; Wang et al., 2005) and is over 15× faster. This makes it a
practical alternative to existing tools particularly of interest to navigational or motor-control commu-
nities where abundant data is explained well by measurable behaviours (position, hand dynamics).
We provide an open-source JAX-optimised (Bradbury et al., 2018) implementation of our code2 .


   1
       One-hour recordings of 200 neurons (106 spikes) takes 1 minute to run on a CPU laptop.
   2
       Code and a demo can be found at: https://github.com/TomGeorge1234/SIMPL


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     M ETHOD
Here we give a high-level description of the SIMPL algorithm. Comprehensive details and a theo-
retical analysis linking SIMPL to expectation-maximisation, are provided in the Appendix.

2.1    T HE MODEL

SIMPL models spike trains of the form s := (sti )i=1,...N
                                                       t=1,...T , where sti represents the number of
spikes emitted by neuron i between time (t − 1) · dt and t · dt. We denote st := (st1 , . . . , stN )
the vector of spike counts emitted by all neurons in the t-th time bin. SIMPL posits that such spike
trains s are modulated by a latent, continuously-valued, low-dimensional, time-evolving variable
x := (xt )t=1,...,T ∈ RD through the following random process:
                 xt+1 | xt ∼          N (xt , σv2 I)                        (Latent dynamics)                  (1)
                   sti | xt ∼         Poisson(fi (xt ))                     (Emission model)                   (2)
where σv := v · dt and x0 ∼ N (0, σ02 I). This generative model enforces a tunable (through
the velocity hyperparameter v) amount of temporal smoothness in the trajectories. At each time
step the latent variable xt determines the instantaneous firing rate of all neurons via their intensity
functions fi (hereon called tuning curves, collectively denoted f ), which are unknown a priori, and
which SIMPL will estimate. Moreover, we make Q        the common assumption that all neurons are
conditionally independent given xt , i.e. p(st |xt ) = N i=1 p(sti |xt ). Finally, we assume the latent
variable x is Markovian, a common assumption in the neuroscience literature. This model has been
previously studied in the literature (Smith & Brown, 2003; Macke et al., 2011), albeit using highly
restrictive tuning curve models, something which SIMPL avoids.

 (a) SIMPL                                                                  (b)
                                                                                  M-step ≈ spike smoothing
                         “M-step” fit tuning curves
                                                          tuning curves, fi(x)     •••         ⊗
 latent trajectory, x(t)
                                                                                  • ••••••
                                    spikes,
                             s(t) ~ true dynamics

                         i                                                        E-step ≈ MLE + Kalman
                                                                                    xt    xt+1  xt   xt+1
                                      t                                                        ≈
                                                                                      s       s    ‸     ‸
                                                                                    s ••• N s1•••N xt   xt+1
                      “E-step” decode position                                     ‸ 1
                                                                                   x = argmaxx log p(s | x)


 (c) behaviour                                                 (d) true dynamics
  y
                                                               dim 2


      x(0)                                                             x*
                               f(0)                                                      f*
                     x                                                       dim 1
Figure 1: Schematic of SIMPL. (a) A latent variable model (LVM) for spiking data (fi (x), x(t)) is optimised
by iterating a two-step procedure closely related to the expectation-maximisation: First, tuning curves are fitted
to an initial estimate of the latent trajectory (an “M-step”). The latent is then redecoded from these tuning cuves
(an “E-step”). (b) SIMPL fits tuning curves using a kernel-smoothed estimate (top) and decodes the latent
variables by Kalman-smoothing maximum likelihood estimates. (c) Measured behaviour is used to initialise
the algorithm as it is often closely related to the true generative LVM (d).
2.2    T HE SIMPL ALGORITHM

Outline We now seek an estimate of the true, unknown latent trajectory x? and tuning curves f ? that
led to an observed spike train, s. SIMPL does so by iterating a two-step procedure closely related to


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the expectation-maximisation (EM) algorithm: first, tuning curves are fitted to an initial estimate of
the latent variable (the “M-step”), which are then used to decode the latent variable (the “E-step”).
This procedure is then repeated using the new latent trajectory, and so on until convergence.
The M-step In the M-step (or “fitting” step) of the e-th iteration SIMPL fits tnng curves to the
current latent trajectory estimate x(e) using a smooth, kernel-based estimate
                                      PT               (e)
                            (e)         t=1 sti k(x, xt )    # spikes at x
                          fi (x) :=     PT           (e)
                                                           ≈                                       (3)
                                                             # visits to x
                                          t=1 k(x, xt )

for some kernel k. In practice, we use a Gaussian kernel with small bandwidth σ. Such a tuning
curve model is conceptually simple and free from the optimisation, misspecification or interpretabil-
ity issues of most parametric models. It constitutes a notable departure from alternatives which use a
neural network (Zhou & Wei, 2020; Schneider et al., 2023) to model tuning curves and is particularly
well suited to low-dimensional latent spaces.
The E-step In the E-step SIMPL seeks to infer (or “decode”) a new estimate of the latent from
the spikes and current tuning curves, x(e+1) = Ep(x|s,f (e) ) [x]. Directly performing this inference
from the spikes is difficult due to the non-linearity and non-Gaussianity of the emission model in
Eq (2). Instead, SIMPL first calculates the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) of x, denoted x        b.
Then, by making a linear-Gaussian approximation to p(b    xt |xt ) ≈ N (xt ; Σt ), the variables (x, x
                                                                                                     b)
form a Linear Gaussian State Space Model (LGSSM) fully characterised by σv2 I (the transition noise
covariance) and Σt (the observation noise covariance). This enables efficient inference via Kalman
smoothing of the MLEs in order to approximate x(e+1) = Ep(x|bx) [x] (schematic in Fig. 1b).

                  b(e+1) := arg max log p(s|x, f (e) )
                  x
                                  x
                                                                                                   (4)
                  x(e+1) := Ep(x|bx(e+1) ) [ x ] ≈ KalmanSmooth(b
                                                                x(e+1) ; σv2 I, Σt )

Crucially, the linear-Gaussian approximation is not made on the spiking emissions p(s|x), which is
non-linear and non-Gaussian by design, but on p(bx|x), a quantity which is provably asymptotically
Gaussian in the many-neurons regime (theoretical argument and an explicit formula for Σt in B.1).
Behavioural initialisation Spike trains often come alongside behavioural recordings xb thought
to relate closely to the true latent variable xb ≈ x? . SIMPL leverages this by setting the initial
decoded latent trajectory, to measured behaviour x(0) ← xb . We posit that behavioural initialisation
will place the first iterate of SIMPL within the vicinity of the true trajectory and tuning curves,
accelerating convergence and favouring the true latent and tuning curves (x? , f ? ) over alternative
isomorphic pairs (φ(x? ), f ? ◦ φ−1 ) whose latent space is warped by an invertible map φ but which
would explain the data equally well. This amounts to an inductive bias favouring tuning curves close
to those calculated from behaviour. Through ablation studies we confirm these beneficial effects.
All in all, SIMPL is interpretable and closely matches common practice in neuroscience (e.g.
kernel-based curve fitting, MLE-based decoding); moreover, it can be formally related to a gen-
eralised version of the EM-algorithm, for which theoretical guarantees may be obtained. We leave
to the appendix detailed theoretical arguments justifying the validity of SIMPL as well as its con-
nection to EM.

Algorithm 1 SIMPL: An algorithm for optimizing tuning curves and latents from behaviour
 1: s ∈ NN ×T                                                                   . Spike count matrix
 2: x(0) ∈ RD×T                            . Initial latent estimate e.g. measured position of animal
 3: procedure SIMPL(s, x(0) )
 4:     for e ← 0 to E do                                                     . Loop for E iterations
 5:         f (e) ← FitTuningCurves(x(e) , s)                                         . The “M-step”
 6:         x(e+1) ← DecodeLatent(f (e) , s)                                           . The “E-step”
 7:     end for
 8:     return x(E+1) , f (E)                                . The optimised latent and tuning curves
 9: end procedure



                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3            R ESULTS

3.1            C ONTINUOUS SYNTHETIC DATA : 2D GRID CELLS

First we tested SIMPL on a realistic navigational task by generating a large artificial dataset of
spikes from a population of N = 225 2D grid cells — a type of neuron commonly found in the
medial entorhinal cortex (Hafting et al., 2005) — in a 1 m square environment. All grid cells had a
maximum firing rate of 10 Hz and were arranged into three discrete modules, 75 cells per module,
of increasing grid scale from 0.3–0.8 m (Fig. 2c). A latent trajectory, x? , was then generated by
simulating an agent moving around the environment for 1 hour under a smooth continuous random
motion model. Data was sampled at a rate of 10 Hz giving a total of T = 36, 000 time bins (∼
800,000 spikes). All data was generated using the RatInABox package (George et al., 2024a).
The initial trajectory, x(0) , was generated by adding smooth Gaussian noise to the latent such that, on
average, the true latent and initial condition differed by 20 cm (Fig. 2a, top panel). This discrepancy
models the agent’s internal position uncertainty and/or a measurement error. It sufficed to obscure
almost all structure from the initial tuning curves f (0) (x) (Fig. 2b, top). To assess performance
we track to the log-likelihood of training and test spikes (see Appendix C.5 for how we partition
the dataset). We also calculate the error between the true and latent trajectory the epoch-to-epoch
change in the tuning curves and the negative entropy (hereon called “spatial info”) of the normalized
tuning curves as a measure of how spatially informative they are (Fig. 2d).
SIMPL was then run for 10 epochs (total compute time 39.8 CPU-secs on a consumer grade laptop).
The true latent trajectory and receptive fields were recovered almost perfectly and the log-likelihood
of both train and test spikes rapidly approached the ceiling performance with negligible overfitting.
As expected, SIMPL performs better on larger datasets, Fig. 2e, however performance remains good
even with substantially smaller datasets (e.g. 50 cells for a duration of 5 minutes). We also swept
across the velocity and kernel bandwidth hyperparameters (v, σ) and found SIMPL was surprisingly
robust to changes in these hyperparameters within reasonable limits (see D.2).

                                                                         x       y
    (a) latent trajectory, x(e)(t)                 estimate, x(e)                     (b) tuning curves, fi(e)(x)
      1                                                 true, x★
                                                                                                                     e=0

                                                                                            1m
       0
       1
                                                                                                                    e=1


       0
       1
 pos [m]


                                                                                                                    e = 10


       0
     0                          time [min]                            1                            ≈
                                                          error
 (d) log-likelihood x(e) error Δf(e)/Δe spatial info. (e) [cm] 40 20 0 (c) true tuning curves, fi★(x)
                                     14.2   -7.4                 60                  CPU-
                                                          T [mins]


           -0.05            0.19
                                                                 30                  sec
                                                                 10                    60
                           train                                  5                    10
                           test                                                         1
           -0.23                 0     0    -8.9                  2
                                                                      100
                                                                      200


                       e
                                                                      5

                                                                      50
                                                                      20


                   0        10
                                                                      Nneurons
Figure 2: Results on a synthetic 2D grid cell dataset. (a) Estimated latent trajectories (epochs 0, 1 and 10).
Initial conditions are generated from the true latent (black) by the addition of slow Gaussian noise. Shaded
zones show the discrepancy between the true and estimated latent. (b) Tuning curve estimates for 5 exemplar
grid cells. (c) Ground truth tuning curves. (d) Performance metrics: Left: log-likelihood of the training and
test spikes (averaged per time step, dotted line shows ceiling performance on a model initialised with the true
latent). Middle-left: Euclidean distance between the true and estimated latent trajectories (averaged per time
step). Middle-right: Epoch-to-epoch change in the tuning curves showing they stabilise over iteration. Right:
Cell spatial information. Violin plots, where shown, give distributions across all neurons. (e) A sweep over the
number of cells and the duration of the trajectory.

Finally, despite having an implicit prior for temporally-smooth latent dynamics, further synthetic
analysis revealed SIMPL is still able recover discontinuous latent trajectories (for example those


                                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


containing jumpy-like “replay” events, see Appendix D.3) or even discrete latents in a non-
dynamical task akin to a discrete two-alternative forced choice task (2AFC, see Appendix D.1).


3.2             H IPPOCAMPAL PLACE CELL DATA

Having confirmed the efficacy of SIMPL on synthetic data, we next tested it on real dataset of
hippocampal neurons recorded from a rat as it foraged in a large environment (Tanni et al., 2022).
This dataset consists of N = 226 neurons recorded over 2 hours, binned at 5 Hz giving T = 36, 000
data samples and ∼ 700,000 spikes. Many of these cells are place cells (O’Keefe & Dostrovsky,
1971) which, in large environments, are known to have multiple place fields (Park et al., 2011).
We initialised with the animal’s position, as measured by an LED located between its ears, and
optimised for 10 epochs. The log-likelihood of test and train spikes both increased, converging after
4 epochs (Fig. 3b) in a compute time of ∼40 CPU-secs. We then analysed the shapes and statistics of
the tuning curves: After optimisation, tuning curves were visibly sharper, Fig. 3a; previously diffuse
place fields contracted (e.g. the third exemplar tuning curve) or split into multiple, smaller fields
(second exemplar). Occasionally, new place fields appeared (fourth exemplar) or multiple place
fields merged into a single larger field (fifth exemplar). Statistically, tuning curves had significantly
more individual place fields (+19%, mean 1.14→1.41 per cell, p = 0.0035 Mann Whitney U tests),
substantially higher maximum firing rates (+45%, median 4.2→6.1 Hz, p = 9.8 × 10−7 ) and were
more spatially informative (p = 0.038). Individual place fields became smaller (-25%, median
0.59→0.44 m2 ) and rounder (+8%, median 0.63→0.68, p = 0.0037).
To ensure these observed changes weren’t merely an artefact of the optimisation procedure we
generated a control dataset by resampling spikes from the behaviour-fitted tuning curves, scon ∼
p(·|x(0) , f (0) ). Control spikes thus had very similar temporal statistics and identical tuning curves
to those in the hippocampal dataset but, critically, were generated from a known ground truth model
exactly equal to their initialization. Thus, any changes in the control tuning curves post-SIMPL
must be artefactual. Indeed, no significant changes were observed besides a slight increase in field
area (Fig. 3bc, grey) providing strong evidence the significant changes observed in the real data (e.g.
the decrease in field area) were genuine, reflecting the true nature of hippocampal tuning curves.

 (a) tuning curves, fi(e)(x)                                                                              (b) log-likelihood
                                                                                                             -0.12
                                                                                                             train
                                                                                                             test
                                                                                                             control
      3.5 m                                                                                                  -0.15
                                                                                                                  0                  epoch       10
 (c)       no. of place fields           field area, A [m2]   field ‘roundness’       max. firing rate [Hz]               spatial info.
  before
                                                        ***


                                                                                                           ***
                               **


                                                                             **


                                                                                                                                             *


     after
                                    ns


                                                                                  ns
                                                         **


                                                                                                                 ns


                                                                                                                                                 ns


  control
           0                    60                      1.5 0            x   y1 0                 15 -8              -6
 (d) latent trajectory, x(e)(t)                     before (behaviour)         (e) x-difference (f) area vs dist. to wall
                                                          after (latent)
 3.5                                                                                                             1.5 1.5
                                                                                       Δ = ‖x(0)-x(10)‖
  pos [m]


                                                                                                                 [m]
                                                                                                                       A, [m2]


     0                                                                                                           0               0
            0                             time [min]                              3                                                  0 dwall [m] 1

Figure 3: Results on a hippocampal place cell dataset collected by Tanni et al. (2022). (a) Exemplar tuning
curves before and after optimization. Automatically identified place field boundaries shown in white. (b)
Log-likelihood of test and train spikes. Control model shown in grey. (c) Statistics analysis of place fields.
Violin plots show the distributions over all place fields / cells. (d) The final latent trajectory estimated from
SIMPL (green) overlaid on top of the measured position of the animal (used as initial conditions, yellow). (e)
Behavioural discrepancy map: the average discrepancy between the latent and behaviour as a function of the
optimised latent x(10) . Overlaid is a snippet of the behavioural vs optimised true latent trajectory. (f) Place
field area as a function of the distance to the nearest wall.

The optimized latent trajectory x(10) remained highly correlated with behaviour (R2 = 0.86, Fig.
3d) occasionally diverging for short periods as it “jumped” to and from a new location, as if the


                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


animal was mentally teleporting itself (an example is visualized in Fig. 3e). We calculated the
                                                                                       (0)     (10)
difference between the optimised latent and the behaviour at each time point, ∆t = kxt − xt k2 ,
and visualized this as a heat map overlaid onto the latent space (Fig. 3e). We found that the latent
discrepancy was minimal near the edges of the environment and peaked near the centre, perhaps
because sensory input is scarce in the centre of the environment due to fewer visual and tactile cues.
Tanni et al. (2022) observed that the size of a place field size increases with its distance to a
wall. Our observation—that the latent discrepancy is highest in the centre of the environment—
suggests one possible hypothesis: behavioural place fields merely appear larger in the centre
of the environment because they are blurred by the correspondingly larger latent discrepancy.
If true, this trend should weaken after optimisation, once the “true” latent has been found.
  To test this we plotted field size
                                         (a)                      (b) -0.514               SIMPL4D (hand position
against distance-to-wall (Fig. 3f); op-                                    log-
                                                                                                           & velocity)
timized fields, like behavioural fields,                           likelihood              SIMPL2D (hand position)
                                                                         (test)            SIMPL2D (hand velocity)
were small very near to the walls and
                                                                       -0.528
grew with distance (replicating the                                             0 epoch 10
result of Tanni et al. (2022)), but this (c) behaviour          SIMPL 2D          (d) behaviour          SIMPL 2D
correspondence stopped after ∼ 0.5        (hand position only)                      (hand velocity only)
m beyond which the optimized place
fields size grew more weakly with
distance-to-wall. This supports our         y                                         y
hypothesis, suggesting a substantial           x                                        x
fraction of the correlation between       x                                        vx
size and distance isn’t a fundamental                             corr. = 0.59                             corr. = 0.41
                                          y                                        vy
feature of the neural tuning curves but
an artefactual distortion in the tuning     0          time [sec]             40      0         time [sec]            40
curves, something which can be cor-
rected for using SIMPL.
                                                          y                                            vy
                                                              x                                              vx
3.3    S OMATOSENSORY
CORTEX DATA                                       (e) behaviour           SIMPL 4D        behaviour                            SIMPL 4D
                                                          (hand position…………..and……….....hand velocity)
DURING A HAND - REACHING TASK

To test SIMPL beyond naviga-                          y                                            vy
tional/hippocampal datasets we ran
                                                              x                                              vx                     CEBRA 4D
it on a macaque somatosensory cor-
                                                  x                                               vx
tex dataset Chowdhury et al. (2020).                                               corr. = 0.74            corr. = 0.57
During this recording a monkey made               y                                               vy
a series of reaches to a target in one                0               time [sec]            40         0          time [sec]   25
of 8 directions, 4. On half of the tri-
als the reach was “active” whereby
the monkey moved the manipulan-
                                                      y                                                vy
dum towards the target by itself. On                          x                                             vx
the other half, the reach was “pas-
sive”, whereby the monkey’s hand               Figure 4: SIMPL applied to somatosensory cortex data. (a)
was bumped in the direction of one of          A macaque performs centre-out reaches; N = 65 somatosen-
                                               sory neurons are recorded. (b) Log-likelihood curves for the three
the targets by a force applied to the
                                               SIMPL models in panels c–e. (c) SIMPL trained with a 2D latent
manipulandum, forcing the monkey               initialised from hand position. Top-left: raw behaviour, averaged
to correct and return the cursor to the        across trials aligned to movement onset; top-right: after SIMPL.
centre. We binned the data (N = 65             Middle: 40 s of behaviour (yellow) and latent (green). Bottom:
neurons, 37 mins, ∼106 spikes) at 20           exemplar tuning curves before and after SIMPL. (d) As in c, but
Hz and ran SIMPL models on its en-             initialised with hand velocity. (e) As in c, but with a 4D latent ini-
tirety (i.e. active and passive reaches,       tialised to hand-position (dims 1 and 2) and velocity (dims 3 and
as well as the inter-trial intervals) for      4). Inset: 2D visualisation of a 4D latent embedding from CEBRA
10 epochs.                                     trained on hand position, adapted from Schneider et al. (2023).

First SIMPL was run with a 2D latent initialised to the monkeys measured x- and y-hand position
(Fig. 4c). Afterwards, the latent trajectory—here averaged across trials with the same direction,
aligned to movement onset—had diverged from, but remained correlated with, initial hand-position


                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(correlation = 0.59). Despite an improvement in likelihood over the behavioural initialisation, latent
trajectories for distinct directions substantially overlapped with one another, indicating an insuffi-
cient dimensionality to capture the full complexity of the data. A similar result was obtained when
initialising to hand-velocity (Fig. 4d).
We then trained SIMPL with a 4D latent space. Two of the dimensions were initialised with hand
position and the other two with hand velocity. This model performed better than either 2D model,
converging to a higher likelihood. The latent dimensions initialised to hand-position remained highly
correlated with hand-position (corr. = 0.74) after optimisation as did the velocity dimensions (corr.
= 0.57). The latent trajectory was also more structured, with distinct and less overlapping motifs
for each trial type. We visualised two-dimensional slices of the four-dimensional tuning curves
for each neuron and found that they had well-defined receptive fields, similar to place fields in
the hippocampus, which were visibly sharper after optimisation. These results suggest that the
somatosensory cortex neurons encode a complex and high-dimensional latent, closely correlated to
hand position and velocity, which can be partially recovered by SIMPL.


3.4   P ERFORMANCE IS IMPROVED BY INITIALISING AT BEHAVIOUR

Latent variable models trained with EM can experience two issues that usually complicate the scien-
tific interpretability of their results. The first concerns the quality of the solution; does the algorithm
converge on a good model of the data which predicts the spikes well? The second issue concerns
identifiability; even if the recovered latent trajectory and tuning curves (f (e) , x(e) ) are of high qual-
ity, they may differ from the true ones (f ? , x? ) by some invertible “warp” φ in a way that does not
affect the overall goodness-of-fit of the model. These warps could include innocuous rotations and
symmteries or, more concerningly if the exact structure of the tuning curve is a quantity of interest,
stretches or fragmentations. Here we show that behavioural initialisation drastically minimises the
severity of both of these issues for SIMPL.
             (a) ground truth (b) initialised: noisy ground truth (fig. 3)                  (c) randomly
 exemplar                                epoch 0              epoch 1           epoch 10            epoch 10
    tuning
     curve

               f(e)(xt(e)) corr             0.41                0.83                0.98                0.87
                           f★(xt★)

      warp          reference
      maps
         φ



               warp distance                0.126               0.050               0.039               0.498


Figure 5: Latent manifold analysis: (Top) Examplar tuning curve in (a) the ground truth latent space, (b) the
latent space discovered by behaviourally-initialised-SIMPL after 0, 1 and 10 epochs and (c) the latent space
discovered by SIMPL initialised with a random latent trajectory. Inset scatter plots show the true and predicted
firing rates of all neurons across all times as well as their correlation values (“accurate” models have higher
correlations). (Bottom) The warp mappings from each latent space to the “closest” location in ground truth as
measured by the distance between the tuning curves population vectors.
To do so, we first assess the absolute goodness-of-fit of SIMPL by computing, for all neurons,
the correlation between the estimated instantaneous firing rates fi(e) (xt(e) ) (a quantity invariant to
warping) and the true firing rates fi? (x?t ). SIMPL converges to a highly accurate model (r=0.98)
under behavioural initialization, but to a less accurate, though still quite accurate, model (r = 0.87)
when initialised with a random trajectory uncorrelated to the true latent. Next, we estimate, quantify
and visualize the warp map φ between SIMPL’s estimates (f (e) , x(e) ) and the ground truth (f ? , x? ).
We obtain this by finding, for every location in the warped space, the position in the true latent space
where the tuning curves are most similar (φ(x) = arg miny kf ? (y) − f (e) (x)k2 ). We then quantify
the “warpness” of this mapping as the average distance between x and φ(x) across the environment,
normalized by its characteristic length scale (1 m). This warp-distance should be 0 for totally un-


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


warped models and O(1) for heavy warps. In addition to perfectly fitting the data, the solution found
by SIMPL under behavioural initialization is minimally warped (warp dist = 0.050). In contrast, the
good (but imperfect) solution found by SIMPL under random initialization is very heavily warped
(warp dist. = 0.498) in a fragmented manner. These results (Fig. 5) strongly motivate the use of
behavioural initializations in latent variable models as an effective means to encourage convergence
towards latent spaces which are both accurate and un-warped with respect to the ground truth.

3.5   B ENCHMARKING SIMPL AGAINST EXISTING TECHNIQUES

We compared SIMPL to four popular methods for latent variable extraction: pi-VAE (Zhou &
Wei, 2020), CEBRA (Schneider et al., 2023) (which use neural network function approximators),
GPLVM (Lawrence, 2003) and GPDM (Wang et al., 2005) (which use Gaussian processes). Cru-
cially, and like SIMPL, none of these methods make restrictive linear assumptions about the struc-
ture of the tuning curves.
To match SIMPL, we initialise the latent variable estimates of GPLVM and GPDM to be-
haviour (pi-VAE and CEBRA handle behaviour natively by using it to condition a prior over
the latent or as a contrastive label). All models were trained for their default number of it-
erations/epochs. After training we aligned the discovered latents to behaviour and visualised
them on top of the ground truth (Fig. 6c). All models successfully uncovered a latent tra-
jectory closer to the ground truth than behaviour (Fig. 6b). SIMPL performed better than
the other models, achieving a final error of 4.2 cm, half that of pi-VAE (8.4 cm).
 We posit that pi-VAE, CEBRA and GPLVM
                                                   (a) compute time          (b) latent error       (d)
may suffer from the lack of an explicit dy-                                                             Ground
                                                SIMPL 40 secs                        4.2 cm              truth


                                                                                                 behaviour
namical systems component in their generative pi-VAE 10.4 mins                             8.4 cm
                                               CEBRA
models while GPDM may suffer from the data- GPLVM              23.7 mins                    9.2 cm
                                                           11.9 mins                 11.6 cm
subsampling we were required to do to cap the GPDM                  66 mins           12.0 cm
training time to less than two-hours. SIMPL           0 [CPU-mins] 70 0                   [cm]     20
                                                  (c)
converged in 40 seconds, over 15 times quicker                           ground truth
than the next fastest (pi-VAE, 10.4 minutes,           SIMPL
Fig. 6a). Except for GPDM, which required
a GPU, all techniques were run and timed on a
                                                       pi-VAE
CPU. Only SIMPL was able to recover sharp
and accurate grid fields close to the ground
truth.                                                 CEBRA



4     R ELATED WORK                                                  GPLVM
                                                       pos [m]


                                                                 1
Probabilistic inference in neural data modu-             GPDM
                                                      0
lated by latent variables has been a major topic        0              time [min]             1
of study for decades — see, e.g. Tipping Figure 6: Comparison to pi-VAE, CEBRA, GPLVM and
& Bishop (1999); Yu et al. (2006; 2008b;a); GPDM on the synthetic grid cell dataset. (a) Compute
Macke et al. (2011); Mangion et al. (2011); time. (b) Final error in the latent. (c) Alignment of the
Park et al. (2015); Gao et al. (2016); Hernan- discovered latent to the ground truth. (d) Exemplar tuning
dez et al. (2018); Dong et al. (2020); Zhou & curves constructed using kernel-based estimation on the
Wei (2020); Gondur et al. (2023); Bjerke et al. latent (i.e. an “M-step”).
(2023) — however not all methods were designed for the kind of data considered in this work. Many
methods contain model complex latent space dynamics but combine these with simplistic tuning
curves which restrict firing rates to (exponential-)linear functions of the latent (Smith & Brown,
2003; Yu et al., 2008a; Macke et al., 2011; Duncker et al., 2019; Linderman et al., 2016; Pandari-
nath et al., 2018; Zoltowski et al., 2020; Sani et al., 2021; Hurwitz et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021;
Gondur et al., 2023) so cannot interpretably account for the representations (place cells, grid cells)
considered here. Other methods do not/cannot use behaviour to aid latent discovery (Gao et al.,
2016; Nam, 2015; Hernandez et al., 2018; Gondur et al., 2023; Bjerke et al., 2023) instead taking
a fully “unsupervised” approach (meaning they can be applied to spike data without an obvious
behavioural correlate) at the expense of complexity and identifiability.
Algorithms that both don’t restrict to simplistic linear tuning curves and exploit behaviour form a
small set of relevant alternatives to SIMPL. Behaviour-informed latent discovery tools have become


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


popular in recent years due to the explosion of large neural datasets taken from behaving animals
and the observation that behaviour can explain substantial variance in the neural dynamics.
Gaussian process latent variable models (GPLVMs), Lawrence (2003); Wang et al. (2005) form
a family of methods that learn smooth, non-linear tuning curves by placing GP priors on them
and performing approximate marginal log-likelihood optimisation on the latent variable. Popular
implementations leave the initial condition of this optimisation user-defined and therefore compat-
ible with the behaviour-informed initialisation used here. However, most such models were intro-
duced outside of the neuroscience literature thus use Gaussian (instead of Poisson) emission models
(Lawrence, 2003; Wang et al., 2005; Jensen et al., 2020), or do not make smoothness assumptions
on the latent trajectory (Jensen et al., 2020; Lawrence, 2003). P-GPLVM, which employs Pois-
son emissions and a GP prior on the latent trajectory, is an exception, but its cubic scaling with
time points makes it impractical for hour-long datasets. In contrast, available GPLVM implementa-
tions(Bingham et al., 2018) use inducing point approximations to achieve linear time complexity.
CEBRA (Schneider et al., 2023) learns a deterministic neural network mapping from spikes to la-
tents using behaviour- or time-guided contrastive learning. Unlike most methods, CEBRA does not
natively learn a generative model nor tuning curves, which are of primary interest in our setting. CE-
BRA also treats each data point independently instead of modelling whole-trajectories preventing it
from taking advantage of the temporal smoothness inherent in many underlying latent codes.
pi-VAE (Zhou & Wei, 2020) uses a variational autoencoder (Kingma & Welling, 2014) to infer
the latent trajectories and learn tuning curves using neural network function approximators. pi-
VAE places a learnable prior, conditioned on behaviour, to the latent variable in order to obtain a
model with provable identifiability properties. However, pi-VAE suffers from the same limitation as
CEBRA in that it treats each data point as an i.i.d observation instead of a part of a whole trajectory.
The properties of large scale neural datasets suggest five desiderata on the algorithms used to analyse
them. These are (1) the absence of restrictive tuning curve assumptions, (2) modelling smooth latent
dynamics, (3) the presence of a spiking component (e.g. Poisson emissions), (4) the ability to
exploit behaviour (including as an initial condition) and (5) scalability to large datasets. None of the
methods described in our literature review satisfy all five desiderata. In Appendix E we provide a
table comparing all methods discussed in this section and more with respect to these desiderata.

5   D ISCUSSION
We introduced SIMPL, a tool for optimizing tuning curves and latent trajectories using a technique
which refines estimates obtained from behaviour. It hinges on two well-established sub-routines —
tuning curve fitting and decoding — which are widely used by both experimentalists and theorists
for analysing neural data. By presenting SIMPL as an iterative application of these techniques, we
aim to make latent variable modelling more accessible to the neuroscience community.
SIMPL could be seen as an instance of a broader class of latent optimization algorithms. In principle
any curve fitting procedure and any decoder (which uses those tuning curves) could be coupled into
a candidate algorithm for optimizing latents from neural data. Our specific design choices, while
attractive due to their conceptual and computational simplicity, will come with limitations. For
example, we predict SIMPL’s kernel-based estimator won’t scale well to very high dimensional
latent spaces (Györfi et al., 2006) where parametric models, e.g. a neural networks, are known to
perform better (Bach, 2017), potentially at the cost of compute time.
Our synthetic analysis focused on settings where behaviour and the true latent differed only in an
unbiased manner. It would be interesting to determine if SIMPL’s performance extends to more
complex perturbations. Fast, non-local and asymmetric perturbations are common in the brain; for
instance “replay”(Carr et al., 2011) where the latent jumps to another location in the environment.
Likewise, during theta sequences(Maurer et al., 2006), the encoded latent moves away from the
agent. This forward-biased discrepancy could theoretically induce a backward-biased skew in be-
havioural place fields, even if the true tuning curves remain unskewed. If this is the case, proper
latent dynamical analysis—via tools like SIMPL—could help reinterpret the predictive nature of
place field tuning curves (Stachenfeld et al., 2017; Fang et al., 2023; Bono et al., 2023; George et al.,
2023), similar to how it reduced the asymmetry in place field sizes further from walls (Fig. 3f).



                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Afsheen Afshar, Gopal Santhanam, M Yu Byron, Stephen I Ryu, Maneesh Sahani, and Krishna V
  Shenoy. Single-trial neural correlates of arm movement preparation. Neuron, 2011.

Francis Bach. Breaking the curse of dimensionality with convex neural networks. Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, (19):1–53, 2017.

Patrick Billingsley. Statistical methods in markov chains. The annals of mathematical statistics,
  1961.

Eli Bingham, Jonathan P. Chen, Martin Jankowiak, Fritz Obermeyer, Neeraj Pradhan, Theofanis
  Karaletsos, Rohit Singh, Paul Szerlip, Paul Horsfall, and Noah D. Goodman. Pyro: Deep Univer-
  sal Probabilistic Programming. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2018.

Martin Bjerke, Lukas Schott, Kristopher T Jensen, Claudia Battistin, David A. Klindt, and Ben-
 jamin Adric Dunn. Understanding neural coding on latent manifolds by sharing features and di-
 viding ensembles. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
 URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=1UCaQYUdE_o.

Rafal Bogacz, Eric Brown, Jeff Moehlis, Philip Holmes, and Jonathan D Cohen. The physics of
  optimal decision making: a formal analysis of models of performance in two-alternative forced-
  choice tasks. Psychological review, 2006.

Jacopo Bono, Sara Zannone, Victor Pedrosa, and Claudia Clopath. Learning predictive cognitive
  maps with spiking neurons during behavior and replays. eLife, pp. e80671, 2023.

James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs. 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/jax-ml/jax.

Ralph A Bradley and John J Gart. The asymptotic properties of ml estimators when sampling from
  associated populations. Biometrika, 1962.

Federico Carnevale, Victor de Lafuente, Ranulfo Romo, Omri Barak, and Néstor Parga. Dynamic
  control of response criterion in premotor cortex during perceptual detection under temporal un-
  certainty. Neuron, 2015.

Margaret F Carr, Shantanu P Jadhav, and Loren M Frank. Hippocampal replay in the awake state: a
 potential substrate for memory consolidation and retrieval. Nature neuroscience, 2011.

Raeed H Chowdhury, Joshua I Glaser, and Lee E Miller. Area 2 of primary somatosensory cortex
  encodes kinematics of the whole arm. eLife, pp. e48198, 2020.

John P Cunningham and Byron M Yu. Dimensionality reduction for large-scale neural recordings.
  Nature neuroscience, 2014.

Arthur P Dempster, Nan M Laird, and Donald B Rubin. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data
  via the em algorithm. Journal of the royal statistical society: series B (methodological), 1977.

Eric L Denovellis, Anna K Gillespie, Michael E Coulter, Marielena Sosa, Jason E Chung, Uri T
  Eden, and Loren M Frank. Hippocampal replay of experience at real-world speeds. eLife, pp.
  e64505, 2021.

Zhe Dong, Bryan Seybold, Kevin Murphy, and Hung Bui. Collapsed amortized variational inference
  for switching nonlinear dynamical systems. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 2638–2647. PMLR, 2020.

Lea Duncker, Gergo Bohner, Julien Boussard, and Maneesh Sahani. Learning interpretable
  continuous-time models of latent stochastic dynamical systems. In International conference on
  machine learning. PMLR, 2019.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ching Fang, Dmitriy Aronov, LF Abbott, and Emily L Mackevicius. Neural learning rules for
  generating flexible predictions and computing the successor representation. eLife, pp. e80680,
  2023.
André A Fenton and Robert U Muller. Place cell discharge is extremely variable during individual
  passes of the rat through the firing field. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 1998.
Ronald Aylmer Fisher. Theory of statistical estimation. In Mathematical proceedings of the Cam-
  bridge philosophical society. Cambridge University Press, 1925.
Yuanjun Gao, Evan W Archer, Liam Paninski, and John P Cunningham. Linear dynamical neural
  population models through nonlinear embeddings. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2016.
Tom M George, William de Cothi, Kimberly L Stachenfeld, and Caswell Barry. Rapid learning of
  predictive maps with stdp and theta phase precession. eLife, pp. e80663, 2023.
Tom M George, Mehul Rastogi, William de Cothi, Claudia Clopath, Kimberly Stachenfeld, and
  Caswell Barry. Ratinabox, a toolkit for modelling locomotion and neuronal activity in continuous
  environments. eLife, 2024a.
Tom M George, Kimberly L Stachenfeld, Caswell Barry, Claudia Clopath, and Tomoki Fukai. A
  generative model of the hippocampal formation trained with theta driven local learning rules.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024b.
Apostolos P Georgopoulos, Andrew B Schwartz, and Ronald E Kettner. Neuronal population coding
  of movement direction. Science, 233(4771):1416–1419, 1986.
Joshua I Glaser, Ari S Benjamin, Raeed H Chowdhury, Matthew G Perich, Lee E Miller, and Kon-
  rad P Kording. Machine learning for neural decoding. eNeuro, (4), 2020.
Rabia Gondur, Usama Bin Sikandar, Evan Schaffer, Mikio Christian Aoi, and Stephen L Keeley.
  Multi-modal gaussian process variational autoencoders for neural and behavioral data. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.03111, 2023.
László Györfi, Michael Kohler, Adam Krzyzak, and Harro Walk. A distribution-free theory of
   nonparametric regression. Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
Torkel Hafting, Marianne Fyhn, Sturla Molden, May-Britt Moser, and Edvard I Moser. Microstruc-
  ture of a spatial map in the entorhinal cortex. Nature, 2005.
Christopher D Harvey, Philip Coen, and David W Tank. Choice-specific sequences in parietal cortex
  during a virtual-navigation decision task. Nature, 2012.
Daniel Hernandez, Antonio Khalil Moretti, Ziqiang Wei, Shreya Saxena, John Cunningham, and
  Liam Paninski. Nonlinear evolution via spatially-dependent linear dynamics for electrophysiol-
  ogy and calcium data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.02459, 2018.
Øyvind Arne Høydal, Emilie Ranheim Skytøen, Sebastian Ola Andersson, May-Britt Moser, and
  Edvard I Moser. Object-vector coding in the medial entorhinal cortex. Nature, 2019.
Amber Hu, David Zoltowski, Aditya Nair, David Anderson, Lea Duncker, and Scott Linderman.
 Modeling latent neural dynamics with gaussian process switching linear dynamical systems.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03330, 2024.
Cole Hurwitz, Akash Srivastava, Kai Xu, Justin Jude, Matthew Perich, Lee Miller, and Matthias
  Hennig. Targeted neural dynamical modeling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 34:29379–29392, 2021.
Aapo Hyvärinen and Petteri Pajunen. Nonlinear independent component analysis: Existence and
  uniqueness results. Neural networks, 1999.
Kristopher Jensen, Ta-Chu Kao, Marco Tripodi, and Guillaume Hennequin. Manifold gplvms for
  discovering non-euclidean latent structure in neural data. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


James J Jun, Nicholas A Steinmetz, Joshua H Siegle, Daniel J Denman, Marius Bauza, Brian Barbar-
  its, Albert K Lee, Costas A Anastassiou, Alexandru Andrei, Cağatay Aydın, et al. Fully integrated
  silicon probes for high-density recording of neural activity. Nature, 2017.
Rudolph Emil Kalman. A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems. 1960.
Timothy D Kim, Thomas Z Luo, Jonathan W Pillow, and Carlos D Brody. Inferring latent dy-
  namics underlying neural population activity via neural differential equations. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5551–5561. PMLR, 2021.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In 2nd International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
Dmitry Kobak, Wieland Brendel, Christos Constantinidis, Claudia E Feierstein, Adam Kepecs,
 Zachary F Mainen, Xue-Lian Qi, Ranulfo Romo, Naoshige Uchida, and Christian K Machens.
 Demixed principal component analysis of neural population data. eLife, 2016.
Rahul G Krishnan, Uri Shalit, and David Sontag.            Deep kalman filters.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1511.05121, 2015.
Neil Lawrence. Gaussian process latent variable models for visualisation of high dimensional data.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 16, 2003.
Colin Lever, Stephen Burton, Ali Jeewajee, John O’Keefe, and Neil Burgess. Boundary vector cells
  in the subiculum of the hippocampal formation. Journal of Neuroscience, 2009.
Itay Lieder, Vincent Adam, Or Frenkel, Sagi Jaffe-Dax, Maneesh Sahani, and Merav Ahissar. Per-
   ceptual bias reveals slow-updating in autism and fast-forgetting in dyslexia. Nature neuroscience,
   2019.
Scott W Linderman, Andrew C Miller, Ryan P Adams, David M Blei, Liam Paninski, and Matthew J
  Johnson. Recurrent switching linear dynamical systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.08466, 2016.
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard
  Schölkopf, and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learn-
  ing of disentangled representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Ryan J Low, Sam Lewallen, Dmitriy Aronov, Rhino Nevers, and David W Tank. Probing variability
  in a cognitive map using manifold inference from neural dynamics. BioRxiv, 2018.
Jakob H Macke, Lars Buesing, John P Cunningham, Byron M Yu, Krishna V Shenoy, and Maneesh
  Sahani. Empirical models of spiking in neural populations. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2011.
Emily L Mackevicius, Andrew H Bahle, Alex H Williams, Shijie Gu, Natalia I Denisenko, Mark S
  Goldman, and Michale S Fee. Unsupervised discovery of temporal sequences in high-dimensional
  datasets, with applications to neuroscience. eLife, 2019.
Andrew Zammit Mangion, Ke Yuan, Visakan Kadirkamanathan, Mahesan Niranjan, and Guido San-
  guinetti. Online variational inference for state-space models with point-process observations.
  Neural Computation, 2011.
Valerio Mante, David Sussillo, Krishna V Shenoy, and William T Newsome. Context-dependent
  computation by recurrent dynamics in prefrontal cortex. Nature, 2013.
Andrew P Maurer, Stephen L Cowen, Sara N Burke, Carol A Barnes, and Bruce L McNaughton.
  Organization of hippocampal cell assemblies based on theta phase precession. Hippocampus,
  2006.
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and
  projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.
Bruce L McNaughton, Carol A Barnes, and JJEBR O’Keefe. The contributions of position, direc-
  tion, and velocity to single unit activity in the hippocampus of freely-moving rats. Experimental
  brain research, 1983.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mayank R Mehta, Carol A Barnes, and Bruce L McNaughton. Experience-dependent, asymmetric
 expansion of hippocampal place fields. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 1997.
Robert U Muller and John L Kubie. The firing of hippocampal place cells predicts the future position
  of freely moving rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 1989.
Hooram Nam. Poisson extension of gaussian process factor analysis for modeling spiking neural
  populations. Master’s thesis, Department of Neural Computation and Behaviour, Max Planck
  Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen.[Google Scholar], 2015.
John O’Keefe and Jonathan Dostrovsky. The hippocampus as a spatial map: preliminary evidence
  from unit activity in the freely-moving rat. Brain research, 1971.
Chethan Pandarinath, Daniel J O’Shea, Jasmine Collins, Rafal Jozefowicz, Sergey D Stavisky,
  Jonathan C Kao, Eric M Trautmann, Matthew T Kaufman, Stephen I Ryu, Leigh R Hochberg,
  et al. Inferring single-trial neural population dynamics using sequential auto-encoders. Nature
  methods, 2018.
EunHye Park, Dino Dvorak, and André A Fenton. Ensemble place codes in hippocampus: Ca1, ca3,
  and dentate gyrus place cells have multiple place fields in large environments. PloS one, 2011.
Mijung Park, Gergo Bohner, and Jakob H Macke. Unlocking neural population non-stationarities
 using hierarchical dynamics models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015.
Karl Pearson. Liii. on lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space. The London,
  Edinburgh, and Dublin philosophical magazine and journal of science, 2(11):559–572, 1901.
Michael L Platt and Paul W Glimcher. Neural correlates of decision variables in parietal cortex.
 Nature, 1999.
Herbert E Rauch, F Tung, and Charlotte T Striebel. Maximum likelihood estimates of linear dynamic
  systems. AIAA journal, 1965.
Honi Sanders, César Rennó-Costa, Marco Idiart, and John Lisman. Grid cells and place cells: an
  integrated view of their navigational and memory function. Trends in neurosciences, 2015.
Omid G Sani, Hamidreza Abbaspourazad, Yan T Wong, Bijan Pesaran, and Maryam M Shanechi.
 Modeling behaviorally relevant neural dynamics enabled by preferential subspace identification.
 Nature Neuroscience, 24(1):140–149, 2021.
Steffen Schneider, Jin Hwa Lee, and Mackenzie Weygandt Mathis. Learnable latent embeddings for
  joint behavioural and neural analysis. Nature, 2023.
Anne C Smith and Emery N Brown. Estimating a state-space model from point process observations.
  Neural Computation, 2003.
Hugo J Spiers and Eleanor A Maguire. Thoughts, behaviour, and brain dynamics during navigation
  in the real world. Neuroimage, 2006.
Larry R Squire, Anna S van der Horst, Susan GR McDuff, Jennifer C Frascino, Ramona O Hopkins,
  and Kristin N Mauldin. Role of the hippocampus in remembering the past and imagining the
  future. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2010.
Kimberly L Stachenfeld, Matthew M Botvinick, and Samuel J Gershman. The hippocampus as a
  predictive map. Nature neuroscience, 2017.
Sander Tanni, William De Cothi, and Caswell Barry. State transitions in the statistically stable place
  cell population correspond to rate of perceptual change. Current Biology, 2022.
Jeffrey S Taube, Robert U Muller, and James B Ranck. Head-direction cells recorded from the post-
   subiculum in freely moving rats. i. description and quantitative analysis. Journal of Neuroscience,
   1990.
Michael E Tipping and Christopher M Bishop. Probabilistic principal component analysis. Journal
 of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 61(3):611–622, 1999.

                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 2008.
Aad W Van der Vaart. Asymptotic statistics, volume 3. Cambridge university press, 2000.
Jack Wang, Aaron Hertzmann, and David J Fleet. Gaussian process dynamical models. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 18, 2005.
James CR Whittington, Timothy H Muller, Shirley Mark, Guifen Chen, Caswell Barry, Neil Burgess,
  and Timothy EJ Behrens. The tolman-eichenbaum machine: unifying space and relational mem-
  ory through generalization in the hippocampal formation. Cell, 2020.
Alex Williams, Anthony Degleris, Yixin Wang, and Scott Linderman. Point process models for
  sequence detection in high-dimensional neural spike trains. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2020.
Brian A Wilt, Laurie D Burns, Eric Tatt Wei Ho, Kunal K Ghosh, Eran A Mukamel, and Mark J
  Schnitzer. Advances in light microscopy for neuroscience. Annual review of neuroscience, 2009.
Anqi Wu, Nicholas A Roy, Stephen Keeley, and Jonathan W Pillow. Gaussian process based non-
  linear latent structure discovery in multivariate spike train data. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2017.
Byron M Yu, Krishna V Shenoy, and Maneesh Sahani. Expectation propagation for inference in non-
  linear dynamical models with poisson observations. In 2006 IEEE Nonlinear Statistical Signal
  Processing Workshop. IEEE, 2006.
Byron M Yu, John P Cunningham, Gopal Santhanam, Stephen Ryu, Krishna V Shenoy, and Ma-
  neesh Sahani. Gaussian-process factor analysis for low-dimensional single-trial analysis of neural
  population activity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2008a.
Byron M Yu, John P Cunningham, Krishna V Shenoy, and Maneesh Sahani. Neural decoding of
  movements: From linear to nonlinear trajectory models. In Neural Information Processing: 14th
  International Conference, ICONIP 2007, Kitakyushu, Japan, November 13-16, 2007, Revised
  Selected Papers, Part I 14. Springer, 2008b.
Yuan Zhao and Il Memming Park. Variational latent gaussian process for recovering single-trial
  dynamics from population spike trains. Neural Computation, 2017.
Ding Zhou and Xue-Xin Wei. Learning identifiable and interpretable latent models of high-
  dimensional neural activity using pi-vae. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2020.
Petr Znamenskiy and Anthony M Zador. Corticostriatal neurons in auditory cortex drive decisions
  during auditory discrimination. Nature, 2013.
David Zoltowski, Jonathan Pillow, and Scott Linderman. A general recurrent state space framework
  for modeling neural dynamics during decision-making. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 11680–11691. PMLR, 2020.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Supplementary Material for “SIMPL: Scalable and hassle-free
optimisation of neural representations from behaviour”

A     BACKGROUND
A.1    E XPECTATION M AXIMIZATION

Expectation Maximization (EM, Dempster et al. 1977) is a widely used paradigm to perform statis-
tical estimation in latent variable models. The goal of EM is to maximise the Free Energy, a lower
bound on the log-likelihood log p(s; f ) of the data, given by (following the notations of Section 2.1):
                  F(f , q) := Eq(x) [log p(x, s ; f )] − Eq(x) [log q(x)] ≤ log p(s; f ),
where q is some probability distribution on the latent variable x. Importantly F is maximised,
and the lower bound becomes “tight”, at q ? := p(x|s ; f ), i.e. the posterior distribution of the
latent variable given the s and f . Moreover, for a fixed q, the only f -dependent term in F is
Eq(x) [log p(x, s ; f )]. To maximise F(f , q) — and thus also increase the log-likelihood — EM
produces a sequence (f (e) )e≥0 of parameters f (e) by invoking, at each step (or “epoch”) e, two well
known subroutines:

      • E-step: Define q (e) := p(x|s ; f (e−1) ); compute F 7−→ Eq(e) [log p(x, s ; f )]
      • M-step: Compute f (e) := arg maxf F(f , q (e) ) = arg maxf Eq(e) [log p(x, s ; f )]

with the property that log p(s; f (e) ) ≥ log p(s; f (e−1) ) for all e, grounding the use of EM to max-
imise the likelihood of the data. In our context it is important to note that, due to a Gaussianity
assumption, calculating the expectation in the E-step requires estimating the mean (and variance) of
the posterior p(x|s ; f (e−1) ) which can be treated as a point estimate of the latent trajectory, i.e. a
“decoding” of the latent from the spikes. Thus, in the context of neural data, EM offers a frame-
work to both estimate intensity functions via maximum likelihood, and also to decode the variable
encoded by the neurons.
Impossibility of Exact EM for Gaussian-Modulated Poisson Processes The E-step of the EM
algorithm requires computing a function defined as an expectation w.r.t p(x|s ; f (e−1) ). In the case
of Hidden Markov Models, such expectations are intractable to compute in closed form, unless
the latent variable x is discrete (i.e. numerical estimation), or both the transition and the emission
probabilities are Gaussian (with mean and variance depending linearly on x, (Rauch et al., 1965)). In
our particular case, exact inference in the model described in Section 2.1 is impossible because the
emission probabilities are Poisson with mean given by a non-linear function of x via each neurons
tuning curve.
In order to perform statistical inference for our spike train model — and avoid resorting to numerical
estimation which is computationally expensive — SIMPL makes a set of approximations which we
detail below. At a high level the goal is to convert the non-linear, non-Gaussian spiking observations,
into a variable which is linear and Gaussian with resepct to the latent, thus EM can be performed
exactly using a Kalman smoother.

A.2    L INEAR G AUSSIAN S TATE S PACE M ODELS AND K ALMAN S MOOTHING

Linear Gaussian State Space Models (LGSSM) are dynamical systems of the form:

                                zt+1 = Ft zt +  t ,  t ∼ N (0d , Qt )
                                                                                                       (5)
                                  xt = Ht zt + δt , δt ∼ N (0m , Rt ).
where z ∈ Rd , x ∈ Rm , Ft , Qt ∈ Rd×d , Ht ∈ Rp×d and Rt ∈ Rm×m . LGSSMs can be
used as latent variable models given some observed data x, where z is treated as a latent vari-
able. While these models are limited in their expressiveness, their benefits are that inference (here,
the “E-steps”) can be done very efficiently: not only is the posterior p(z1 , . . . , zT |x1 , . . . , xT )
a Gaussian distribution (of dimension T d), but all of its marginals and pairwise marginals


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


p(zt |x1 , . . . , xT ), p(zt , zt+1 |x1 , . . . , xT ) (crucially, the only distributions needed for learning the
parameters of LGSSM via EM ) can be computed jointly in O(T ) time using an efficient technique
known as Kalman Smoothing (Kalman, 1960; Rauch et al., 1965).
Such a scaling contrasts with naive numerical binning-based alternatives for inference in continuous,
non-Gaussian State Space Models, which require maintaining an estimate of each bin — a vector
of size n (no. bins) where n grows exponentially with the dimension of the latent space, as used
in e.g. Denovellis et al. 2021. Instead, for LGSSMs, the Gaussianity means only the mean and
covariance of the marginal posterior distributions — of size d and d2 respectively — need to be
stored. This is not memory intensive and, perhaps more importantly, the Kalman Filter proceeds
to compute them in a combined O(T ) time. In our experiments, we found the cost of the Kalman
Filter to be negligible relative to the kernel evaluations which are the main computational bottleneck
of SIMPL.
Note from here onwards we will return to using x to denote the latent variable in the LGSSM, and
x
b or s for observations.

B        SIMPL AS AN APPROXIMATE EM ALGORITHM
B.1       MLE- BASED A PPROXIMATE E-S TEP

Instead of q (e) = p(x|s ; f (e−1) ), SIMPL computes an approximation to q (e) ≈ qb(e) =
p(x|bx ; f (e−1) ) where x
                         b is the Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE) of x given the observations s
and the current tuning curves f (e−1) defined as:
                                                                              T X
                                                                              X N
                      b = arg max log p(s|x ; f (e−1) ) = arg max
                      x                                                                 log p(sti |xt ; f (e−1) )
                                   x                                      x
                                                                              t=1 i=1
                                       N
                                       X
               =⇒ x
                  bt = arg max               log p(sti |xt ; f (e−1) ).
                                  xt
                                       i=1

As defined, computing the MLE returns a point estimate of the true trajectory that led to the observed
spike train s, however we seek a posterior. In particular, MLE does not use the prior knowledge
encoded by p(x).
To find the approximate posterior we note that, as a function of s, x
                                                                    b is itself a random variable. In
the many neurons limit, and under certain regularity assumptions, the distribution of this random
variable converges to a Gaussian, a fact known as asymptotic normality. In other words; though s
(conditioned on x) is a non-Gaussian random variable, x b (a deterministic function of s) is approxi-
mately Gaussian in the many neurons limit and thus satisfied the conditions of the LGSSM.
We restate a formal statement of this asymptotic normality result in the case of independent, but
non-identically distributed observations 3 originally established in Bradley & Gart (1962), and re-
formulated using the notations of the model at hand. For simplicity, we will consider the case where
only P distinct intensity functions f1 , . . . , fP exist, although versions of this result exist without this
assumption.
Theorem B.1 (Asymptotic Normality of the MLE ). Let x?t ∈ Rd . Let s = (s1t , . . . , sN t ) be
independent random variables with probability densities p(sti |x?t ; ft(i) ), where t(i) ∈ {1, . . . , P } is
the index of the intensity function ft(i) that generated the spike train sti . For p ∈ 1, . . . , P , denote
np the number of times the intensity function fp appeared in the sequence ft(i) . Assume that the
MLE x bt exists and it is unique. Then, under mild regularity conditions, we have:
                                √                      d
                                  N (bxt − x?t ) −−−−→ N (0, I(x?t )−1 )
                                                           N →∞

                      P
where I(x?t ) :=            µp Ep(st ;fp ) Hess(log p(st |x?t ; fp )) is the Fisher Information matrix of the model
                      P
                      p=1
           d                                                                                      n
at x?t , → means convergence in distribution, and we defined µp := limN →∞ Np .
    3
        The i.i.d case was established in Fisher (1925)


                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The asymptotic Gaussianity of the MLE in the many neurons limit suggests performing approximate
inference in a surrogate Hidden Markov Model, with the same transition probabilities p(xt+1 |xt ) as
the original ones, but where the observations s are replaced by xb. Leveraging Theorem B.1, SIMPL
approximates the emission probabilities p(b   xt |xt ) by the Gaussian distribution N (xt , Σt ), where
Σt := (N I(b  xt ))−1 ≈ (N I(xt ))−1 , the Fisher information of the spikes.
Temporarily ignoring the xt -dependence of the covariance matrices Σt and treating them as deter-
ministic (discussed below), the variables (xt , x
                                                bt ) then form the following latent variable system with
hidden variables xt and observed variables x bt given by:

                                           xt+1 | xt      ∼     N (xt , σv2 I),
                                                                                                               (6)
                                             b t | xt
                                             x            ∼     N (xt , Σt )

This model is precisely an instance of Linear Gaussian State Space Models defined in Equation 5
and the four matrices set to:
                                       Ft = I                   (constant)
                                       Ht = I                   (constant)
                                       Qt = σv2 I               (constant)
                                       R = Σt                   (time-varying).

This correspondence allows SIMPL to compute an approximation of the marginal posterior distribu-
tions p(xt |s) ≈ p(xt |b
                       x) using Kalman Smoothing (Kalman, 1960; Rauch et al., 1965). Importantly,
the MLE estimates x bt can be obtained in parallel for all t; the only sequential procedure remaining
being the Kalman Smoothing step. The trajectory x  b(e) of SIMPL’s E-step is then set to the mean of
  (e)
qb .

B.2       S PIKE S MOOTHING AS A GENERALIZED M-S TEP

SIMPL’s M-step is computationally cheap and interpretable. However, it differs from the M step of
the EM algorithm, which we recall is given by:

                        f (e),EM := arg max F(f , q (e) ) = arg max Eq(e) [log p(x, s ; f )]                   (7)
                                            f                         f

Below, we reconcile the two approaches by showing that SIMPL M-step can be seen as instances
of a more general “model fitting” M-step.
To see why, note the objective function of a standard M-step equals (up to a constant in f ) the nega-
tive KL divergence between the joint distribution 4 qb(e) (x|s)p(s) (observable through samples) and
the model p(s, x; f ). Thus, a standard M-step can be understood as minimizing this KL divergence
approximately, by replacing the expectation over p(s) by an empirical average over the true data s,
an approximation which is asymptotically consistent in the large number of time steps limit under
suitable ergodicity conditions (Billingsley, 1961).
Similarly, SIMPL’s M-Step also fits the model p(s, x, f ) to the “data” distribution qb(e) (x|s)p(s).
However, instead of doing so by minimizing the KL divergence between the data and the model,
it does so using a kernel-based estimate 5 . Thus, Both M-steps can be understood as having the
same goal, simply differing in their solution to solve it. In that sense, SIMPL’s M-step is indeed a
generalized M-step.


C        I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Below we provide some implementation details that were important to maximise the computational
efficiency of the method.

    4
        We denote q k (x) by q k (x|s) to highlight the dependence between x and s.
    5
        Additionally, it replaces the expectation over qb(e) (x|s) by a one-sample estimate of it through x̃


                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1     M AXIMIZING SIMPL’ S COMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY

C.1.1    C OMPUTATIONAL BOTTLENECKS IN SIMPL
A single evaluation of the log-likelihood log p(st |xt ) requires evaluating the kernel-based rate map
estimates given in Equation 7. This takes O(T ) time since it involves a sum across all timesteps.
Moreover, this calculation will be repeated itself T -times for each step of the Kalman smoother in
order to (1) compute the MLEs x   bt (which naively require gradient ascent on log p(st |xt )) and (2)
evaluate the MLE variance Σt := (N I(b   xt ))−1 = (N Hx (log p(s|b         xt ))−1 . All in all, an exact
                                                                      xt ))(b
                                                                   2
implementation of SIMPL’s E-step would have quadratic O(T ) time complexity, which would be
prohibitively slow for long datasets. Moreover, the second-order differentiation needed to compute
I(bxt ) is also computationally expensive (formally, in introduces a large constant factor in front of
the O(T 2 ) term).
In the next sections, we describe additional approximations which allow SIMPL to estimate the
MLE and its variance in O(T ) time and without differentiating the rate maps.

C.1.2    L INEAR - TIME MLE ESTIMATION
Naive gradient-based solution The naive way to calculate the MLE x         bt is to evaluate all N tun-
ing curves (recall each evaluation costs O(T )) for some location x, use these to establish the log-
likelihood log p(st |x), calculate the gradient of this log-likelihood w.r.t. x, and then take, for ex-
ample, k gradient descent steps to find the MLE. This process is repeated for each timestep t in the
Kalman smoother, leading to a quadratic time complexity of O(kN T 2 ).

SIMPL’s approach To compute the MLE in linear time SIMPL bypasses the need to recalculate
the tuning curves at each time step by, instead, binning them onto a discretised grid of points once
at the start of each iteration.
Formally SIMPL computes n evaluations the tuning curves f̃ := (f̃1 , . . . , f̃n ) := (f (g1 ), . . . , f (gn ))
on a grid of n points G = (g1 , . . . , gn ). This has time complexity O(N nT ). We use a uniform
rectangular grid of points (the smallest rectangle containing the full observed behavioural variable)
of spacing dx. For example, in a 1 m × 1 m environment with dx = 0.02 m, this would yield a grid
of 50×50 points (n = 2500).
Then, given f̃ , SIMPL then discretizes the log-likelihood functions log p(st |x) over that same grid:
                                                                                           ˜   s
                                                 N
                                                 X                         N
                                                                           X           e−fij f˜ijtj
                      ˜lit := log p(st |gi ) =         log p(stj |gi ) =         log
                                                 j=1                       j=1
                                                                                         stj !
                                                                                                            (8)
                                                  N
                                                  X
                                           =−            f˜ij + stj log f˜ij − log stj !
                                                   j=1

where we noted f˜ij := [f̃ (gi )]j . Finally, given such evaluations, SIMPL sets its approximation of
the MLE to be
                               bt := arg max log p(st |g) = arg max ˜lit
                               x
                                          g∈G                               i

This way of calculating the MLE has linear time complexity yielding an improvement for n < kT .

C.1.3    L INEAR - TIME DERIVATIVE - FREE MLE VARIANCE ESTIMATION
A similar strategy could be employed to also compute I(b     xt ) := −Hx (log p(st |b
                                                                                    xt ))(b
                                                                                          xt ), which
appears in Σt . Here Hx is the Hessian operator defined as Hx (f )(x) := ∇2x f (x). To do
so, one could compute the Hessian of the rate maps and their logarithm on that grid, from
which any Hx (log p(s|b   xt ))(b
                                x ) at the grid-point-based MLE obtained above can be evaluated as
                               PtN
Hx (log p(st |gi ))(gi ) = − j=1 Hx (fj )(gi ) + stj Hx (log fj )(gi ). This would be linear in time
however, we found that differentiating f could be very slow.
Instead SIMPL takes an entirely different approach and produces an estimation of Σt by instead
estimating the variance of the posterior distribution p(xt |st ) ∝ p(xt )p(st |xt ) = p(st , xt ). The


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


posterior variance and the MLE variance are expected to closely match, as discussed in our theoret-
ical justification above. Moreover, as this posterior is available analytically up to the normalizing
constant p(st ), its variance can be approximately computed by binning p(xt |st ) onto the same grid
G introduced above, yielding the following fast estimator for Σt .

                                                      µ )(g − µt )T
                                      P                                          P
                                         i p̃it (gi −
                                                    P t i
                                                                                     gi p̃it
              Σt ≈ Cov p(xt |st ) ≈                                   ,     µt := Pi                    (9)
                                                     i p̃it                         i p̃it


where p̃it := exp(˜lit ) = p(st |gi ). Intuitively, this is equivalent to fitting a multivariate Gaussian to
the binned likelihood map. The covariance matrix of this Gaussian is then used as an approximation
of the MLE variance. We provide a theoretical argument justifying the validity of this formula below.

Theoretical Justification Equation 9 is justified by the Bernstein Von Mises theorem, which states
that the difference between the posterior distribution and the distribution of the MLE vanishes in the
many neurons limit. We restate this theorem using the notations of our paper, assuming a unique
rate map, and without stating some of the required regularity assumptions for simplicity. We refer
the reader to (Van der Vaart, 2000, Theorem 10.1, p.141–144) for the full version.
Theorem C.1 (Bernstein-von Mises). Let x?t ∈ Rd . Let st = (s1t , . . . , sN t ) be i.i.d random vari-
ables with probability density p(st |x?t ; f ). Assume that the MLE x bt exists and it is unique. Then,
under mild regularity conditions, for any prior p on xt , we have:
                                                                          p(st )
                                             xt , (N I(x?t ))−1 )kTV → 0
                            kp(xt |st ) − N (b
                                                                          N →∞

       p(s)
where → denotes convergence in probability, and k · kTV denotes the Total Variation norm on
bounded measures.

From this theorem, we thus have that the (random) posterior distribution behaves (in total varia-
tion) as a Gaussian whose covariance matrix is precisely the asymptotic variance of the MLE. Note
however that convergence in total variation does not a priori imply convergence of variances. Fur-
ther work could examine under which assumptions such a convergence of variances may hold. In
practice, we found that this approximation yielded a satisfying trade-off between performance and
accuracy.

C.2    I TERATIVE L INEAR R EALIGNMENT OF THE TRAJECTORIES

To improve the identifiability properties and the numerical stability of SIMPL, we also transform
the decoded latent trajectory at each iteration using a linear mapping which maximally aligns it
                               (e)         (e)                            P     (0)        (e)
with behaviour defined as xt ← Mxt + c where M, c = arg min t kxt − (Mxt + c)k.
This approach ensures the scale, orientation and centre of the optimised latent trajectory are tied
to behaviour, preventing accumulation of linear shifts/rotations across iterations and allowing us
to interpret the latent relative to, and in the same units as, behaviour. We suspect that performing
this alignment on all iterates after the optimisation would yield similar results. Because the trans-
formed latent necessarily has similar scale to the behaviour — which was used to set the size of the
discretised environment — we can reuse the same discrete grid for the latent avoiding the need to
rediscretize the environment at each iteration.

C.3    H YPERPARAMETERS SETTINGS

SIMPL has two model hyperparameters:

       • v: the diffusion rate for Kalman smoothing, which sets a prior over expected velocity of
         the latent variable. Units are in ms−1 .
       • σ: the bandwidth of the kernel used in the M-step to smooth spikes. Units are in m.

Additionally there are some implementation-specific parameters:

       • dx: the bin size for the variance estimation of the MLE. Units are in m.

                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • dt: the time step of the discretization of the latent variable. Units are in s.

       • E: the number of iterations of the EM algorithm.

Finally, in all simulations we used a test fraction of 10% and held out ‘speckled’ data segments of
length 1 second to evaluate the performance of the model. We provide in Table 1 the value of these
hyperparameters for the Artificial Grid Cell Dataset and the Real Hippocampal Dataset.
                                     Table 1: Hyperparameters settings
                       Dataset                            v            σ       dx         dt      E
        Artificial Grid Cell Dataset (Fig. 2)       0.4 ms−1         0.02 m   0.02 m    0.1 s     10
                                                                −1
         Real Hippocampal Dataset (Fig. 3)          1.0 ms           0.1 m    0.04 m    0.2 s     10
       Motor task dataset (2D) 6 (Fig. 4c&d)              1.0         0.1      0.02     0.05 s    10
          Motor task dataset (4D) (Fig. 4e)               1.5         0.09     0.1      0.05 s    10


C.4    S YNTHETIC DATA GENERATION WITH THE R AT I NAB OX PACKAGE

All synthetic grid cell data were generated using the RatInABox package (George et al., 2024a).
In this model, an agent moves through a 1 m by 1 m environment following a smooth, continuous
random motion policy (details can be found in the original paper)under default parameters whereby
the agent’s mean speed is 0.08 m/s. Specifically, the RatInABox model was used to generate the
true latent trajectory, denoted as x? . This trajectory was then “noised” to produce the trajectory
used as the initial condition for SIMPL, denoted as x(0) , which represents the animal’s measured
position. The noise, or “discrepancy” vector ∆x := x(0) −x? , was generated by sampling a velocity
trajectory from a 2D Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process with zero mean and a coherence time scale of 3
seconds. This velocity trajectory was then integrated to obtain the discrepancy. Finally, the agent’s
behaviour x(0) was additionally influenced by the same environmental forces implemented in the
standard RatInABox model, i.e. the agent smoothly drifts away from walls to avoid crashing. The
scale of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process was adjusted so that the mean discrepancy between the
latent and observed trajectories was 20 cm in pen-space (i.e. away from walls).
Grid cells were modelled as the thresholded sum of three cosine plane waves (see RatInABox meth-
ods) with a width ratio—ratio of field width to inter-field distance—of 0.55. Each grid cell is as-
signed a wave direction θi , gridscale λi and 2D phase offset φi = [φ1 , φ2 ]T . Specifically, N=225
grid cells were divided into 3 modules of N=75 grid cells. Within each module all cells had the same
grid scale (0.3, 0.5 and 0.8 m) and wave direction (0, 0.1 and 0.2 rad) but random phase offsets, ap-
proximately matching grid cells in the brain. Grid cell firing rates are all scaled to a maximum of 10
Hz.
Grid cells firing rates are determined by the latent position at time t, i.e. fi (t) = f GC (x?t ), from
which spikes are sampled according to an inhomogeneous Poisson process Nspikes (t, t + dt) ∼
Poi(fi (t) · dt)


C.5    T EST- TRAIN PARTITIONING

To assess performance we partition the spike data matrix, s, into testing and training sets, Stest , Strain .
Inference is performed solely on the training set and we then track the log-likelihood of data in both
                                                                         (e) (e)
sets (Fig. 2d, left), e.g. `(e) = |Stest |−1
                                               P
                                          test  (i,t)∼S test log p(sti |xt , fi ). This partitioning requires
careful consideration: entire time intervals cannot be withheld for testing without impairing the
model’s ability to infer the latent over this period. Likewise, entire neurons cannot be withheld
without impairing the model’s capacity to estimate their tuning curves. Instead, we adopt a speckled
train-test mask previously used in latent variable modelling set-ups (Williams et al., 2020) which
withholds for testing extended chunks of time bins arranged in an irregular “speckled” pattern across
the data matrix (totalling 10% of the data).


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.6   B ENCHMARKING DETAILS

In section 3.5, we benchmarked SIMPL against four comparable methods on the synthetic grid
cell datasets. For all techniques, tuning curves were visualised in the same way as for SIMPL: by
extracting the latent trajectories after optimisation and using kernel smoothing to construct the rate
maps, i.e., a single “M-step.” Default parameters were used for all methods. CEBRA constrains its
N-dimensional latent space to lie on an (N-1)-dimensional hypersphere. We disabled this constraint
for the 2D grid cell dataset. For GPLVM, we used a variant that exploits induction points to improve
scalability with the amount of data, performed a grid-search across the number induction points, and
reported the best result. For GPDM, which does not feature induction points and thus has a cubic
complexity w.r.t T , we restricted training for this technique to 5 minutes of data (compared to 60
minutes for the other methods) to keep computation times under 1 hour,. For pi-VAE, we set the
                                         (0)
“task variable” ut to the behaviour xt , and the latent zt to be the true position xt . Additionally, we
set the distribution p(zt |ut ) (e.g. the position given behavior mapping) to be a Gaussian distribution
                    (0)
centered at ut = xt , and a fixed variance.

D     A DDITIONAL RESULTS

D.1    T OY MODEL OF A DISCRETE LATENT VARIABLE TASK

Before testing SIMPL on a large temporally continuous dataset we constructed a smaller dataset
akin to a discrete two-alternative forced choice task (2AFC) (Fig. 7) — a widely studied decision–
making paradigm (Platt & Glimcher, 1999; Bogacz et al., 2006; Znamenskiy & Zador, 2013; Lieder
et al., 2019). The true latent states x?t ∈ {0, 1} are binary and have no temporal structure (here
subscript t indexes trials not time), analagous to a series of random “left” or “right” choices (Fig.
7b). This latent state is stochastically encoded by a population of neurons with random tuning curves
giving the Bernoulli emission probabilities under each latent state:

                                                fi0 ∼ U(0, 1) x = 0,
                                    fi? (x) =
                                                fi1 ∼ U(0, 1) x = 1,

                      x?t ∼ Bernoulli(0.5) and       sti |xt ∼ Bernoulli(fi? (x?t )).
Data is then sampled for T = 50 trials and N = 15 neurons as shown in Fig. 7. Initial conditions,
 (0)
xt , are generated from the true latent by randomly resampling a fraction of trials ρ = 0.5 (Fig.
7b). This partial resample represents an initial discrepancy between the behavioural measurement
and the true internal state of the agent.
We perform inference on this dataset using a reduced version of the model (S IMPL - R). In the
M-step, tuning curves were fitted by calculating the average activity of a neuron across each
                           (e)          P           (e)     P      (e)
latent condition (e.g. fi (x) =            t sti δ(xt , x)/   t δ(xt , x), conceptually similar to ker-
nel smoothing). For the E-step, each latent was the decoded according to the maximum like-
lihood estimate under the observed spikes and tuning curve estimates from the previous epoch:
  (e+1)                 P                  (e)
xt      = arg maxx i log p(sti |x, fi ) (there is no time dependence between latents, thus no
Kalman smoothing). This process was repeated for 5 epochs and, with high reliability, converged on
the true latents after approximately two (Fig. 7c & d, distributions show repeat for 1000 randomly
seeded datasets, dotted lines show ceiling performance on a model perfectly initialised with noise-
less x(0) = x? ). We repeated this experiment for various values of ρ: latent recovery was almost
perfect when ρ was small (i.e. when the initial conditions were close to the true latent), dropping off
as ρ approached 1. At ρ = 1 when the conditions were completely random, the model was biased to
recover a latent space that is either perfectly correlated or perfectly anti-correlated (“left” ↔ “right”)
with the true latent (Fig. 7c, right), an isomorphic solution.

D.2    H YPERPARAMETER SWEEP

We swept over the two hyperparameters v (the velocity prior) and σ (the kernel bandwidth) to assess
how sensitive SIMPL is to these hyperparameters, as shown in Figure 8. For this we used the
same synthetic grid cell dataset used in Fig. 2. Notably, SIMPL’s performance (measured in terms


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (a)            data, s ~ p(•|x★, f★)                (c) correlation           log-likelihood             final corr. (d) tuning curves
    15                                                   1                -290                          1                              f(0)   f(5) f★
 neurons


                                                                                                                                 Neurons
           0                                            -1            -460              -1
               0             trials                   50 0 epoch, e 5      0 epoch, e 5    0                        ρ        1

    (b)             true latent x★           “measured behaviour” x(0)                     x(5) “optimised” latent
               L
               R
                                                 •••                                               •••                                  LR LR LR
                                                                                                                                       0          1
                    0                        trials                50 0                        trials                       50           P(spike)
Figure 7: A two-alternative forced choice task (2AFC) toy-model. (a) Data generation: Spikes are sampled
from a simple generative model. For each of T=50 independent trials a random binary latent — analogous to a
“left” or “right” choice — is encoded by a population of N=15 neurons with randomly initialised tuning curves.
(b) Model performance: Starting from a noisy estimate (yellow) of the true latent (black) where a fraction
ρ = 0.5 of trials are resampled, S IMPL - R recovers the true latent variables (green) with high accuracy. (c)
Left: Correlation between x(e) and x? . Middle: Log-likelihood, log p(s|x(e) , f (e) ). Right: Final correlation
between x(5) and x? as a function of initialization noise ρ. Violin plots show distributions over 1000 randomly
seeded datasets, dotted lines show ceiling performance of a perfectly initialised model (x(0) = x? ) (d) Tuning
curves.



of the final error, see panel b) is relatively stable across a wide range of hyperparameters; kernel
bandwidths between 0.1 cm and 5 cm and velocity priors between 0.2 m/s and 1 m/s all yield similar
performance. When the tuning curves are confirmed that kernel bandwidth has a significant effect
on their appearance. Broader kernels give smoother tuning curves eventually blurring the individual
grid fields together whilst narrower kernels give sharper tuning curves eventual leading to overfitting
where individual spikes are resolved.
                                      (a)                                                                   (b)
                                       10



                                       1.0                                                                          error
                                                                                                                    [cm] 40 20 0
                                                                                                              10                   CPU-
                        σv [ms-1]                                                             σv [ms-1] 0.41                       sec
                                                                                                                                     60
                        speed prior 0.4                                                       speed prior0.2                         10
                                                                                                             0.05                     1
                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                    0.5

                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                    2

                                                                                                                    20


                                       0.2
                                                                                                                   σ [cm]
                                                                                                              kernel bandwidth


                                      0.05

                                              0.1        0.5       2          5       20

                                                                σ [cm]
                                                           kernel bandwidth
Figure 8: Performance of SIMPL on the synthetic grid cell dataset as a function of the hyperparameters v
(speed prior) and σ (kernel bandwidth). (a) Tuning curves. (b) Final error between the latent and ground truth
(colour) and total compute time (size).


D.3                N ON - CONTINUOUS HIPPOCAMPAL REPLAY DATASET

Since SIMPL places an explicit prior on latent trajectories which are smooth and continuous we
tested whether it could be used to model a dataset where the latent variable is non-continuous. For
this we simulated a synthetic “replay” dataset from N = 225 small Gaussian place cells. In this
dataset the latent variable and behaviour perfectly match except for regular, brief periods of “replay”
where the latent variable jumps to a new location. Using the same hyperparameters as in the main
text we found that SIMPL was able to recover the latent variable, capturing (or “decoding”) the
replay events with high accuracy (Fig. 9), despite its smoothness prior.


                                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            (a) 1           x
                            y   Ground truth   Epoch 0 (behaviour)                    (b)


              pos [m]
                 0
                 1          x
                            y   Ground truth   Epoch 10

              pos [m]

                 0
                        0                      time [mins]                            1
Figure 9: A synthetic hippocampal “replay” dataset. (a) One minute of trajectory, x-coordinate in solid line,
y-coordinate in dashed. The behaviour (light-green, top panel) is smooth, actually matching the latent most
of the time except when the latent takes regular, brief discontinuous jumps reminiscent of hippocampal replay
events. After optimisation SIMPL is able to recover the latent (dark-green, bottom panel) and capture the
replay events with high accuracy. (b) Spike raster plots; spikes plotted against the behaviour, optimised latent
and ground truth latent.


D.4    AUTOMATIC PLACE FIELD DETECTION

In Fig. 3, it was shown that the tuning curves of place cells in the hippocampus undergo statistically
significant changes when optimised using SIMPL. For this analysis, individual place fields were
automatically identified from the binned rate maps as isolated regions of elevated activity within a
cells tuning curve. This was done by thresholding the activity of each neuron at 1 Hz and identifying
contiguous regions of activity with a peak firing rate above 2 Hz and a total area less than half that
of the full environment, similar to approaches taken in previous work (Tanni et al., 2022).

E     S UMMARY TABLE OF RELATED METHODS
Here we summarize some of the most relevant LVM and dimensionality reduction techniques in the
context of our five key desiderata as described in the related work section. These are:

      1. Complex tuning curves: Does the model learn/infer non-linear tuning curves as opposed to
         linear/exponential-linear/etc. tuning curves.
      2. Smooth latent dynamics: Does the model impose smooth temporal dynamics on the latent
         space (e.g. by assuming a linear dynamical system, Gaussian process or using an RNN), as
         opposed to treating each time point independently.
      3. Spike-friendly: Was the method designed for spiking data. For probabilistic models, this
         refers to whether the generative noise model is Poisson as opposed to, say, Gaussian.
      4. Exploit behaviour: Does/can the model use behaviour (as an observation, contrastive loss-
         target, initialisation, or otherwise) to guide latent discovery.
      5. Scalable: Can the model scale to datasets of long duration. Specifically, in available open-
         source implementations of the method does training/inference have near-linear time com-
         plexity. Note this does not mean that compute time is necessarily fast in an absolute sense,
         just that scaling is linear.


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Model                            Complex        Smooth         Spike-         Exploit be-    Scalable
                                  tuning         latent         friendly       haviour
                                  curves         dynamics
 SIMPL (Our method)               Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
                                                                                    §
 GPLVM (Lawrence, 2003)           Yes            N/S            No             Yes            Yes#
 P-GPLVM (Wu et al., 2017)        Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes§           No
 M-GPLVM (Jensen et al.,          Yes            No             No             No             Yes#
 2020)
 faeLVM (Bjerke et al., 2023)     Yes†           Yes            Yes            No             Yes
 PfLDS (Gao et al., 2016)         Yes            Yes            Yes            No             Yes
 VIND (Hernandez et al.,          Yes            Yes            Yes            No             Yes
 2018)
 pi-VAE (Zhou & Wei, 2020)        Yes            No             Yes            Yes            Yes
 CEBRA (Schneider et al.,         N/A            No             Yes            Yes            Yes
 2023)
 MIND(Low et al., 2018)           Yes            No             No             No             Yes
 LFADS (Pandarinath et al.,       No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
 2018)
 TNDM (Hurwitz et al., 2021)      No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
 GP-SDEs (Duncker et al.,         No             Yes            N/S            N/S            Yes
 2019)
 rSLDS (Linderman et al.,         No             Yes            No             Yes§           Yes
 2016)
 gpSLDS (Hu et al., 2024)         No             Yes            No             Yes§           Yes
                                                                                    §
 GPDM (Wang et al., 2005)         Yes            Yes            No             Yes            No
 MM-GPVAE (Gondur et al.,         No             Yes            Yes            No             Yes
 2023)
 PSID (Sani et al., 2021)         No             Yes            No             Yes            Yes
 GPFA (Yu et al., 2008a)          No             Yes            No             No             Yes#
 P-GPFA (Nam, 2015)               No             Yes            Yes            No             No
 SSMDM (Zoltowski et al.,         No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
 2020)
 PLNDE (Kim et al., 2021)         No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
 GLDS (Kalman, 1960)              No             Yes            No             No             Yes
 DKF (Krishnan et al., 2015)      Yes            Yes            No             No             Yes
 PLDS (Macke et al., 2011)        No             Yes            Yes            No             Yes
 UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018)      N/A            No             No             No             No
 TSNE (Van der Maaten &           N/A            No             No             No             No
 Hinton, 2008)
 pPCA (Pearson, 1901; Tip-        No             No             No             No             Yes
 ping & Bishop, 1999)
   dPCA (Kobak et al., 2016)          No           No             No           Yes            Yes
Table 3: A table of comparable models and their properties. N/A means the criterion is not applicable to the
model. N/S means the criterion is not specified or may be dependent on implementation specifics. Techniques
in bold are compared to on our benchmark dataset in Fig. 6
#
  : Scalable if using an implementation making induction point approximations.
§
  : Algorithm could be initialised at behaviour.
†
  : Assumes neurons in a given ensemble have a shared tuning curve structure (e.g. Gaussian) with neuron-
specific transformations (e.g. shift and scale)


                                                      25
