Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M ULTI - OBJECTIVE D IFFERENTIABLE N EURAL
A RCHITECTURE S EARCH
 Rhea Sanjay Sukthanker1∗, Arber Zela1∗, Benedikt Staffler2 , Samuel Dooley3 ,
 Josif Grabocka4 , Frank Hutter1,5
 1
   University of Freiburg, 2 Bosch Center for AI, 3 Meta,
 4
   University of Technology Nuremberg, 5 ELLIS Institute Tübingen



                                               A BSTRACT
            Pareto front profiling in multi-objective optimization (MOO), i.e., finding a diverse
            set of Pareto optimal solutions, is challenging, especially with expensive objectives
            that require training a neural network. Typically, in MOO for neural architecture
            search (NAS), we aim to balance performance and hardware metrics across devices.
            Prior NAS approaches simplify this task by incorporating hardware constraints into
            the objective function, but profiling the Pareto front necessitates a computationally
            expensive search for each constraint. In this work, we propose a novel NAS
            algorithm that encodes user preferences to trade-off performance and hardware
            metrics, yielding representative and diverse architectures across multiple devices
            in just a single search run. To this end, we parameterize the joint architectural
            distribution across devices and multiple objectives via a hypernetwork that can
            be conditioned on hardware features and preference vectors, enabling zero-shot
            transferability to new devices. Extensive experiments involving up to 19 hardware
            devices and 3 different objectives demonstrate the effectiveness and scalability
            of our method. Finally, we show that, without any additional costs, our method
            outperforms existing MOO NAS methods across a broad range of qualitatively
            different search spaces and datasets, including MobileNetV3 on ImageNet-1k, an
            encoder-decoder transformer space for machine translation and a decoder-only
            space for language modelling.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The ability to make good tradeoffs between predictive accuracy and efficiency (in terms of latency
and/or energy consumption) has become crucial in an age of ever increasing neural networks
complexity and size (Alabdulmohsin et al., 2023; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Kaplan et al., 2020; Zhai
et al., 2022) and a plethora of embedded devices. However, finding the right trade-off remains a
challenging task that typically requires human intervention and a lot of trial-and-error across devices.
With multiple conflicting objectives, it becomes infeasible to optimize all of them simultaneously
and return a single solution. Ideally, NAS should empower users to choose from a set of diverse
Pareto optimal solutions that represent their preferences regarding the trade-off between objectives.
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) (White et al., 2023) provides a principled framework to search for
network architectures in an automated fashion. Several works (Cai et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021a;
Elsken et al., 2019b; Wang et al., 2020b) have extended NAS for multi-objective optimization (MOO),
considering performance and hardware efficiency metrics like latency and energy consumption.
However, to the best of our knowledge, no existing gradient-based method returns the full Pareto front
for the MOO problem at hand without repeating their search routine multiple times with different
hardware constraints.
In this work, we propose a scalable and hardware-aware Multi-Objective Differentiable Neural
Architecture Search (MODNAS) algorithm that efficiently trains a single supernet which can be
used to read off Pareto-optimal solutions for different user preferences and different target devices,
without any additional search steps. To search across devices, we frame the problem as a multi-task,
multi-objective optimization problem, where each task (device) has multiple (conflicting) objectives,
    ∗
        Equal contribution. Email to: {sukthank, zelaa}@cs.uni-freiburg.de


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               0
                                                        2       3
                                               1


Figure 1: MODNAS overview. Given a set of T devices, MODNAS seeks to optimize M (potentially
conflicting) objectives across these devices. To this end, it employs a MetaHypernetwork HΦ (r, dt ),
that takes as input a scalarization r, representing the user preferences, and a device embedding dt , to
yield an un-normalized architectural distribution α̃. The Architect uses α̃ to sample differentiable
discrete architectures, used in the Supernetwork to estimate accuracy and in the MetaPredictor
to estimate the other M − 1 loss functions (e.g. latency, energy consumption) for every device. By
iterating over devices and sampling scalarizations uniformly from the M -dimensional simplex, at
each iteration we update the MetaHypernetwork using multiple gradient descent (MGD).

e.g., classification accuracy and latency. The user’s preferences are modelled by a preference vector
that defines a scalarization (weighted sum), of the different objectives. This preference vector, along
with features of the hardware of interest, is fed to a hypernetwork (Ha et al., 2017) that outputs
continuous architectural parameters α. To search in the space of architectures, we employ a one-shot
model and a bi-level optimization scheme, as is typically done in gradient-based NAS. In our case,
however, the upper-level parameters are the hypernetwork weights, optimized in expectation over
different preference vectors and hardware devices via multiple gradient descent (Désidéri, 2012).
To evaluate our method, we conduct experiments on multiple NAS search spaces, including CNN
and Transformer architectures, and up to 3 objectives across 19 hardware devices. While other NAS
methods that utilize hardware constraints in their search objectives require substantial search costs
both for each new constraint and each new hardware, MODNAS addresses both in a zero-shot manner,
without extra search cost, while yielding higher quality solutions.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
1. We present a principled approach for Multi-objective Differentiable NAS, that leverages hyper-
   networks and multiple gradient descent for fast Pareto-Front approximation across devices.
2. This work is the first to provide a global view of the Pareto solutions with just a single search
   run, without the need to repeat search or fine-tune on new target devices.
3. Extensive evaluation of our method across 4 different search spaces (NAS-Bench-201, Mo-
   bileNetV3, an encoder-decoder and a decoder-only Transformer space), 3 tasks (image classi-
   fication, machine translation and language modeling), and up to 19 hardware devices and 3
   objectives, show both improved efficiency and performance in comparison to previous approaches
   that use a constrained objective in their search.
To facilitate reproducibility, we provide our code in https://github.com/automl/modnas.

2    BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
In this section, before describing our algorithm, we introduce some basic concepts, definitions and
related work. Refer to Appendix J for an extended related work.
Multi-objective optimization (MOO) for Multi-Task Learning. Consider a multi-task dataset D
consisting of N instances, where the feature vector of the i−th instance is denoted as xi ∈ X , and the
M -many associated target variables as yi1 ∈ Y 1 , . . . , yiM ∈ Y M . Moreover, consider there exists a
family of parametric models f (x; w) : X → {Y 1 × · · · × Y M }, parameterized by w, that maps the
input x to the joint space of the multiple tasks. To simplify the notation, we denote the prediction of the
                                                                                PN
m-th task as f m (x; w) : X → Y m , and the respective loss Lm (w) ≜ N1 i ℓm (yim , f m (xi ; w)).
The vector of the values of all loss functions is denoted as L(w) ≜ (L1 (w), . . . , LM (w)). MOO


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


then seeks to find a set of Pareto-optimal solutions w∗ that jointly minimize L(w)1 :
                                              w∗ ∈ argmin L(w)                                        (1)
                                                        w

Definition 2.1. (Pareto Optimality): A solution w2 dominates w1 iff Lm (w2 ) ≤ Lm (w1 ), ∀m ∈
{1, . . . , M }, and L(w1 ) ̸= L(w2 ). In other words, a dominating solution has a lower loss value on
at least one task and no higher loss value on any task. A solution w∗ is called Pareto optimal iff there
exists no other solution dominating w∗ .
Definition 2.2. (Pareto front): The sets of Pareto optimal points and their function values are called
Pareto set (Pw ) and Pareto front (PL = {L(w)w∈Pw }), respectively.
Linear Scalarization. In MOO, a standard technique to solve the M -dimensional problem is
                                                  PM
using a preference vector r ∈ S ≜ {RM | m=1 rm = 1, rm ≥ 0, ∀m ∈ {1, . . . , M }} in
the M -dimensional probability simplex (Lin et al., 2019; Mahapatra & Rajan, 2020; Ruchte &
Grabocka, 2021). Every r ∈ S yields a convex combination of the loss functions in Equation 1
as Lr (w) = r T L(w). Given a preference vector r, one can apply standard, single-objective opti-
mization algorithms to find a minimizer wr∗ = argminw Lr (w). By sampling multiple r vectors,
one can compute Pareto-optimal solutions wr∗ that profile the Pareto front. Several methods (Hoang
et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2020; Navon et al., 2021; Phan et al., 2022) employ a hypernetwork (Ha et al.,
2017) to generate Pareto-optimal solutions given different preference vectors as input. In this work,
we utilize a hypernetwork conditioned on scalarizations to generate Pareto-optimal architectures.
Furthermore, we also extend the hypernetwork by conditioning it on different task vectors.
Multiple Gradient Descent (MGD). MOO can be solved to local optimality via MGD (Désidéri,
2012), as a natural extension of single-objective gradient descent, which iteratively updates w towards
a direction that ensures that all tasks improve simultaneously (called Pareto improvement): w′ ←
        ∗           ∗                                                                  m
w − ξgw   , where gw  is a vector field that needs to be determined. If we denote by gw   = ∇w Lm (w)
the gradient of the m-th scalar loss function, via Taylor approximation, the decreasing direction of
                                     ∗                m ∗
Lm when we update w towards gw         is given by ⟨gw  , gw ⟩ ≈ −(Lm (w′ ) − Lm (w))/ξ. In MGD gw   ∗

is chosen to maximize the slowest update rate among all objectives:
                                                      n                 o
                                ∗                                    m
                               gw   ∝     argmax          min ⟨gw , gw ⟩ .                          (2)
                                         gw ∈Rd ,||gw ||≤1   m∈[M ]

The early work of Désidéri (2012) has been extended in various settings, particularly multi-task
learning, with great promise (Lin et al., 2019; Liu & Vicente, 2021; Mahapatra & Rajan, 2020; Sener
& Koltun, 2018), but these approaches are applied to mainly a fixed architecture and extending them
to a supernet subsuming a search space of multiple architectures is non-trivial.
One-shot NAS and Bi-Level optimization. With the architecture space being intrinsically discrete,
large (often consisting of upto 1036 architectures) and hence expensive to search on, most existing
differentiable NAS approaches leverage the weight sharing paradigm and continuous relaxation to
enable gradient descent (Bender et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2021b; Dong & Yang, 2019; Liu et al.,
2019b; 2023; Movahedi et al., 2022; Pham et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020a; Zhang
et al., 2021). Typically, in these approaches, architectures are stacks of cells, where the cell structure
is represented as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) with N nodes and E edges. Every transition from
node i to j, i.e. edge (i, j), is associated with an operation o(i,j) ∈ O, where O is a predefined
candidate operation set. Liu et al. (2019b) proposed a continuous relaxation of the search space
by parameterizing the discrete operation choices in the DAG edges via a learnable vector α. This
enables framing the NAS problem as a bi-level optimization one, with differentiable objectives w.r.t.
all variables:
                     argmin Lval (w∗ (α), α) s.t. w∗ (α) = argmin Ltrain (w, α),                      (3)
                        α                                               w

where Ltrain and Lval are the empirical losses on the training and validation data, respectively, w
are the supernetwork parameters, α ∈ A are the continuous architectural parameters, and w∗ (α) :
A → Rd is a best response function that maps architectures to their optimal weights.
Comparison to single-objective constrained NAS. Early NAS methods predominantly targeted high
accuracy, whereas contemporary hardware-aware differentiable NAS approaches (Cai et al., 2018; Fu
   1
       w can be replaced with any other parameter here, also architectural ones (see Section 3).


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021; Wan et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2019; 2021; Xu et al.,
2020b) are designed to identify architectures optimized for target hardware efficiency. Typically, these
methods integrate hardware constraints within their objectives, yielding a single optimal solution
and necessitating multiple search iterations to construct the Pareto front. Our proposed algorithm
addresses this by profiling the entire Pareto front in a single search iteration. While single-objective
constrained optimization is advantageous in scenarios demanding optimization of one objective under
a specific constraint, practical applications often require a suite of models adaptable to varying user
preferences even on a single device. Our efficient Pareto-front approximation algorithm provides
such a suite of optimal models to choose from.

3     H ARDWARE - AWARE M ULTI - OBJECTIVE D IFFERENTIABLE N EURAL
      A RCHITECTURE S EARCH
We first formalize the multi-objective bi-level optimization NAS problem across multiple hardware
devices, and then introduce a scalable and differentiable method that combines MGD with linear
scalarizations to efficiently solve this problem.

3.1    P ROBLEM D EFINITION & S KETCH OF S OLUTION A PPROACH
In multi-objective NAS, the bi-level problem described in Equation 1 becomes more difficult, since
we are not only concerned with finding w∗ given a fixed architecture, but we want to optimize in the
space of architectures A as well. Assuming we have T hardware devices (target functions) and M
objectives (e.g. accuracy, latency, etc.), similar to (3), for every t ∈ {1 . . . T }, the Pareto set can be
obtained by solving the following bi-level optimization problem:
                  argmin Lvalid
                          t     (w∗ (α), α) s.t. w∗ (α) = argmin Ltrain
                                                                  t     (w, α),                          (4)
                     α                                               w

where the M -dimensional loss vector Lt (w∗ (α), α) ≜ L1t (w∗ (α), α), . . . , LM           ∗

                                                                                      t (w (α), α) is
evaluated ∀t ∈ {1, . . . , T }. Ltrain
                                 t     and Lvalid
                                            t     are the vectors with all M loss functions evaluated on
the train and validation splits of D, used in the lower- and upper-level problems of (4), respectively.
Our goal is to find Pareto-optimal architectures for each target
device, covering diverse and representative preferences for
different objectives. However, naively solving (4) for each
device t requires T independent bi-level searches, making
this very inefficient for large models. To overcome this, we
incorporate a single hypernetwork within the one-shot model                        *
(supernetwork) commonly used in conventional NAS (Bender
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019b; Pham et al., 2018). This allows
us to generate architectures based on device embeddings and
preference vectors in just one search run, reducing the search
cost from O(T) to O(1).

3.2    A LGORITHM D ESIGN AND C OMPONENTS                            Figure 2: Architecture overview of
Our search procedure is composed of four core modular com-           the MetaHypernetwork, which gets
ponents (see Figure 1): (1) a MetaHypernetwork that gen-             as input a device embedding dt (in-
erates the architectural distribution; (2) an Architect that         put to an embedding layer E) and
samples discrete architectures from this distribution; (3) a         a scalarization r (input to K hyper-
Supernetwork that exploits the weight-sharing paradigm for
                                                                     networks) and yields an architecture
search efficiency and serves as a proxy for the network accu-        encoding α̃.
racy; and (4) a MetaPredictor that predicts hardware metrics and enables gradient propagation back
to the MetaHypernetwork. We now discuss each of these in detail.
MetaHypernetwork. In order to generate architectures across multiple devices, inspired by Wang
et al. (2022) and Lin et al. (2020), we propose a MetaHypernetwork that can meta-learn across
different hardware devices (see Figure 2). Hypernetworks are a class of neural networks that generate
the parameters of another model. They were initially proposed for model compression (Ha et al.,
2017) and were later adopted for NAS (Brock et al., 2018) and MOO (Lin et al., 2020; Navon et al.,
2021). Here, given a preference vector r = (r1 , . . . , rM ) and a hardware device feature vector dt , for


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


device t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, we use the MetaHypernetwork HΦ (r, dt ), parameterized by Φ, to generate
an un-normalized architecture distribution α̃Φ that is later used to compute the upper-level updates
in (4). Similar to Lee et al. (2021b), dt is a fixed-size feature vector that is obtained by evaluating
a fixed set of reference architectures on device t. The MetaHypernetwork is composed of 2 main
components (see Figure 2):
1. A bank of K independent hypernetworks: hpn1 , . . . , hpnK , that parse the preference vector r and
   generate the architectural parameters α̃1 , . . . , α̃K , respectively.
2. A linear layer E, that learns a similarity map from device feature vectors to the bank of hpns. E
   takes as input the device feature vector dt and outputs an attention vector of size K.
The final output, α̃Φ , of the MetaHypernetwork is computed as a weighted sum of the outputs of the
K hypernetworks, where the vector of weights is the output of the linear layer E. For a more detailed
description of the MetaHypernetwork we refer the reader to Appendix D.2.
In all experiments, we initialize the MetaHypernetwork to yield a uniform probability mass over
all architectural parameters for all scalarizations and device embeddings. By using the preference
vector r to create a linear scalarization of Lt and the MetaHypernetwork to model the architectural
distribution across T devices, the bi-level problem in (4) reduces to:
      argmin Er∼S r T Lvalid (w∗ (αΦ ), αΦ )      s.t. w∗ (αΦ ) = argmin Er∼S r T Ltrain

                       t                                                           t     (w, αΦ ) ,          (5)
         Φ                                                             w

where αΦ are the normalized architectural parameters obtained from the Architect Λ(α̃Φ )
                      PM
and r T Lt (·, αΦ ) =             m
                         m=1 rm Lt (·, αΦ ) is the scalarized loss for device t. Conditioning the
MetaHypernetwork on the hardware embeddings allows us to generate architectures on new test
devices without extra finetuning or meta-learning steps. Iniutively, the MetaHypernetwork, learns
to map the new test device, to the most similar device, in its learnt bank of embeddings (see also
Figure 12 in the appendix). We use the Dirichlet distribution Dir(β), β = (β1 , . . . , βM ), to sample
the preference vectors and approximate the expectation over the scalarizations using Monte Carlo
sampling. In our experiments, we set β1 = · · · = βM = 1, for a uniform sampling over the
(M − 1)-simplex, however, one can set these differently based on user priors or make it a learnable
parameter (Chen et al., 2021b).
MetaPredictor. For the cheap-to-
                                         Algorithm 1: MODNAS
evaluate hardware objectives, such
as latency, energy consumption,          Data: Dtrain ; Dvalid ; Supernetwork; device features
we employ a regression model                     {dt }Tt=1 ; MetaHypernetwork HΦ ; nr. of objectives
pm       m                                       M ; Architect Λ; learning rates ξ1 , ξ2 .
 θ (α, dt ) that predicts the target   1 while not converged do
labels ytm for objective m and
                                       2     for t ∈ {1, . . . , T } do
device t, given an architecture α 3               Sample scalarization r ∼ Dir(β)
                           m
and device embedding dt . We use 4                Set arch params α̃Φ ← HΦ (r, dt )
the same predictors as Lee et al. 5               Sample αΦ ∼ Λ(α̃Φ ) from Architect
(2021b) and optimize the MSE                       t
                                                          PM
                                                  gΦ  ← m=1 rm ∇Φ Lm         t (Dvalid ; w, αΦ )
loss:     minθ Eα∼A,t∼[T ] ytm − 6
                                                                                1            T
               2                       7     γ ← FrankWolfeSolver(gΦ              , . . . , gΦ ); // Alg.4
pm       m
 θ (α, dt ) , as done in Lee et al.            ∗
                                                     PT                 t
(2021a) for meta-learning perfor-      8     gΦ  ←       t=1  γ t ·  g Φ
                                                                  ∗
mance metrics across datasets. 9             Φ ← Φ − ξ1 · gΦ           ; // update MetaHypernetwork
In our experiments, we pretrain 10           for t ∈ {1, . . . , T } do
a separate MetaPredictor for          11          Sample scalarization r ∼ Dir(β)
                                      12          Set arch params α̃Φ ← HΦ (r, dt )
every hardware objective m (e.g.
                                      13          Sample αΦ ∼ Λ(α̃Φ ) from Architect
latency, energy, etc.) on a subset                 t
                                                          PM
          m
of (α, yt ) pairs, and use its        14          gw  ← m=1 rm ∇w Lm          t (Dtrain ; w, αΦ )
                                                         PT
predicted value directly in (5) 15             ∗      1
                                             gw ← T t=1 gw           t
as Lm                    m       m
      t (·, αΦ ) = pθ (αΦ , dt ). 16         w ← w − ξ2 · gw        ∗
                                                                         ;    // update Supernetwork
Since the MetaPredictor is in
                                      17 return HΦ
principle a small neural network
this pretraining step is inexpensive.
During search, we freeze and do not further update the MetaPredictor parameters θ.
Supernetwork. For expensive objectives like neural network classification accuracy, we use a
Supernetwork that encodes the architecture space and shares parameters between architectures,


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


providing a best response function w∗ (αΦ ) for the scalarized loss in (5). While any parametric model
could estimate this function, such as performance predictors (Lee et al., 2021a), this requires an
expensive prior step of creating the training dataset for the predictor, by training architectures from
scratch. To reduce memory costs of Supernetwork training, we: (1) use a one-hot encoding of αΦ for
differentiable architecture sampling (Cai et al., 2018; Dong & Yang, 2019; Xie et al., 2019), activating
only one architecture per step, and (2) entangle operation choice parameters in the Supernetwork,
further increasing memory efficiency of the supernetwork beyond weight sharing (Sukthanker et al.,
2023).
Architect.      The Architect Λ(α̃) samples discrete architectural configurations from the un-
normalized distribution α̃Φ = HΦ (r, dt ) and enables gradient estimation through discrete variables
for ∇Φ Lt (·, αΦ ). Methods such as GDAS (Dong & Yang, 2019) utilize the Straight-Through Gumbel-
Softmax (STGS) estimator (Jang et al., 2017), that integrates the Gumbel reparameterization trick
to approximate the gradient. Here we employ the recently proposed ReinMax estimator (Liu et al.,
2023), that yields second-order accuracy without the need to compute second-order derivatives. See
Appendix A.1 for more details on these discrete samplers. Similar to the findings in Liu et al. (2023),
in our initial experiments, ReinMax outperforms the GDAS’ STGS estimator (see Figure 15 in the
Appendix), therefore, we use ReinMax in all experiments that follow.

3.3     O PTIMIZING THE MetaHypernetwork VIA MGD
We denote the gradient of the scalarized loss in (5) with respect to the MetaHypernetwork
                                                                       t
parameters Φ, shared across all devices t ∈ 1, . . . , T , as: gΦ         = r T ∇Φ Lt (·, αΦ ) =
PM           m
  m=1 rm ∇Φ Lt (·, αΦ ), where αΦ is the discrete architectural sample from the Architect Λ(α̃Φ).
                                                                                                                    silv
Multiple Gradient Descent (MGD) (Désidéri,                                                                    ng_a50 er_4210r silve
                                                                                                         samsu                      r_41
                                                                                                   l3                                      14
2012; Sener & Koltun, 2018) provides a plausible                                           p   ixe                                              10
                                                                                                                                                     80
                                                                                                                                                       ti_
approach to estimate the update directions for ev-                                                                                                           25
                                                                                    _1


                                                                                                                                                                6
                                                                                ph
                                                                               ial_


ery task simultaneously by maximizing (2). Via
                                                                              ent


                                                                                                                                                                    108
                                                                        7ess


the Lagrangian duality, the optimal solution to


                                                                                                                                                                     0ti_
                                                                    ung_s


                                                                                                                                                                       32
               ∗
                   PT
equation 2 is gΦ ∝ t=1 γt∗ gΦ t
                                , where {γt∗ }Tt=1
                                                                   sams


                                                                                                                                                                            1080ti_1
is the solution of the following minimization                                                                                                        0.86
                                                                                                                                   0.72
                                                                   titanx_1


problem:


                                                                                                                                                                           eyeriss
               T            2   T
                                                                    titan


             n X                X                          o
                        t
  min               γt gΦ             γt = 1, γt ≥ 0, ∀t
                                                                       x_32


γ1 ,...,γT
                                                                                                                                                                     i4
              t=1           2   t=1                                                                                                                                 rasp
                                                                              tita
                                                                               nx_


The solution to this problem is either 0 or, given                                                                                                        el2
                                                                                 256


                                                                                         gol
                                                                                            d_6                                                      pix
a small step size ξ, a descent direction that mono-                                               240
                                                                                                         titan_r
                                                                                                                tx_256 gold_6226    fpga
tonically decreases all objectives at the same
time and terminates when it finds a Pareto sta-                      MODNAS                             CMA-ES+LaMOO               MO-ASHA                            qEHVI
                        t                                            RS                                 CMA-ES                     RS-BO                              NSGA-II
tionary point, i.e. gΦ     = 0, ∀t ∈ {1, . . . , T }.                RHPN                               LS                         LS-BO                              Global opt.
When T = 2, the problem above simplifies
                   1               2 2               Figure 3: Hypervolume (HV) of MODNAS and
to minγ∈[0,1] γgΦ     + (1 − γ)gΦ     2
                                        , which is a
quadratic function of γ with a closed form solu-     baselines across 19 devices on NAS-Bench-201.
tion:                                                For every device, we optimize for 2 objectives,
                                               !     namely latency (ms) and test accuracy on CIFAR-
                        (g 2 − g 1 )T g 2
    ∗                      Φ    Φ      Φ             10. For each method, metric and device we report
   γ = max min                            ,1 ,0 .
                          ∥gΦ1 − g 2 ∥2              the mean of 3 independent search runs. Higher
                                   Φ 2
                                                     area in the radar plot indicates better HV. Test
When T > 2, we utilize the Frank-Wolfe devices are colored in red around the plot.
solver (Jaggi, 2013) as in Sener & Koltun (2018),
where the analytical solution in for T = 2 is used inside the line search. We provide the full algorithm
to compute γ ∗ in Algorithm 4 in Appendix A.3.
In Algorithm 1 and Figure 1 we provide the pseudocode and an illustration of the overall search phase
of MODNAS. For every mini-batch sample from Dvalid , we iterate over the device features dt (line
2), sample one scalarization r and condition the MetaHypernetwork on both r and dt to generate
the un-normalized architectural distribution α̃Φ (lines 3-4). We then compute the device-specific
gradient in line 6 which is used to estimate the γ coefficients (line 7) used from MGD to update Φ
(lines 8-9). Similarly to Liu et al. (2019b), we use the first-order approximation to obtain the best


                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


response function in the lower level (lines 10-14) and repeat the same procedure for the upper-level
(lines 2-6), except now the Supernetwork weights w are updated with the mean gradient (line 15),
over devices.

4         E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we firstly demonstrate the scalability and generalizability of our MODNAS approach
on a NAS tabular benchmark (Section 4.1). Then, we validate MODNAS on larger search spaces for
Machine Translation (Section 4.2), Image Classification and Language Modeling (Section 4.3).
Search Spaces and Datasets. We                     The trained MetaHPN approximates the Pareto front by generating architectures given:
                                                   1) preference vectors
evaluate MODNAS on 4 search                        2) device type

spaces: (1) NAS-Bench-201 (Dong
& Yang, 2020; Li et al., 2021) with
19 devices and CIFAR-10 dataset;
(2) MobileNetV3 from Once-for-All
(OFA) (Cai et al., 2020) with 12
devices and ImageNet-1k dataset;
(3) Hardware-Aware-Transformer                Figure 4: Illustration of MODNAS inference.
(HAT) (Wang et al., 2020b) on the machine translation benchmark WMT’14 En-De across 3 different
hardware devices; (4) HW-GPT-Bench (Sukthanker et al., 2024) – a GPT-2 based search space used
for language modeling on the OpenWebText (Gokaslan & Cohen, 2019) across 8 devices. We refer to
Appendices E and F for more details on these search spaces.
Evaluation. At test time, in order to profile the Pareto front with MODNAS on unseen devices, we
sample 24 equidistant preference vectors r from the M -dimensional probability simplex and pass
them through the pretrained MetaHypernetwork HΦ (r, dt ) to get 24 architectures. Here the test
device feature dt is obtained similarly as for the train devices. See Figure 4 or an illustration.
Baselines. We compare MODNAS against several base-                                                       titan_rtx_256
                                                                                                0.95
lines2 , such as Random Search (RS), Local Search (LS) and
various Evolutionary Strategy and Bayesian Optimization                                         0.90
MOO methods. Please refer to Appendix B for a more
                                                                                                0.85
                                                                                  Hypervolume


                                                                                                                           RS
comprehensive description of each of them. Furthermore,                                                                    qEHVI+LaMOO
                                                                                                                           CMA-ES+LaMOO
we also evaluate the MetaHypernetwork with randomly                                             0.80                       CMA-ES
                                                                                                                           LS
initialized weights (RHPN).                                                                                                MO-ASHA
                                                                                                                           RS-BO
                                                                                                0.75                       LS-BO
Metrics. To assess the quality of the Pareto set solu-                                                                     MO-RE
                                                                                                                           qEHVI
                                                                   0.70                                                    NSGA-II
tions, we use the hypervolume (HV) indicator, which                                                                        MODNAS
is a standard metric in MOO. Given a reference point                       10     20         30   40 50
                                                                                 Num. evaluations
ρ = [ρ1 , . . . , ρm ] ∈ RM
                          + that  is an upper bound  for all ob-
jectives {f m (·; w, α)}M                    m                m
                           m=1 , i.e. supα f (·; w, α) ≤ ρ , Figure 5: HV over number of evalu-
∀m ∈ [M ], and a Pareto set Pα ⊂ A, HV(Pα ) measures ated architectures on NAS-Bench-201
the region of non-dominated points bounded above from ρ: of MODNAS and the blackbox MOO
                                      M                          baselines on a test device. For MOD-
                                         [f (·; w, α), ρ ] , NAS we only do 24 full evaluations.
                                     Y
               M                           m            m
  λ q ∈ R+ | ∃α ∈ Pα : q ∈
                                          m=1

where λ(·) is the Euclidean volume. HV can be interpreted as the total volume of the union of the
boxes created by the Pareto front.

4.1        S IMULTANEOUS PARETO S ET L EARNING ACROSS 19 DEVICES AND A BLATIONS
We firstly validate the scalability and learning capability of MODNAS by evaluating on the NAS-
Bench-201 (Dong & Yang, 2020) cell-based convolutional space. Here we want to optimize both
latency and classification accuracy on all devices. We utilize the same set of 19 heterogeneous devices
as Lee et al. (2021b), from which we use 13 for search and 6 at test time. For the latency predictor,
we use the one from HELP, namely a graph convolutional network (GCN), which we pretrain for 3
GPU hours on the ground truth latencies on the 13 search devices as described in Section 3. We run

      2
          For baselines, we use SyneTune (Salinas et al., 2022): https://github.com/awslabs/syne-tune


                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                               ng_a50
                                                                                                                     silver_4210r s
                                                                                                                                    ilve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FPGA                                                                                                          Global opt.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RS
                                                                                                         samsu
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.00

                     0.8
                                        gold_6226                                              el3
                                                                                                                                        r_41
                                                                                                                                              14
                                                                                                                                                   10                                                         0.96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RHPN
                                                                                            pix                                                      80                                                0.95                                                                                                                                           MODNAS
                                                Latency constraint                                                                                          ti_
                                                                                                                                                               25                                                    0.92                                                                 0.7                                                         LS-BO


                                                                                    h_1
                     0.7                            MODNAS                                                                                                        6                                                                                                                                                                                   MO-RE


                                                                                   l_p
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.90                                                                               0.6
                                                    MODNAS (0.2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MO-ASHA


                                                                                ntia


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                fpga_energy
                                                                                                                                                                      108
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NSGA-II


                                                                             sse
                     0.6                            MODNAS (0.4)


                                                                                                                                                                                         Hypervolume
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.85


                                                                                                                                                                       0ti_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.83 0.82                                                         0.4


                                                                        ng_s7e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RS-BO
                                                    MODNAS (0.6)                                                                                                                                                                        0.81


                                                                                                                                                                         32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.3                                                     qEHVI
Normalized latency
                     0.5                            MODNAS (0.8)                                                                                                                                       0.80


                                                                     samsu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.77                                           0.2


                                                                                                                                                                              1080ti_1
                                                    MODNAS (1.0)                                                                                        0.88                                           0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.1
                     0.4                            MetaD2A+HELP                                                                     0.77                                                                                                             0.73 0.73                               0.0


                                                                      titanx_1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.71
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.70
                     0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.7


                                                                                                                                                                             eyeriss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.65                                                              0.65                      0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fpga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4


                                                                       titan
                     0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _late
                                                                          x_32
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.60                                                                                            0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ncy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1                                              0.40


                                                                                                                                                                       i4
                     0.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.30 0.35


                                                                                                                                                                                                         MO opt.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               AS
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MO RS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                -II
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NS A


                                                                                                                                                                                                           MO I
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -B O
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                              HV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.20 0.25


                                                                                                                                                                                                               H
                                                                                                                                                                      rasp


                                                                                                                                                                                                             GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            DN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                            RH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.10 0.15


                                                                                                                                                                                                           -AS


                                                                                                                                                                                                           RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                           LS
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.00 0.05


                                                                                 tita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    error


                                                                                                                                                                                                  ob
                                                                                                                                                                                                Gl
                                                                                  nx_
                     0.0                                                                                                                                     l2


                                                                                    256
                                                                                          gold                                                          pixe
                           0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6     0.8
                                                       Figure 8: HV (left) and Pareto front (right) of
                                                                                              _62
                                                                                                    40
                                       Normalized error                                                  titan_r                       fpga
                                                                                                                 tx_256 gold_6226
                                                       MODNAS and baselines on FPGA with 3 nor-
Figure 7: Pareto front on Eyeriss (left) and HV across malized objectives: error, latency and energy
devices (right) of MODNAS ran with various latency usage. HV is computed using the (1, 1, 1) refer-
constraints on NAS-Bench-201. See Fig. 21 in Ap- ence point on the right 3D plot. See Fig. 16 for
pendix H for all results.                              results on Eyeriss.

the MODNAS search (see Appendix D for more details on the search hyperparameters), as described
in Algorithm 1, for 100 epochs (22 GPU hours on a single NVidia RTX2080Ti) and show the HV in
Figure 3 of the evaluated Pareto front in comparison to the baselines, for which we allocate the same
search time budget across all devices equivalent to the MODNAS search + evaluation.
Most notably, MODNAS consistently outperforms all other                                 fpga
                                                                0.95
baselines across every device. For the baselines, we con-
                                                                0.90
duct 19 separate search runs (one for each device), whereas
MODNAS leverages meta-learning to generate the Pareto           0.85



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Hypervolume
set on each device using the same MetaHypernetwork in           0.80
a single search run. Interestingly, the trained MODNAS          0.75
attention-based MetaHypernetwork significantly outper-          0.70     MGD
                                                                         MC Sampling
forms the RHPN baseline in profiling the Pareto front,          0.65     Sequential
demonstrating its effectiveness in optimizing across multi-              Mean
                                                                0.60
ple devices and conflicting objectives simultaneously. In            0    20         40       60  80 100
                                                                                    Search Epochs
Figure 20a in the Appendix, we compare MODNAS with
additional baselines, running them at double the budget Figure 6: HV over search epochs of dif-
used for the experiments in Figure 3. Figure 5 (see Fig- ferent gradient schemes in MODNAS.
ure 23 in the appendix for all devices) shows that most baselines require more than twice the number
of architecture evaluations to reach the same HV as MODNAS. Results show that MODNAS remains
the top performer across hardware devices on average. Furthermore, in the appendix, Figure 20
presents radar plots for four additional metrics, and Figure 18 and 17 results on NB201 when
optimizing CIFAR-100 accuracy and device latency.
Reliably learnt embeddings for hardware devices. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our
MetaHypernetwork in learning hardware device similarities, Figure 12 in the appendix shows
K-means clustering of original and MetaHypernetwork embeddings, reduced via t-SNE. The
MetaHypernetwork successfully clusters similar devices, confirming its efficacy.
MetaHypernetwork update schemes: robustness of MGD. We compare the MGD update scheme
for the MetaHypernetwork Φ (line 9 in Alg. 1) against (1) the mean gradient over tasks: Φ ←
        PT
Φ−ξ T1 t=1 gΦ  t
                 ; (2) sequential updates with all single tasks’ gradients: Φ ← Φ−ξgΦt
                                                                                       , ∀t; (3) single
                                                                       t
updates using gradients of MC samples over tasks: Φ ← Φ − ξgΦ , t ∼ {1, . . . T }. Figure 6 (see
Figure 24 in Appendix H for more results) shows the HV over search epochs for these schemes. MGD,
by accounting for inter-task dependencies, achieves higher final HV, better anytime performance, and
faster convergence than the other schemes.
Scalability to three objectives. We show the scalability of MODNAS to 3 objectives, namely,
accuracy, latency and energy consumption. For this experiment we use the FPGA and Eyeriss tabular
energy usage values from HW-NAS-Bench (Li et al., 2021). In addition to the MetaPredictor for
latency, we pretrain a second predictor on the energy usage objective. We then run MODNAS and the
MOO baselines with the same exact settings as for 2 objectives. Results shown in Figure 8 indicate
that MODNAS can scale to M > 2 without additional search costs or hyperparameter tuning and yet
achieves HV close to the global optimum front of the NAS-Bench-201 space.
MODNAS vs. constrained single-objective optimization. To compare against single-objective
NAS with hardware constraints in the objective, we run MetaD2A+HELP (Lee et al., 2021b). Since
MetaD2A + HELP is not able to profile the Pareto front directly, we run the NAS search 24 times with


                                                                                                                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


different constraints, which we compute by denormalizing the same 24 equidistant preference vectors
we use to evaluate MODNAS. We also extend MODNAS to incorporate user prior constraints over
the multiple objectives being optimized during search. Namely, we add a normalized constraint cm ,
such that if the predicted value from the MetaPredictor during search satisfies this constraint, i.e.
pm         m      m
 θ (αΦ , dt ) ≤ c , we remove the gradient w.r.t. to that objective in lines 6 and 14 of Algorithm 1.
In Figure 7 (other devices in Figure 21) we can see that when increasing the latency constraint to 1
(only cross-entropy optimized), though the HV decreases, MODNAS returns Pareto sets with more
performant architectures. MetaD2A+HELP, despite multiple search runs, prioritizes performance
over diversity, resulting in less varied solutions.

4.2     PARETO F RONT P ROFILING ON T RANSFORMER S PACE
                                                                RaspberryPi-CPU                                          RaspberryPi-CPU
To demonstrate its effectiveness beyond im-                                        0.74
                                                                                                            0.046                          RS
                                                                                                                                           MO-RE
age classification and CNN spaces, we ap-            0.72
                                                                                   0.72                                                    LS
                                                                                                            0.044                          NSGA-II
ply MODNAS to the hardware-aware Trans-                   0.69 0.69 0.69           0.70                                                    LS-BO
                                                                                                                                           RS-BO
former (HAT) search space from Wang



                                                                     Hypervolume
                                                                                                                                           MO-ASHA
                                                                         0.68                               0.042


                                                                                                                        1/BLEU
                                                                                   0.68
                                                                                                                                           qEHVI
                                                                              0.67
et al. (2020b) on the WMT’14 En-De (Jean                                           0.66
                                                                                                                                           RHPN
                                                                                                                                           MODNAS
                                                                                   0.65
et al., 2015; Macháček & Bojar, 2014) ma-                                                                  0.040                          HAT
                                                                                   0.64 0.64 0.64 0.64
chine translation task. We pretrain the                                            0.62                0.61 0.038
MetaPredictor (details in Appendix D.1)                                            0.60
                                                                                                                  3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000
for 5 GPU hours on 2000 architecture sam-
                                                                                qE S
                                                                               NS VI
                                                                                -AS I


                                                                                          MO S

                                                                                              RS
                                                                                              PN
                                                                                   HA


                                                                                             -RE



                                                                                             -BO

                                                                                          RS T
                                                                                             -BO
                                                                                                                              Latency (ms)

                                                                              MO GA-I


                                                                                            HA
                                                                                    A


                                                                                              L
                                                                                  H
                                                                                 DN


                                                                                           RH
                                                                                          LS
                                                                              MO


ples from the search space and then con-
duct the search for 110 epochs (6 days on 8 Figure 9: HV and Pareto fronts of MODNAS and
NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs) using 2 search baselines across devices on the HAT space.
devices, adhering to the same hyperparameters as Wang et al. (2020b) to optimize for latency and
validation cross entropy loss. We allocate to each baseline 2.5× more runtime budget than MODNAS,
resulting in 1300 (RS-BO) to 6000 (MO-ASHA) total architecture evaluations, whereas MODNAS
evaluates only 24 generated architectures. Details on the HAT search space and search hyperpa-
rameters are in Appendix E. We evaluate MODNAS on all 3 devices (2 search and 1 test) using
the BLEU score, and results in Figure 9 show that MODNAS outperforms all baselines, achieving
a higher hypervolume (left plot) of the generated Pareto fronts (right plot). For HAT, we evaluate
the architectures provided in their paper. Additional results on other training devices and evaluation
metrics are presented in Figures 28, 29 and 30 in the Appendix.

4.3     E FFICIENT D IFFERENTIABLE MOO STARTING FROM P RETRAINED S UPERNETWORKS
Image Classification on ImageNet-1k. We now evaluate MODNAS                                                                 Average HV (12 devices) for OFA
                                                                                                                     0.76        0.76
on ImageNet-1k using the MovileNetV3 search space from Once-for-                                                                        0.74
                                                                                                                     0.74
All (OFA) (Cai et al., 2020). For this experiment, we run MODNAS                                                                               0.73 0.73 0.73
                                                                                                                     0.72                                       0.72
using 11 search (and 1 test) devices starting with the pretrained OFA                                                                                                  0.71
                                                                                                       Hypervolume


supernetwork and run the search further for 1 day on 8 RTX2080Ti                                                     0.70

GPUs. During the search, we only update the MetaHypernetwork                                                         0.68
                                                                                                                                                                              0.67 0.67
weights and keep the pretrained Supernetwork weights frozen. De-                                                     0.66
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.65
tails on the search space and hyperparameters are in Appendices E                                                    0.64
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.64

and D.3. We use the simple MLP from Lee et al. (2021b) as                                                            0.62
our MetaPredictor, pretraining it for 6 hours on 5000 sampled
                                                                                                                     0.60
architecture-latency pairs. To evaluate the 24 points generated by
                                                                                                                         L S
                                                                                                                       MO S-BO

                                                                                                                         RS A
                                                                                                                            -BO

                                                                                                                         MO VI
                                                                                                                        NS RE
                                                                                                                               -II
                                                                                                                              RS
                                                                                                                             PN
                                                                                                                              LP
                                                                                                                              LS
                                                                                                                              A

                                                                                                                             H


                                                                                                                           GA
                                                                                                                            H


                                                                                                                          HE
                                                                                                                          DN


                                                                                                                            -



                                                                                                                          RH
                                                                                                                         -AS


                                                                                                                         qE
                                                                                                                     MO


our MetaHypernetwork and baselines, we use the OFA pretrained
Supernetwork. Results in Figure 10 show that MODNAS achieves          Figure 10: Average HV
a higher average HV across all devices compared to baselines, which   of MODNAS and baselines
we run for 192 hours using the OFA pretrained accuracy predictor      across 12 devices on OFA
(see Figure 34 for all results and Figure 33 for the Pareto fronts).  space. For every device we op-
Comparison to Zero-Cost Proxies. We also compare the HV of timize for 2 objectives, namely
the Pareto front obtained by MODNAS to that produced by NSGA- latency (ms) and test accuracy
II (Deb et al., 2002), which uses a zero-cost proxy (ZCP) (Abdelfat- on ImageNet-1k.
tah et al., 2021) (we chose Zico (Li et al., 2023)) for performance estimation instead of the actual
accuracy. Table 6 in the appendix presents the results of this experiment on two devices. As shown,
despite its improved runtime efficiency, the ZCP-guided search underperforms compared to both the
existing baselines and MODNAS, which optimize for accuracy directly.


                                                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                  A100
Language Modeling with GPT-2. With the rapid growth of                                         RS
                                                                     40.8
language model sizes, it is crucial to identify transformer variants                           MOREA
                                                                                               LS
that are efficient during inference (latency) while maintaining                                NSGA2
                                                                     36.3                      LSBO
competitive performance. We apply MODNAS to the GPT-S                                          RSBO


                                                                                            Perplexity
space from HW-GPT-Bench (Sukthanker et al., 2024), which                                       MOASHA
                                                                     31.8                      EHVI
features a non-convex Pareto front between perplexity and hard-                                MODNAS
ware metric objectives. Using pretrained Supernetwork weights
                                                                     27.3
from HW-GPT-Bench, we conduct a single 6-hour search on 4
Nvidia A100 GPUs, optimizing for energy consumption (Wh)             22.8
and perplexity across 8 different GPU devices. See Appendix D             0.2 0.3     0.4     0.5
for details on the MetaHypernetwork architecture and search                       Energy (Wh)
hyperparameters. The Supernetwork weights are kept frozen Figure 11: Pareto front of MOD-
while updating the MetaHypernetwork. Figure 11 shows that, NAS and baselines on the HW-
with the same time budget, MODNAS matches or surpasses other GPT-Bench, A100 GPU.
MOO baselines, demonstrating its effectiveness in optimizing beyond convex Pareto fronts.

4.4     C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY
Ignoring the cost to train final architectures Table 1: Cost of MODNAS and other methods. N is
in the Pareto set, methods like MetaD2A + the number of trained architectures during search, T the
HELP (Lee et al., 2021a;b) have a worst- number of devices and C the number of constraints.
case time complexity of O(CT) to build Method                                                           Search Cost Pareto Set Build Cost
the Pareto set, where T is the number of LEMONADE (Elsken et al., 2019a)                                  O(NT)             O(1)
devices and C is the number of constraints. Blackbox      MOO (Daulton et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2022)
                                                 ProxylessNAS (Cai et al., 2018)
                                                                                                          O(NT)
                                                                                                          O(CT)
                                                                                                                            O(1)
                                                                                                                            O(1)
MODNAS reduces this to O(1) by con- OFA (Cai et al., 2020) + HELP (Lee et al., 2021b)
                                                 MetaD2A   + HELP (Lee   et al., 2021a;b)                  O(N)
                                                                                                           O(1)
                                                                                                                           O(CT)
                                                                                                                           O(CT)
ditioning a single MetaHypernetwork on MODNAS (Ours)                                                       O(1)             O(1)

both device types and constraints. Methods
like LEMONADE (Elsken et al., 2019a) and ProxylessNAS (Cai et al., 2018) apply constraints
during the search phase, requiring an independent search per device. Black-box methods such as
LEMONADE, NSGA-II (Deb et al., 2002), or qEHVI (Daulton et al., 2020) train O(NT) architectures
or a surrogate based on O(N) architectures in the case of MetaD2A + HELP. In contrast, MODNAS
and OFA have a cost of O(1) as they train a single supernetwork. Although MODNAS iterates over T
                       ∗       ∗
devices to compute gΦ    and gw  , Figure 25 in Appendix H.1 shows that MODNAS generalizes well on
17 test devices with only 2 search devices due to its meta-learning capabilities. See Tables 1 and 5 in
the Appendix for more details.

5     C ONCLUSIONS , B ROADER I MPACT AND L IMITATIONS
In this paper, we propose a novel hardware-aware differentiable NAS algorithm for profiling the
Pareto front in multi-objective problems. In contrast to constraint-based NAS methods, ours can
generate Pareto optimal architectures across multiple devices with a single hypernetwork that is
conditioned on preference vectors encoding the trade-off between objectives. Experiments across
various hardware devices (up to 19), objectives (accuracy, latency and energy usage), search spaces
(CNNs and Transformers), and applications (classification, machine translation, language modeling)
demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our method.
Broader Impact. In an era of large-scale models (e.g. foundation models), speeding up the search
and training cost for inference-optimal neural architectures is an important aspect of responsible
research (Cai et al., 2024; Muralidharan et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). The main goal of this work
is to improve the search costs, as well as the efficiency of the found architectures in terms of various
hardware metrics, therefore reducing the energy consumption and CO2 footprint. The energy savings
of these architectures will be amplified as they might be deployed on a large number of devices.
Limitations. While our differentiable multi-objective search method shows promising results, there
are potential limitations. MODNAS inherits challenges common to gradient-based search, such as
the risk of failure without proper tuning or regularization (Zela et al., 2020). For example, gradients
may favor one objective, leading to local optima that hinder exploration of the full Pareto front.
Additionally, the method relies on differentiable proxies for objectives, which may not always align
with ground truth values.



                                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partially supported by the following sources: TAILOR, a project funded by EU
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under GA No 952215; the Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under grant number 417962828; the European
Research Council (ERC) Consolidator Grant “Deep Learning 2.0” (grant no. 101045765). Robert
Bosch GmbH is acknowledged for financial support. The authors acknowledge support from EL-
LIS and ELIZA. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Gauss Center for Supercomputing eV
(www.gauss-centre.eu) for funding this project by providing computing time on the GCS supercom-
puter JUWELS at Jülich Supercomputing Center (JSC). Funded by the European Union. Views and
opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the
European Union or the ERC. Neither the European Union nor the ERC can be held responsible for
them.


.R EFERENCES
M. Abdelfattah, A. Mehrotra, L. Dudziak, and N. Lane. Zero-cost proxies for lightweight NAS.
 In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR’21), 2021.
 Published online: iclr.cc. 9
Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Getting vit in shape:
   Scaling laws for compute-optimal model design. Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023. 1
Stephan Patrick Baller, Anshul Jindal, Mohak Chadha, and Michael Gerndt. Deepedgebench:
  Benchmarking deep neural networks on edge devices. 2021 IEEE International Conference on
  Cloud Engineering (IC2E), pp. 20–30, 2021. 44
G. Bender, P-J. Kindermans, B. Zoph, V. Vasudevan, and Q. Le. Understanding and simplifying
  one-shot architecture search. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML’18), volume 80. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2018. 3, 4, 43, 44
Hadjer Benmeziane, Kaoutar El Maghraoui, Hamza Ouarnoughi, Smail Niar, Martin Wistuba, and
  Naigang Wang. Hardware-aware neural architecture search: Survey and taxonomy. In Proceedings
  of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-21, pp. 4322–4329,
  8 2021. Survey Track. 44
J. Bergstra and Y. Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. Journal of Machine
   Learning Research, 13:281–305, 2012. 21
Andrew Brock, Theo Lim, J.M. Ritchie, and Nick Weston. SMASH: One-shot model architecture
  search through hypernetworks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. 4
H. Cai, C. Gan, T. Wang, Z. Zhang, and S. Han. Once-for-All: Train one network and specialize it
  for efficient deployment. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
  1, 7, 9, 10, 21, 27, 28, 43
Han Cai, Ligeng Zhu, and Song Han. Proxylessnas: Direct neural architecture search on target task
  and hardware. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. 3, 6, 10, 44
Ruisi Cai, Saurav Muralidharan, Greg Heinrich, Hongxu Yin, Zhangyang Wang, Jan Kautz, and
  Pavlo Molchanov. Flextron: Many-in-one flexible large language model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.10260, 2024. 10
Minghao Chen, Houwen Peng, Jianlong Fu, and Haibin Ling. Autoformer: Searching transformers
 for visual recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
 vision, pp. 12270–12280, 2021a. 1, 21
Xiangning Chen and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Stabilizing differentiable architecture search via perturbation-
  based regularization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1554–1565. PMLR,
  2020. 43


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiangning Chen, Ruochen Wang, Minhao Cheng, Xiaocheng Tang, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. DrNAS:
  Dirichlet neural architecture search. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021b. 3, 5
Richeek Das and Samuel Dooley. Fairer and more accurate tabular models through nas. Algorithmic
  Fairness through the Lens of Time Workshop at NeurIPS, 2023. 44
S. Daulton, M. Balandat, and E. Bakshy. Differentiable expected hypervolume improvement for
   parallel Multi-Objective Bayesian optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, volume 33, pp. 9851–9864. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. 10, 21
Samuel Daulton, David Eriksson, Maximilian Balandat, and Eytan Bakshy. Multi-objective bayesian
  optimization over high-dimensional search spaces. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp.
  507–517. PMLR, 2022. 43
Kalyanmoy Deb, Samir Agrawal, Amrit Pratap, and Tanaka Meyarivan. A fast elitist non-dominated
  sorting genetic algorithm for multi-objective optimization: Nsga-ii. In Parallel Problem Solving
  from Nature PPSN VI: 6th International Conference Paris, France, September 18–20, 2000
  Proceedings 6, pp. 849–858. Springer, 2000. 43
Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and TAMT Meyarivan. A fast and elitist multiob-
  jective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation, 6(2):182–197,
  2002. 9, 10, 21, 43
Jean-Antoine Désidéri. Multiple-gradient descent algorithm (mgda) for multiobjective optimization.
  Comptes Rendus Mathematique, 350:313–318, 2012. 2, 3, 6, 43
X. Dong and Y. Yang. Searching for a robust neural architecture in four gpu hours. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2019. 3, 6,
  28, 30, 43
X. Dong and Y. Yang. NAS-Bench-201: Extending the scope of reproducible neural architecture
  search. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR’20),
  2020. Published online: iclr.cc. 7, 22, 27
Samuel Dooley, Rhea Sanjay Sukthanker, John P Dickerson, Colin White, Frank Hutter, and Micah
  Goldblum. Rethinking bias mitigation: Fairer architectures make for fairer face recognition. In
  Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. 44
Lukasz Dudziak, Thomas Chau, Mohamed Abdelfattah, Royson Lee, Hyeji Kim, and Nicholas Lane.
  Brp-nas: Prediction-based nas using gcns. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:10480–10490, 2020. 22, 44
T. Elsken, J. Metzen, and F. Hutter. Efficient multi-objective neural architecture search via lamarckian
   evolution. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019a. 10
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Efficient multi-objective neural architecture
  search via lamarckian evolution. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019b.
  1, 43
Yonggan Fu, Wuyang Chen, Haotao Wang, Haoran Li, Yingyan Lin, and Zhangyang Wang.
  AutoGAN-distiller: Searching to compress generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings
  of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 3292–3303. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. 3, 44
Aaron Gokaslan and Vanya Cohen. Openwebtext corpus. http://Skylion007.github.io/
  OpenWebTextCorpus, 2019. 7, 27

Nyoman Gunantara. A review of multi-objective optimization: Methods and its applications. Cogent
  Engineering, 5(1):1502242, 2018. 43
Zichao Guo, Xiangyu Zhang, Haoyuan Mu, Wen Heng, Zechun Liu, Yichen Wei, and Jian Sun.
  Single path one-shot neural architecture search with uniform sampling. In Computer Vision–ECCV
  2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XVI 16,
  pp. 544–560. Springer, 2020. 44


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D. Ha, A. Dai, and Q. Le. Hypernetworks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR’17), 2017. 2, 3, 4
Chaoyang He, Haishan Ye, Li Shen, and Tong Zhang. Milenas: Efficient neural architecture search
  via mixed-level reformulation. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 11990–11999, 2020. 30, 44
Long P Hoang, Dung D Le, Tran Anh Tuan, and Tran Ngoc Thang. Improving pareto front learning
  via multi-sample hypernetworks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 37, pp. 7875–7883, 2023. 3, 43
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Thomas
  Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katherine Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia
  Guy, Simon Osindero, Karén Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Oriol Vinyals, Jack Rae, and Laurent Sifre.
  An empirical analysis of compute-optimal large language model training. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 30016–30030. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. 1
Chi-Hung Hsu, Shu-Huan Chang, Jhao-Hong Liang, Hsin-Ping Chou, Chun-Hao Liu, Shih-Chieh
  Chang, Jia-Yu Pan, Yu-Ting Chen, Wei Wei, and Da-Cheng Juan. Monas: Multi-objective neural
  architecture search using reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.10332, 2018. 44
C. Igel, Nikolaus Hansen, and Stefan Roth. Covariance matrix adaptation for multi-objective
  optimization. Evolutionary Computation, 15:1–28, 2007. 21
Rafael C Ito and Fernando J Von Zuben. Ofa 2 : A multi-objective perspective for the once-for-all
  neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13683, 2023. 44
Martin Jaggi. Revisiting frank-wolfe: Projection-free sparse convex optimization. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, 2013. 6, 20
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax.
  In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR’17), 2017.
  Published online: iclr.cc. 6, 19
Sébastien Jean, Orhan Firat, Kyunghyun Cho, Roland Memisevic, and Yoshua Bengio. Montreal
  neural machine translation systems for wmt’15. In Proceedings of the tenth workshop on statistical
  machine translation, pp. 134–140, 2015. 9
Qian Jiang, Xiaofan Zhang, Deming Chen, Minh N Do, and Raymond A Yeh. Eh-dnas: End-to-end
  hardware-aware differentiable neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12299, 2021.
  4, 44
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
   Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020. 1
Sunghoon Kim, Hyunjeong Kwon, Eunji Kwon, Youngchang Choi, Tae-Hyun Oh, and Seokhyeong
  Kang. Mdarts: Multi-objective differentiable neural architecture search. In 2021 Design, Automa-
  tion & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), pp. 1344–1349. IEEE, 2021. 44
Ivan Lazarevich, Matteo Grimaldi, Ravi Kumar, Saptarshi Mitra, Shahrukh Khan, and Sudhakar
  Sah. Yolobench: Benchmarking efficient object detectors on embedded systems. 2023 IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCVW), pp. 1161–1170, 2023. 44
Hayeon Lee, Eunyoung Hyung, and Sung Ju Hwang. Rapid neural architecture search by learning to
  generate graphs from datasets. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021a.
  5, 6, 10
Hayeon Lee, Sewoong Lee, Song Chong, and Sung Ju Hwang. Hardware-adaptive efficient latency
  prediction for nas via meta-learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 34, pp. 27016–27028. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021b. 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 22, 23, 28, 41


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jaeseong Lee, Duseok Kang, and Soonhoi Ha. S3nas: Fast npu-aware neural architecture search
  methodology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.02009, 2020. 44

Jayoung Lee, Pengcheng Wang, Ran Xu, Sarthak Jain, Venkat Dasari, Noah Weston, Yin Li, Saurabh
  Bagchi, and Somali Chaterji. Virtuoso: Energy- and latency-aware streamlining of streaming
  videos on systems-on-chips. ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst., 28(3), April 2023. ISSN
  1084-4309. 44

Chaojian Li, Zhongzhi Yu, Yonggan Fu, Yongan Zhang, Yang Zhao, Haoran You, Qixuan Yu, Yue
  Wang, and Yingyan (Celine) Lin. Hw-nas-bench: Hardware-aware neural architecture search
  benchmark. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 7, 8, 28

Guihong Li, Yuedong Yang, Kartikeya Bhardwaj, and Radu Marculescu. Zico: Zero-shot NAS via
  inverse coefficient of variation on gradients. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2023. 9

L. Li and A. Talwalkar. Random search and reproducibility for neural architecture search. In J. Peters
   and D. Sontag (eds.), Proceedings of The 36th Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence Conference
  (UAI’20), pp. 367–377. PMLR, 2020. 21, 44

Liam Li, Kevin G. Jamieson, Afshin Rostamizadeh, Ekaterina Gonina, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht,
  and Ameet Talwalkar. Massively parallel hyperparameter tuning. ArXiv, abs/1810.05934, 2018. 21

X. Lin, H. Zhen, Z. Li, Q. Zhang, and S. Kwong. Pareto multi-task learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. 3, 43

Xi Lin, Zhiyuan Yang, Qingfu Zhang, and Sam Tak Wu Kwong. Controllable pareto multi-task
  learning. ArXiv, abs/2010.06313, 2020. 3, 4, 23, 43

Chenxi Liu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Florian Schroff, Hartwig Adam, Wei Hua, Alan Loddon Yuille, and
  Li Fei-Fei. Auto-deeplab: Hierarchical neural architecture search for semantic image segmentation.
  2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 82–92,
  2019a. 44

H. Liu, K. Simonyan, and Y. Yang. DARTS: Differentiable architecture search. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2019b. 3, 4, 6, 43

Liyuan Liu, Chengyu Dong, Xiaodong Liu, Bin Yu, and Jianfeng Gao. Bridging discrete and
  backpropagation: Straight-through and beyond. Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023. 3, 6, 19, 43

Suyun Liu and Luís Nunes Vicente. The stochastic multi-gradient algorithm for multi-objective
  optimization and its application to supervised machine learning. Annals of Operations Research,
  pp. 1572–9338, 2021. 3, 43

Zhichao Lu, Kalyanmoy Deb, Erik Goodman, Wolfgang Banzhaf, and Vishnu Naresh Boddeti.
  Nsganetv2: Evolutionary multi-objective surrogate-assisted neural architecture search. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings,
  Part I 16, pp. 35–51. Springer, 2020. 43

Matouš Macháček and Ondřej Bojar. Results of the WMT14 metrics shared task. In Proceedings of
 the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pp. 293–301, Baltimore, Maryland, USA,
 June 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/v1/W14-3336. 9, 27

D. Mahapatra and V. Rajan. Multi-task learning with user preferences: Gradient descent with
  controlled ascent in pareto optimization. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML’20), pp. 6597–6607. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2020.
  3, 43

Natalia Martinez, Martin Bertran, and Guillermo Sapiro. Minimax pareto fairness: A multi objective
  perspective. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6755–6764. PMLR, 2020. 44


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rohit Mohan, Thomas Elsken, Arber Zela, Jan Hendrik Metzen, Benedikt Staffler, Thomas Brox,
  Abhinav Valada, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture search for dense prediction tasks in
  computer vision. Int. J. Comput. Vision, 131(7):1784–1807, April 2023. ISSN 0920-5691. 44
Michinari Momma, Chaosheng Dong, and Jia Liu. A multi-objective/multi-task learning framework
 induced by pareto stationarity. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 15895–15907.
 PMLR, 2022. 43
Sajad Movahedi, Melika Adabinejad, Ayyoob Imani, Arezou Keshavarz, Mostafa Dehghani, Azadeh
  Shakery, and Babak N Araabi. λ-darts: Mitigating performance collapse by harmonizing operation
  selection among cells. The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
  3
Saurav Muralidharan, Sharath Turuvekere Sreenivas, Raviraj Joshi, Marcin Chochowski, Mostofa
  Patwary, Mohammad Shoeybi, Bryan Catanzaro, Jan Kautz, and Pavlo Molchanov. Compact
  language models via pruning and knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14679, 2024.
  10
Aviv Navon, Aviv Shamsian, Gal Chechik, and Ethan Fetaya. Learning the pareto front with
  hypernetworks. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 3, 4, 43
Biswajit Paria, Kirthevasan Kandasamy, and Barnabás Póczos. A flexible framework for multi-
  objective bayesian optimization using random scalarizations. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelli-
  gence, pp. 766–776. PMLR, 2020. 21
H. Pham, M. Guan, B. Zoph, Q. Le, and J. Dean. Efficient neural architecture search via parameter
  sharing. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018. 3, 4, 44
Hoang Phan, Ngoc Tran, Trung Le, Toan Tran, Nhat Ho, and Dinh Phung. Stochastic multiple target
  sampling gradient descent. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:22643–22655,
  2022. 3, 43
Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V. Le. Regularized evolution for image
  classifier architecture search. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, AAAI’19. AAAI Press, 2019. ISBN 978-1-57735-809-1. 21
Binxin Ru, Clare Lyle, Lisa Schut, Miroslav Fil, Mark van der Wilk, and Yarin Gal. Speedy perfor-
  mance estimation for neural architecture search. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2021. 22
Michael Ruchte and Josif Grabocka. Scalable pareto front approximation for deep multi-objective
 learning. In 2021 IEEE international conference on data mining (ICDM), pp. 1306–1311. IEEE,
 2021. 3, 25
David Salinas, Valerio Perrone, Olivier Cruchant, and C. Archambeau. A multi-objective perspective
  on jointly tuning hardware and hyperparameters. ArXiv, abs/2106.05680, 2021. 21
David Salinas, Matthias Seeger, Aaron Klein, Valerio Perrone, Martin Wistuba, and Cedric Archam-
  beau. Syne tune: A library for large scale hyperparameter tuning and reproducible research. In
  International Conference on Automated Machine Learning, AutoML 2022, 2022. 7
Shreyas Saxena and Jakob Verbeek. Convolutional neural fabrics. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 29, 2016. 44
Robin Schmucker, Michele Donini, Muhammad Bilal Zafar, David Salinas, and C. Archambeau.
  Multi-objective asynchronous successive halving. ArXiv, abs/2106.12639, 2021. 21
Ozan Sener and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-task learning as multi-objective optimization. In Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2018. 3, 6, 43
Albert Shaw, Daniel Hunter, Forrest Landola, and Sammy Sidhu. Squeezenas: Fast neural architecture
  search for faster semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision Workshops, pp. 0–0, 2019. 44


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Samuel L Smith, Benoit Dherin, David Barrett, and Soham De. On the origin of implicit regularization
  in stochastic gradient descent. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 43
Rhea Sanjay Sukthanker, Arjun Krishnakumar, Mahmoud Safari, and Frank Hutter. Weight-
  entanglement meets gradient-based neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10440,
  2023. 6, 43
Rhea Sanjay Sukthanker, Arber Zela, Benedikt Staffler, Joerg K.H. Franke, and Frank Hutter.
  Hw-gpt-bench: Hardware-aware architecture benchmark for language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.10299, 2024. 7, 10, 23, 27, 28, 39, 41
M. Tan, B. Chen, R. Pang, V. Vasudevan, M. Sandler, A. Howard, and Q. Le. Mnasnet: Platform-
 aware neural architecture search for mobile. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2019. 44
Alvin Wan, Xiaoliang Dai, Peizhao Zhang, Zijian He, Yuandong Tian, Saining Xie, Bichen Wu,
  Matthew Yu, Tao Xu, Kan Chen, et al. Fbnetv2: Differentiable neural architecture search for
  spatial and channel dimensions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12965–12974, 2020. 4
Dilin Wang, Meng Li, Chengyue Gong, and Vikas Chandra. Attentivenas: Improving neural
  architecture search via attentive sampling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6418–6427, 2021. 4, 44
H. Wang, Z. Wu, Z. Liu, H. Cai, L. Zhu, C. Gan, and S. Han. Hat: Hardware-aware transformers for
  efficient natural language processing. arXiv:2005.14187[cs.CL], 2020a. 27
Hanrui Wang, Zhanghao Wu, Zhijian Liu, Han Cai, Ligeng Zhu, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. HAT:
  Hardware-aware transformers for efficient natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 58th
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7675–7688, Online, July
  2020b. Association for Computational Linguistics. 1, 7, 9, 23, 28
Zifeng Wang, Zizhao Zhang, Chen-Yu Lee, Han Zhang, Ruoxi Sun, Xiaoqi Ren, Guolong Su, Vincent
  Perot, Jennifer Dy, and Tomas Pfister. Learning to prompt for continual learning. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 139–149, 2022. 4, 23
Colin White, Mahmoud Safari, Rhea Sanjay Sukthanker, Binxin Ru, Thomas Elsken, Arber Zela,
  Debadeepta Dey, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture search: Insights from 1000 papers. ArXiv,
  abs/2301.08727, 2023. 1
Bichen Wu, Xiaoliang Dai, Peizhao Zhang, Yanghan Wang, Fei Sun, Yiming Wu, Yuandong Tian,
  Peter Vajda, Yangqing Jia, and Kurt Keutzer. Fbnet: Hardware-aware efficient convnet design
  via differentiable neural architecture search. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10734–10742, 2019. 4, 44
Yan Wu, Zhiwu Huang, Suryansh Kumar, Rhea Sanjay Sukthanker, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Trilevel neural architecture search for efficient single image super-resolution. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2101.06658, 2021. 4, 44
S. Xie, H. Zheng, C. Liu, and L. Lin. SNAS: stochastic neural architecture search. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. 3, 6
Yuhui Xu, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Xin Chen, Guo-Jun Qi, Qi Tian, and Hongkai Xiong.
  Pc-darts: Partial channel connections for memory-efficient architecture search. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a. 3
Yuhui Xu, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Xin Chen, Bowen Shi, Qi Tian, and Hongkai Xiong.
  Latency-aware differentiable neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.06392, 2020b.
  4, 44
Xinmin Yang, Wei Yao, Haian Yin, Shangzhi Zeng, and Jin Zhang. Gradient-based algorithms for
  multi-objective bi-level optimization. Science China Mathematics, 2024. 43


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Feiyang Ye, Baijiong Lin, Xiaofeng Cao, Yu Zhang, and Ivor W. Tsang. A first-order multi-gradient
  algorithm for multi-objective bi-level optimization. In ECAI, volume 392 of Frontiers in Artificial
  Intelligence and Applications, pp. 2621–2628. IOS Press, 2024. 43
Mao Ye and Qiang Liu. Pareto navigation gradient descent: a first-order algorithm for optimization
 in pareto set. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 2246–2255. PMLR, 2022. 43
Arber Zela, Thomas Elsken, Tonmoy Saikia, Yassine Marrakchi, Thomas Brox, and Frank Hutter.
  Understanding and robustifying differentiable architecture search. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2020. 10, 43
Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scaling vision transformers.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  12104–12113, 2022. 1
Dingkun Zhang, Sijia Li, Chen Chen, Qingsong Xie, and Haonan Lu. Laptop-diff: Layer pruning
  and normalized distillation for compressing diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.11098,
  2024. 10
Li Lyna Zhang, Yuqing Yang, Yuhang Jiang, Wenwu Zhu, and Yunxin Liu. Fast hardware-aware
  neural architecture search. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 692–693, 2020. 44
Miao Zhang, Steven Su, Shirui Pan, Xiaojun Chang, Ehsan Abbasnejad, and Reza Haffari. idarts:
 Differentiable architecture search with stochastic implicit gradients. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning, 2021. 3
Qi Zhang, Peiyao Xiao, Shaofeng Zou, and Kaiyi Ji. MGDA converges under generalized smoothness,
  provably. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. 43
Yiyang Zhao, Linnan Wang, Kevin Yang, Tianjun Zhang, Tian Guo, and Yuandong Tian. Multi-
  objective optimization by learning space partition. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. 10, 21
B. Zoph and Q. V. Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR’17), 2017. 43


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Algorithmic components                                                                    19
       A.1 Discrete Samplers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
       A.2 Details on the Architect Gradient Computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
       A.3 Frank-Wolfe Solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20

     B Multi-objective NAS algorithms                                                            21

     C Evaluation Details                                                                        21
       C.1 Other Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
       C.2 MODNAS-SoTL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         22

     D Experimental Details                                                                      22
       D.1 MetaPredictor Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22
       D.2 MetaHypernetwork Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
       D.3 MODNAS Hyperparameter Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          25
       D.4 Normalization of objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25

     E Details on Search Spaces                                                                  27

     F Datasets and Devices                                                                      27

     G Runtime Comparison                                                                        28

     H Additional Experiments                                                                    28
       H.1 Additional Results on NAS-Bench-201 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       28
       H.2 Additional Results on Hardware-aware Transformers (En-De) . . . . . . . . . .         39
       H.3 Additional Results on the HW-GPT space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      39
       H.4 Additional Results on MobileNetV3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     41

     I   Further Discussion on the Robustness of MODNAS                                          43

     J   Extended Related Work                                                                   43


                                                   18
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 A     A LGORITHMIC COMPONENTS
 In this section, we provide the pseudocodes for some of the algorithmic components we use in
 MODNAS.

 A.1   D ISCRETE S AMPLERS
 Given the architecture parameters α̃Φ from the MetaHypernetwork, we obtain a differen-
                              sample from the Architect as αΦ ← π − stop_g(π) + αΦ , where
 tiable discrete architecture
 αΦ ∼ Cat softmax1 (~   αΦ ) and
                                         αΦ + softmaxτ (~αΦ )                 softmax (~
                                                                                           1 αΦ )
       π ← 2 · softmax1 stop_g ln(                            )−α  ~Φ + α~Φ −                     .
                                                 2                                       2
 Here, Cat is the categorical distribution, τ is the temperature in the tempered softmax
                       exp(αi /τ )
 softmaxτ (α)i = P|O|              , and stop_g(·) duplicates its input and detaches it from backprop-
                      j=1 exp(αj /τ )
 agation. Refer to the ReinMax paper (Liu et al., 2023) for more details. The algorithm pseudocode
 on how a one-hot encoded (discrete) architecture is sampled given an unnormalized architectural
 distribution α̃ is given in Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3, for the Straight-Through (Jang et al., 2017)
 and ReinMax (Liu et al., 2023) gradient estimators, respectively.

  Algorithm 2: Straight − Through (Jang               Algorithm 3: ReinMax (Liu et al., 2023)
  et al., 2017)                                       Data: α̃: softmax input, τ : temperature
  Data: α̃: softmax input, τ : temperature            Result: α: one-hot samples
  Result: α: one-hot samples                        1 π0 ← softmax1 (α̃)

1 π0 ← softmax1 (α̃)                                2 α ∼ Cat(π0 )

2 α ∼ Cat(π0 )
                                                            α+softmaxτ (α̃)
                                                    3 π1 ←
                                                                   2
3 π1 ← softmaxτ (α̃)

                                                    4 π1 ← softmax1 stop_g ln(π1 )− α̃ + α̃
4 α ← π1 − stop_g(π1 ) + α                                           1
                                                    5 π2 = 2 · π1 −
5 return α                                                           2 · π0
                                                    6 α ← π2 − stop_g(π2 ) + α
                                                    7 return α



 A.2   D ETAILS ON THE Architect G RADIENT C OMPUTATION
 In this section, we provide additional details on how the Architect utilizes the Straight-Through
 Estimator (STE) to backpropagate through the sampling of discrete architectural parameters.
 Forward pass:
 1. The MetaHypernetwork parameterizes the unnormalized architectural distribution: α̃ = HΦ ,
    where Φ are the MetaHypernetwork parameters.
 2. α̃ is passed to Architect and it does the following steps:
     (a) Normalizes α̃ and samples a one-hot (discrete) α: α ∼ Cat(softmax(α̃)).
     (b) Sets the Supernetwork architectural parameters to the one-hot α, i.e. resulting in a single
         subnetwork by masking the Supernetwork.
     (c) Passes α as input to MetaPredictor.
 3. The Supernetwork and MetaPredictor do a forward pass using the training data (e.g., images)
    and hardware embedding, respectively.
 4. Compute the scalarized loss function.
 The main problem now is that we cannot directly backpropagate the gradient computation through
 the Architect to update the MetaHypernetwork parameters Φ. This is due to the sampling from
 the Categorical distribution in step 2/(a) above being non-differentiable. The STE approximates the
 gradient for the discrete architectural parameters by ignoring this actual non-differentiable sampling
 operation.


                                                  19
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Backward pass:
    1. Calculate the gradient of the scalarized loss with respect to the discrete architectural parameters α:
       ∂L/∂α.
    2. Propagate this gradient back to Φ (MetaHypernetwork parameters) via the probability distribu-
       tion:
                                          ∂L      ∂α
                                 ∇Φ L =                  ∇Φ softmax(HΦ ).
                                          ∂α ∂softmax
       STE backpropagates "through" a proxy that treats the non-differentiable function (sampling of
                                                  ∂α
       α) as an identity function (as a result ∂softmax = 1) and computes the gradient w.r.t. to the
       MetaHypernetwork parameters:

                                                   ∂L
                                         ∇Φ L =       ∇Φ softmax(HΦ )
                                                   ∂α
       .
    To recap, during the forward pass the Architect samples a discrete architecture from an architecture
    distribution parameterized by the MetaHypernetwork, and during backpropagation the STE is
    utilized to propagate back through the sampling operation and update the MetaHypernetwork
    parameters, hence the distribution from which the discrete architectures in the next iteration will be
    sampled.

    A.3    F RANK -W OLFE S OLVER
    In this section, we provide the pseudocode of the Frank-Wolfe solver (Jaggi, 2013) used to compute
    the gradient coefficients used for the MGD updates. To solve the constrained optimization problem,
    the Frank-Wolfe solver uses analytical solution for the line search with T = 2 (Algorithm 5).

    Algorithm 4: FrankWolfeSolver (Jaggi, 2013)
           1            T
  Data: gΦ   , . . . , gΦ
  Result: γ = (γ1 , . . . , γT )
                           1     1
1 Initialize γ ← ( , . . . ,
                           T     T)
                                    i T j
2 Precompute M s.t. Mi,j = (gΦ ) (gΦ )
3 repeat
                          PT
4     t̂ ← argminr t=1 γt Mrt
5     et̂ ← Mt̂,· ;                                                              // t̂-th row of M
                                       T
6     δ̂ ← argminδ (1 − δ)γ + δet̂ M (1 − δ)γ + δet̂ ;                       // using Algorithm 5
7     γ ← (1 − δ̂)γ + δ̂et̂
8 until δ̂ ∼ 0 or Number of Iterations Limit;
9 return γ


                                                       2
    Algorithm 5: Solver minδ∈[0,1] ||δθ + (1 − δ)θ̄||2
1 if θT θ̄ ≥ θT θ then
2     δ←1
           T         T
3 else if θ θ̄ ≥ θ̄ θ̄ then
4     δ←0
5 else
             θ̄−θ)T θ̄
6     δ ← (||θ−  θ̄||2
                    2

7   return δ


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     M ULTI - OBJECTIVE NAS ALGORITHMS
This section elaborates on the multi-objective NAS methods we utilize as baselines in Section 4.

• Random Search (RS) is a robust baseline for both single-objective (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012; Li
  & Talwalkar, 2020) and multi-objective (Cai et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021a) architecture searches.
  This baseline involves randomly sampling architectures from the search space and computing the
  Pareto front from these samples. While RS is computationally efficient and often effective, it may
  not always find the optimal architectures, especially in larger search spaces.
• Local Search (LS) is adapted to refine solutions near Pareto-optimal points in multi-objective
  optimization, iteratively improving solutions within defined neighborhoods.
• Multi-objective Asynchronous Successive Halving (MO-ASHA) (Schmucker et al., 2021) is a
  multi-fidelity method that utilizes an asynchronous successive halving scheduler (Li et al., 2018) and
  non-dominating sorting for budget allocation. MO-ASHA uses the NSGA-II selection mechanism
  and the ϵ-net (Salinas et al., 2021) exploration strategy that ranks candidates in the same Pareto
  set by iteratively selecting the one with the largest Euclidian distance from the previous set of
  candidates.
• Multi-Objective Regularized Evolution (MO-RE) builds on Regularized Evolution (RE) (Real
  et al., 2019), which evolves a population of candidates through mutation and periodically removes
  the oldest individuals, thus regularizing the population. MO-RE adapts this by using multi-objective
  non-dominated sorting to score candidates, with parents sampled based on these scores.
• Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II) (Deb et al., 2002) is a multi-objective
  evolutionary algorithm designed to find a Pareto set of architectures. It ranks architectures using non-
  dominated sorting and maintains diversity with crowding distance. Through selection, crossover,
  and mutation, NSGA-II evolves populations towards the Pareto front, although it is known for
  being sample inefficient.
• Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) (Igel et al., 2007) is an evolu-
  tionary algorithm particularly effective in continuous optimization problems. In a multi-objective
  context, it adapts its covariance matrix to the shape of the search space, iteratively updating its sam-
  pling distribution to favor promising regions. This method efficiently handles complex, non-linear
  optimization landscapes and can be adapted to multi-objective scenarios by using techniques such
  as Pareto-based selection to maintain a diverse set of solutions.
• Latent Action MOO (LaMOO) (Zhao et al., 2022) uses a parametric model and Monte Carlo Tree
  Search (MCTS) to learn to partition the objective space based on the dominance number, which
  indicates the vicinity of a point to the Pareto front relative to the other samples. qEHVI+LaMOO
  and CMA-ES+LaMOO use the original qEHVI and CMA-ES, respectively, as an inner routine in
  the learned subspaces.
• Bayesian Optimization with Random Scalarizations (RS-BO) (Paria et al., 2020) uses an
  acquisition function based on random linear scalarizations of objectives across multiple points to
  find the Pareto-optimal set that minimizes Bayesian regret.
• Bayesian Optimization with Linear Scalarizations (LS-BO) is similar to RS-BO but optimizes
  a single objective derived from a fixed linear combination of two objectives instead of using
  randomized linear scalarizations.
• Expected Hypervolume Improvement (qEHVI) (Daulton et al., 2020) is a Bayesian optimization
  acquisition function that explores the Pareto front by quantifying potential hypervolume improve-
  ment. This approach measures the volume dominated by Pareto-optimal solutions and guides
  the search towards regions likely to offer better trade-offs, aiding in the discovery of diverse
  Pareto-optimal solutions.

C     E VALUATION D ETAILS
C.1   OTHER M ETRICS
For NAS-Bench-201, in addition, we evaluate the generational distance (GD) and inverse generational
distance (IGD) (see Appendix C). See Figure 20 for the results complementary to the hypervolume
radar plot in Figure 3 of the main paper.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Generational Distance (GD) and Inverse Generational Distance (IGD). Given a reference set
S ⊂ A and a Pareto set Pα ⊂ A with dim(A) = K, the GD indicator is defined as the distance
between every point α ∈ Pα and the closest point in s ∈ S, averaged over the size of Pα :
                                                    X                     1/2
                                            1
                          GD(Pα , S) =                    min d(α, s)2          ,
                                          |Pα |           s∈S
                                                   α∈Pα
                  qP
                    K               2
where d(α, s) =       k=1 (αk − sk ) is the Euclidean distance from α to its nearest reference point
in S.
The inverted generational distance (IGD) is computed as IGD(Pα , S) = GD(S, Pα ).

Generational Distance Plus (GD+ ) and Inverse Generational Distance Plus (IGD+ ).
GD+ (Pα , S) = IGD+ (S, Pα ) replaces the euclidean distance d(α, s) in GD with:
                                       v
                                       uK
                                       uX
                           +
                         d (α, s) = t (max{αk − sk , 0})2
                                             k=1


C.2   MODNAS-S OTL
On the NAS-Bench-201 search space, since the architectures evaluated with the supernetwork weights
are not highly correlated to the ones trained independently from scratch, we employ the Sum of
Training Losses (SoTL) proxy from Ru et al. (2021). To profile the Pareto front with SoTL, we firstly
evaluate the 24 architectures using the exponential moving average of the sum of training losses for
                                    P12
the initial 12 epochs of training as e=1 0.912−e Ltrain (w, α), and then train from scratch only the
subset of architectures in the Pareto set built using the SoTL evaluations. We present the results of
MODNAS-SoTL in Figure 20, where we compare to the other baselines as well. As we see, we can
further decrease the evaluation cost via MODNAS-SoTL, by trading off the number of solutions in
the Pareto set with HV.

D     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
D.1   MetaPredictor A RCHITECTURES

For all search spaces we set the dimensionality of the hardware embedding to 10. This corresponds
to latency evaluations on a set of 10 reference architectures, which are the same used by Lee et al.
(2021b).

NAS-Bench-201. For the NAS-Bench-201 (Dong & Yang, 2020) search space we use a Graph
Convolutional Network (GCN) as proposed in Dudziak et al. (2020). Furthermore, in addition to
the one-hot operation encoding and adjacency matrix corresponding to the architecture cells, we
also input the hardware embedding to this predictor, as done by Lee et al. (2021b). The number
of nodes in the GCN is 8 and the dimensionality of the layers is set to 100 following HELP (Lee
et al., 2021b). In order to show the effectiveness of our MetaHypernetwork to learn the hardware
device similarities, in Figure 12 we cluster the original device embedding vectors and the learned
MetaHypernetwork embeddings using K-means clustering after reducing their dimensionality using
t-SNE. As we can see, the MetaHypernetwork learns to cluster similar devices together in latent
space, demonstrating the efficacy of our algorithm.

MobileNetV3 (OFA). Following HELP (Lee et al., 2021b), we employ a simple feedforward neural
network in the MobileNetV3 search space. The input dimension of the MetaPredictor is set to 160,
matching the concatenated architecture encoding dimension. We set the size of the hidden layers to
100. Specifically, the MetaPredictor comprises 2 linear layers with ReLU activation for processing
the 160-dimensional one-hot architecture encoding and 2 linear layers for processing the hardware
embedding. The outputs from these two paths are concatenated and passed through a final linear
layer to predict the latency.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            TSNE Projection for Hardware Embeddings                                                                           TSNE Projection for Device Pool Similarities
                                                                              titanx_1                                                300      eyeriss                                                       Cluster 0
                   200                                                     1080ti_32 samsung_s7                                               samsung_s7              samsung_a50                            Cluster 1
                                                                                                                                      200                                                                    Cluster 2
                                                                                                                                                                  raspi4                                     Cluster 3
                                                                              1080ti_1
                                          pixel3 gold_6240             gold_6226                                                      100                 pixel3         titan_rtx_256
                   100                                                                                                                                                             pixel2
                                                                           titanx_32                                                               titanx_256
TSNE Dimension 2


                                                                                                                   TSNE Dimension 2
                                                                                                                                       0                                                  fpga
                                                                                                                                                                                 silver_4114
                                           silver_4210r                                                                                                1080ti_256
                                silver_4114 essential_ph_1
                            samsung_a50
                       0               fpga
                                                                                                                                      100                                                      silver_4210r
                                     titan_rtx_256                                                                                                                                         gold_6240
                                 raspi4      pixel2                                                                                   200                                                        essential_ph_1
                   100
                                                              1080ti_256
                                                                                                  Cluster 0                           300                                        gold_6226
                                                          titanx_256                                                                                                                     titanx_32
                   200                                                                            Cluster 1                                                                1080ti_32
                                                                                                  Cluster 2                           400                                         titanx_1
                                        eyeriss                                                   Cluster 3                                                              1080ti_1
                           600        400         200     0      200        400                                                             300 250 200 150 100 50 0                  50      100
                                                  TSNE Dimension 1                                                                                      TSNE Dimension 1

                             (a) Original hardware embeddings                                                                                 (b) MetaHypernetwork embeddings

Figure 12: K-means clustering on the t-SNE projections of the original hardware device embeddings
and learned embeddings from the MetaHypernetwork on NB201.


Seq-Seq Transformer (HAT). HELP 3 does not release the architecture or the meta-learned
pretrained predictor for HAT(Wang et al., 2020b). However, HAT 4 releases code and pretrained
models for each of the devices and tasks trained independently. Hence, we build our single per-task
MetaPredictor based on the architecture of the HAT predictor, i.e. a simple feedforward neural
network. The input dimension corresponds to the one-hot architecture encoding of the candidate
Transformer architecture. Additionally, to condition on the hardware embedding, we include 2
extra linear layers for processing the hardware embedding, which is then concatenated with the
processed architecture encoding to produce the final latency prediction. The hidden dimension of the
MetaHypernetwork is set to 400, with 6 hidden layers. The predictor’s input feature dimension is
130.

HW-GPT-Bench. We utilize the raw energy observations released in (Sukthanker et al., 2024)
to train a single hardware-aware meta-predictor across energy observations from eight GPU types.
Our meta-predictor is a simple MLP, similar to the one in HAT, with 4 hidden layers, 2 layers for
processing the hardware embedding (which the network is conditioned on). The MLP’s hidden
dimension is 256, and the input feature dimension matches the one-hot encoded architecture feature
map for this space, i.e., 80.

D.2                        MetaHypernetwork A RCHITECTURE

Given a preference vector r ∈ RM , we use the hypernetwork hϕ (r) : RM → A, parameterized
by ϕ ∈ Rn , to generate an un-normalized architecture distribution α̃ that is later used to compute
the upper-level updates in (4). In our experiments, hϕ is composed of M − 1 5 embedding layers
em , m ∈ {2, . . . , M } with nm possible learnable vectors of size dim(A)
                                                                     M −1 . The output of hϕ is the
concatenation of all M − 1 outputs of em , such that its size matches dim(A). See Figure 13 for
details.
In order to enable the hypernetwork to generate architectures across multiple devices, inspired by
Wang et al. (2022) and Lin et al. (2020), we propose a MetaHypernetwork HΦ (r, dt ) : RM ×
HM −1 → A that can meta-learn across T different hardware devices (see Figure 1). The input to
HΦ is a concatenation of device feature vectors across all metrics, i.e. dt = ⊕M           m
                                                                                     m=2 dt . Similar to
                     m
Lee et al. (2021b), dt ∈ H is a fixed-size feature vector representative of device t ∈ {1, . . . , T } and
objective m ∈ {2, . . . , M }, that is obtained by evaluating a fixed set of reference architectures for a
given metric. The MetaHypernetwork, with Φ = ∪K           k=0 ϕk parameters, contains a bank of K > T
hypernetworks {hϕk (r)}K   k=1  and  an additional linear layer eϕ0 (dt ) : HM −1 → RK at the beginning,
that learns a similarity map for every device feature to the hypernetworks’ bank. If we denote by

                   3
                       https://github.com/HayeonLee/HELP
                   4
                       https://github.com/mit-han-lab/hardware-aware-transformers
                   5
                       m = 1 (CE loss) does not have an hardware embedding.


                                                                                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


hϕ1:k = (hϕ1 · · · hϕk )T the vector of all hypernetworks in the bank, then, given a preference vector r,
to obtain α̃ for device t, we compute a weighted mixture of predictions of all hϕ in the hypernetwork
bank as follows:
                                                   XK
                              α̃Φ = HΦ (r, dt ) =      eϕ0 (dt )[k] · hϕk (r)
                                                       k=1
                                                 = eϕ0 (dt ) · hϕ1:k (r).

We keep the MetaHypernetwork architecture
similar across search spaces. The only thing
we adapt is the output dimensionality of the
hypernetwork (in the hypernetwork bank of
MetaHypernetwork), which corresponds to the
dimensionality of the architecture parameters
of the respective search space. We set the size
of the initial hardware embedding layer and the
hypernetwork bank to 50 for all search spaces.
Furthermore, each hypernetwork has 100 pos-
sible learnable embeddings em , for every ob-
jective m ∈ {2, . . . , M }, to map the scalar-
ization vector to an architecture. We quantize
the continuous sampled rm ∈ [0, 1] to the dis-
crete [0, 1, . . . 100] interval before indexing the                        *
respective embedding layers. See Figure 2 for
an illustration of the MetaHypernetwork archi-
tecture.
For the NAS-Bench-201 search space, we use
a single embedding layer of dimensionality 30,
corresponding to the dimensionality of the ar-
chitecture space: 6 × 5 (6 edges and 5 operation
choices on each edge). For the 3-objective ex-
periment, we include an additional embedding            Figure 13: MetaHypernetwork architecture
for the energy usage objective, concatenated            overview in the case of M objectives. Note that
with the latency embedding before passing it            m = 1 is reserved for the accuracy objective,
to the MetaHypernetwork. The individual hy-             which we model through the cross-entropy loss
pernetworks in the MetaHypernetwork bank                in the Supernetwork. The initial linear layer eϕ0
have 2 embedding layers with dimensionality             gets the dt hardware embedding and outputs a
15, whose outputs are concatenated to match the         weight that scales each of the K hypernetworks’
architecture space dimensions.                          (orange boxes) outputs from the hypernetwork
In the MobileNetV3 space, we use 4 embedding            bank. The scaled architectural parameters are then
layers – for depth, expansion ratio, kernel size,       summed up element-wise. All individual hyper-
and resolution. The space comprises 5 blocks,           network hϕk get as input the same scalarization
each with 3 depth choices, making the depth em-         r. Each of them has M − 1 embedding layers
bedding layer dimensionality 5 × 3. The kernel          with dimensions nm × dim(A)
                                                                                 M −1 , ∀m ∈ {2, . . . , M }
and expansion embedding layers have dimen-              that gets as input the scalarizations for objectives
sions 5 × 4 × 3, corresponding to 5 blocks with         m = 2, . . . , m = M , and yields a vector of size
a maximum depth of 4 and 3 possible kernel              dim(A)
                                                          M −1 . The output from the M − 1 embedding
size or expansion ratio choices. The resolution         layers are concatenated to give the architecture en-
embedding layer has a dimension of 25, repre-           coding α̃.
senting 25 possible resolution choices.
In the Seq-Seq Transformer (HAT) space, the individual hypernetworks of the MetaHypernetwork
utilize 9 embedding layers (the encoder layer count is fixed; see Table 3):
  • 2 embedding layers of size 2 for the encoder and decoder blocks to map the scalarization to the
    embedding dimension architecture parameter, held constant throughout the encoder or decoder
    block.
  • 2 embedding layers with dimensions 6 × 3 (6 encoder/decoder layers, 3 choices) for the linear
    layer size in every attention block for both encoder and decoder.


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  • 2 embedding layers with dimensions 6 × 2 for the number of heads in each attention block.
  • 1 embedding layer of size 6 to encode the 6 possible choices for the number of layers in the
    decoder.
  • 1 embedding layer of size 6 × 3 (6 encoder layers, 3 choices) for the arbitrary encoder layer
    choice for attention.
  • 1 embedding layer of size 6 × 2 (6 encoder layers, 2 choices) for the number of heads in the
    encoder-decoder attention.
For the HW-GPT-Bench space, the individual hypernetworks of the MetaHypernetwork contain 5
embedding layers:
  • 1 embedding layer of dimension 1 × 3 for mapping the scalarization to the embedding dimension
    architecture parameter of the language model, with 3 choices.
  • 1 embedding layer of dimension 1×3 for mapping the scalarization to the layer number dimension
    architecture parameter of the language model, with 3 choices.
  • 1 embedding layer of dimension 12 × 3 for mapping the scalarization to the mlp_ratio dimension
    architecture parameter of the language model, with 12 layers and 3 mlp_ratio choices per layer.
  • 1 embedding layer of dimension 12×3 for mapping the scalarization to the num_heads dimension
    architecture parameter of the language model, with 12 layers and 3 choices per layer.
  • 1 embedding layer of dimension 2 for toggling the bias in linear layers on or off.

D.3    MODNAS H YPERPARAMETER C ONFIGURATIONS
In Table 2, we show the search hyperparameters and their corresponding values we use to conduct
our experiments with MODNAS. For the convolutional spaces we subtract a cosine similarity penalty
from the scalarized loss following (Ruchte & Grabocka, 2021):

                 t                                            r T Lt (Dvalid , w, αΦ )
                gΦ ← r T ∇Φ Lt (Dvalid , w, αΦ ) − λ∇Φ                                    ,          (6)
                                                           ||r|| ||Lt (Dvalid , w, αΦ )||
where || · || is the l2 norm. We set λ to 0.001. Empirically we did not observe significant differences
on disabling the cosine penalty term.

D.4    N ORMALIZATION OF OBJECTIVES
Since our method relies on a scalarization of different objectives, it is important that the objectives
being optimized are on the same scale. For simplicity, lets consider the scenario where the two
objectives of interest are the cross-entropy loss and latency. Since we pretrain and freeze our
MetaPredictor, the latency-scale remains constant throughout the search, while the cross-entropy
loss of the Supernetwork (likely) decreases over time. To this end, we use the following max-min
normalization to normalize the objectives:
                                                 Lm
                                                  t (·, αΦ ) − min(L̄)
                                 Lm
                                  t (·, αΦ ) =                         ,                             (7)
                                                  max(L̄) − min(L̄)
            SN
where L̄ = i=1 stop_g Lm               i
                             t (·, αi ) is the set of losses evaluated on N architectures and potentially
N previous steps. For the latency objective, we precompute these sample-statistics using N samples
(ground-truth for NAS-Bench-201 and predicted for OFA and HAT spaces) from the search space,
whilst for the cross-entropy loss we compute them throughout the search. Furthermore, to take into
account the decreasing cross-entropy, we reset the cross-entropy loss statistics after every epoch.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Table 2: Hyperparameters used on different search spaces

          Search Space                         Hyperparameter Type                          Value
                                                          learning rate                     3e-4
                                                          weight decay                      1e-3
                                                          embedding layer size               100
                                      MetaHypernetwork
                                                          hypernetwork bank size              50
                                                          optimizer                        Adam
                                                          ReinMax temperature                  1
                                                          learning rate                     0.025
                                                          momentum                            0.9
          NAS-Bench-201                                   weight decay                     0.0027
                                                          learning rate scheduler          cosine
                                                          epochs                             100
                                                          batch size                         256
                                      Supernetwork
                                                          gradient clipping                    5
                                                          cutout                             true
                                                          cutout length                       16
                                                          initial channels                    16
                                                          optimizer                         SGD
                                                          train portion                       0.5
                                                          learning rate                      1e-5
                                                          weight decay                       1e-3
                                                          embedding layer size               100
                                      MetaHypernetwork
                                                          hypernetwork bank size              50
                                                          optimizer                         Adam
                                                          ReinMax temperature                  1
                                                          learning rate                      1e-3
                                                          momentum                            0.9
          MobileNetV3 (OFA)                               weight decay                       3e-5
                                                          learning rate scheduler           cosine
                                                          epochs                              50
                                                          batch size                          32
                                      Supernetwork
                                                          bn_momentum                         0.1
                                                          bn_eps                             1e-5
                                                          dropout                             0.1
                                                          width                               1.2
                                                          optimizer                          SGD
                                                          train portion                       1.0
                                                          learning rate                      3e-4
                                                          weight decay                       1e-3
                                                          embedding layer size                100
                                      MetaHypernetwork
                                                          hypernetwork bank size              50
                                                          optimizer                         Adam
                                                          ReinMax temperature                  1
                                                          learning rate                      1e-7
                                                          momentum                            0.9
          Seq-Seq Transformer (HAT)                       weight decay                        0.0
                                                          learning rate scheduler           cosine
                                                          epochs                              110
                                                          batch size/max-tokens              4096
                                      Supernetwork
                                                          criterion                 smoothed_cross_entropy
                                                          attention-dropout                   0.1
                                                          dropout                             0.3
                                                          precision                        float32
                                                          optimizer                         Adam
                                                          train portion                       1.0
                                                          learning rate                      1e-5
                                                          weight decay                       1e-3
                                                          embedding layer size                100
                                      MetaHypernetwork
                                                          hypernetwork bank size              50
                                                          optimizer                         Adam
                                                          ReinMax temperature                  1
                                                          learning rate                   0.000316
                                                          momentum                             -
          HW-GPT-Bench                                    weight decay                        0.1
                                                          learning rate scheduler           cosine
                                                          steps                              800k
                                                          batch size/max-tokens             32768
                                      Supernetwork
                                                          criterion                     cross_entropy
                                                          attention-dropout                   0.0
                                                          dropout                             0.0
                                                          precision                        bfloat16
                                                          optimizer                        AdamW
                                                          train portion                       1.0


                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    D ETAILS ON S EARCH S PACES
NAS-Bench-201 (Dong & Yang, 2020) is a con- Table 3: Encoder-Decoder Search Space for HAT.
volutional, cell-based search space. The search
space consists of 3 stages, each with number Module Searchable Dim                        Choices
of channels 16, 32 and 64, respectively. Each Encoder No. of Layers                       [6] (fixed)
stage contains a convolutional cell repeated 5                Embedding dim               [640, 512]
                                                              No. of heads                [8, 4]
times. Here, every cell is represented as a di-               FFN dim                     [3072, 2048, 1024]
rected acyclic graph (DAG) which has 4 nodes, Decoder No. of layers                       [6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1]
densely connected with 6 edges. Each edge has                 Embedding dim               [640, 512]
5 possible operation choices: a skip connection,              No. of heads                [8, 4]
                                                              FFN dim                     [3072, 2048, 1024]
a zero operation, a 3×3 convolution, a 5×5 con-               Arbitrary-Encoder-Layer     [-1, 1, 2]
volution or an average pooling operation. NAS-                Enc-Dec attention num heads [8, 4]
Bench-201 is a tabular benchmark exhaustively
constructed, where the objective is finding the optimal cell for the given macro skeleton.
MobileNetV3 proposed in OFA (Cai et al., 2020) is a macro convolutional search space. The
different searchable dimensions in the search space are the depth (per block), the kernel size (for
every layer in every block) and the channel expansion ratio (for every layer in every block). There
are a total of 5 blocks, each with 3 possible depth choices and every layer in this block has 3 possible
kernel sizes and channel expansion ratio choices. This amounts to a total search space size of
((3 × 3)2 + (3 × 3)3 + (3 × 3)4 )5 ≈ 2 × 1019 . Additionally, every architecture has 25 possible choices
for the size of the input resolution. The 3 possible choices for depth, kernel size and expansion ratio
are {2, 3, 4}, {3, 5, 7} and {3, 4, 6}, respectively. The input resolution choices are {128, 132, 136,
140, 144, 148, 152, 156, 160, 164, 168, 172, 176, 180, 184, 188, 192, 196, 200, 204, 208, 212, 216,
220, 224}. We use a width factor of 1.2 similar to OFA (Cai et al., 2020).
Seq-Seq Encoder-Decoder Transformer (HAT) (Wang et al., 2020a) for the En-De machine
translation task has a searchable number of layers, embedding dimension, feedforward expansion
layer dim per-layer, number of heads per-layer for both the encoder and the decoder sub-modules. In
addition to this, the number of encoder layers the decoder attends to, and the number of attention
heads in the encoder-decoder attention is also searchable. We present the details of the search space
in Table 3.
HW-GPT-Bench (Sukthanker et al., 2024) is a decoder-only transformer space designed for autore-
gressive language modeling. The search space includes choices for embedding dimensions {768, 384,
192}, the number of layers from {10, 11, 12}, the MLP expansion ratio per layer from {2,3,4}, the
number of heads per layer from {12,8,4}, and the option to toggle the bias parameter on or off in the
layers.

      Table 4: Search-test split for hardware devices and datasets for different search spaces.

 Search Space                Train-devices                                            Test devices                Dataset
                             1080ti_1, 1080ti_32, 1080ti_256, silver_4114,            titan_rtx_256, gold_6226,
 NAS-Bench-201               silver_4210r, samsung_a50, pixel3, essential_ph_1,       fpga, pixel2,               CIFAR10
                             samsung_s7, titanx_1, titanx_32, titanx_256, gold_6240   raspi4, eyeriss
                             2080ti_1, 2080ti_32, 2080ti_64, titan_xp_1,              titan_rtx_64
 MobileNetV3 (OFA)           titan_xp_32, titan_xp_64, v100_1, v100_32,                                           ImageNet-1k
                             v100_64, titan_rtx_1, titan_rtx_32
 Seq-Seq Transformer (HAT)   titanxp gpu, cpu xeon                                    cpu raspberrypi             WMT14.en-de
 HW-GPT-Bench                a40, v100, rtx2080, rtx3080                              a100, h100, P100, a6000     OpenWebText


F    DATASETS AND D EVICES
This section describes the hardware devices and tasks used to evaluate MODNAS and the MOO
baselines throughout the paper. We assess our methods across small- and large-scale image clas-
sification datasets, including CIFAR-10 and ImageNet-1K. For the machine translation task, we
evaluate our method on the WMT’14 En-De dataset (Macháček & Bojar, 2014), and we use the
OpenWebText (Gokaslan & Cohen, 2019) dataset for language modeling. Furthermore, we evaluate
MODNAS across 19 devices on NAS-Bench-201, 12 devices on MobileNetV3, three devices on Seq-
Seq Transformer, and eight devices from HW-GPT-Bench (Sukthanker et al., 2024), with zero-shot


                                                            27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


generalization to test devices. Table 4 lists the devices used. For more details on the devices, we refer
readers to Lee et al. (2021b), Cai et al. (2020), Wang et al. (2020b), Li et al. (2021), and Sukthanker
et al. (2024).

G     RUNTIME C OMPARISON
In Table 5 we provide the number of GPU hours we ran MODNAS and baselines on every search space.
We ran the search on NAS-Bench-201, OFA, together with the evaluations on Nvidia RTX2080Ti,
while for HAT we used NVidia A6000. For both OFA and HAT, we used 8 GPUs in parallel. Similar
as in Sukthanker et al. (2024), on the HW-GPT-Bench space we ran the MODNAS search and
evaluations on 4 Nvidia A100 GPUs.
Table 5: Total amount of GPU hours required to run MODNAS’ and baselines’ search on every
search space.

 Search Spaces     Method            Lat/En/Mem Pred.    Supernet   Acc./Ppl Pred.   Search   Total Time
                   MetaD2A+HELP              25              -           8629         0.3       8654.3
 NASBench201       MOO Baselines             -               -             -         370.5      370.5
                   MODNAS                    3              22             -          0.05      25.25
                   OFA+HELP                  6             1200          356           10       1572
 Once-For-All      MOO Baselines             6             1200          356          192       1754
                   MODNAS                    6             1392            -          0.05     1398.25
                   HAT                       15            346.7           -         210.9      572.6
 HAT               MOO Baselines             15            346.7           -          576       937.7
                   MODNAS                    5              576            -          0.05      581.25
                   MOO Baselines             1              192            -           48        241
 HW-GPT-Bench
                   MODNAS                    1              216            -          0.05      217.25



H     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
H.1     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON NAS-B ENCH -201
In Figure 19, we present the Pareto fronts obtained by our method in comparison to different baselines
on the NAS-Bench-201 search space. In Figure 20, we present different additional metrics, such as
GD and IGD (see Section C), to evaluate the quality of the Pareto fronts obtained on NAS-Bench-201.
Figure 21 presents the Pareto front MODNAS yields when applying different latency constraints
during the search phase. Figure 15a compares our method using the ReinMax gradient estimator to
the GDAS estimator (Dong & Yang, 2019). As we can see, ReinMax obtains a qualitatively better
hypervolume coverage compared to GDAS. Figure 16 presents the 3D Pareto front and hypervolume
obtained by MODNAS compared to other baselines when optimizing for accuracy, latency and
energy usage on NAS-Bench-201. Figure 24 presents the comparison of MODNAS with MGD to
other gradient aggregation schemes, such as mean, sequential and MC sampling (see Section 4.1),
across multiple hardware devices. Finally, in Figure 25 we present the robustness of MODNAS to
the fraction of devices used for the predictor training and the search phase. In addition, in Figure 18
and 17, we compare MODNAS against different MO baselines on the CIFAR-100 dataset on two
different devices.

H.1.1    P REDICTED V / S G ROUND -T RUTH L ATENCIES
In Figure 14, we present the scatter plots of the predictions of our hardware-aware MetaPredictor
vs. the ground-truth latencies of different architectures. In the figure title we also report the kendall-
tau correlation coefficient for every device. As observed, our predictor achieves high kendall-τ
correlation coefficient across all devices.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               Device: fpga, Kendall Tau: 0.983                                                                                 Device: eyeriss, Kendall Tau: 0.749                                                                            Device: gold_6226, Kendall Tau: 0.924                                                                                   Device: pixel2, Kendall Tau: 0.678
                     8                                                                                                                         45                                                                                                      18                                                                                                                       30

                     7                                                                                                                         40                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                25
                     6                                                                                                                         35                                                                                                      14
 Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                           Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Predicted Latency
                                                                                                                                               30                                                                                                      12                                                                                                                       20
                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                     4                                                                                                                         25                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8
                     3                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6                                                                                                                        10
                     2                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                     1                                                                                                                         10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                          1             2            3         4        5                      6         7         8                                2                 4           6                       8                10                                         4          6        8     10 12 14                                 16    18                                        5        10         15        20 25 30               35        40
                                                              True Latency                                                                                                   True Latency                                                                                                     True Latency                                                                                                             True Latency
                                              Device: raspi4, Kendall Tau: 0.899                                                                             Device: titan_rtx_256, Kendall Tau: 0.981                                                                          Device: 1080ti_1, Kendall Tau: 0.894                                                                               Device: 1080ti_32, Kendall Tau: 0.900
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       11                                                                                                                       16
                     80
                                                                                                                                               35                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                               30                                                                                                       9
                     60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8
 Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                           Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Predicted Latency
                                                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7                                                                                                                       10
                     40
                                                                                                                                               20                                                                                                       6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8
                     20                                                                                                                        15                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                                               10
                      0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3                                                                                                                       4
                              0                 20               40                        60                80                                         10            15     20        25                     30          35                                 4              6         8         10        12                        14         16                                    4             6             8       10 12           14        16         18
                                                              True Latency                                                                                                   True Latency                                                                                                     True Latency                                                                                                             True Latency
                                            Device: 1080ti_256, Kendall Tau: 0.975                                                                       Device: essential_ph_1, Kendall Tau: 0.822                                                                            Device: gold_6240, Kendall Tau: 0.842                                                                                   Device: pixel3, Kendall Tau: 0.890
                     35                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                               30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       18
                     30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         25
                                                                                                                                               25                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14                                                                                                                       20
                     25
 Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                           Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Predicted Latency
                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12                                                                                                                       15
                     20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                     15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                                               10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                     10
                                                                                                                                                5                                                                                                       4                                                                                                                        0

                                   10              15           20         25                       30             35                               5            10         15        20                      25          30                                2.5       5.0        7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0 22.5                                                                   0             5             10        15       20        25         30
                                                              True Latency                                                                                                   True Latency                                                                                                 True Latency                                                                                                                 True Latency
                                            Device: samsung_s7, Kendall Tau: 0.830                                                                           Device: samsung_a50, Kendall Tau: 0.939                                                                        Device: silver_4114, Kendall Tau: 0.846                                                                               Device: silver_4210r, Kendall Tau: 0.960
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                     50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30

                                                                                                                                               40                                                                                                      35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                25
                     40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
 Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                           Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                                               30                                                                                                      25                                                                                                                       20
                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                               20
                     20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                     10                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5                                                                                                                        5
                                  10          20         30        40      50                      60         70                                        10             20        30       40                         50                                           5         10       15       20 25                            30         35        40                               5                 10             15         20       25            30
                                                              True Latency                                                                                                   True Latency                                                                                                     True Latency                                                                                                             True Latency
                                                                                                    Device: titanx_1, Kendall Tau: 0.890                                                                           Device: titanx_32, Kendall Tau: 0.893                                                                             Device: titanx_256, Kendall Tau: 0.958

                                                                                                                                                                                                     14                                                                                                              35
                                                                                      14

                                                                                      12                                                                                                             12                                                                                                              30
                                                                  Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                                                                                 Predicted Latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Predicted Latency


                                                                                      10                                                                                                             10                                                                                                              25

                                                                                      8                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                      6                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                      4                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                           4            6          8           10                   12           14         16                            4           6         8         10                              12          14                                  10         15             20          25                           30             35
                                                                                                                        True Latency                                                                                            True Latency                                                                                                             True Latency


Figure 14: Scatter plots of predicted latencies from our pretrained MetaPredictor vs. ground-truth
latencies (test devices in red).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      silve                                                                                                                  _a50silver_4210r silv                                                                                                                _a50silver_4210r silv
                                                ng_a50 r_4210r silve                                                                                                    ng                                                                                                                                   ng
                                          samsu                         r_41                                                                                      samsu                           er_4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     114                                                                               samsu                           er_4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            114
                                                                              14
                                   el3                                             10                                                                       el3                                                            10                                                                    el3                                              10
                              pix                                                    80                                                               pix                                                                    80                                                            pix                                                      80
                                                                                         ti_                                                                                                                                   ti_                                                                                                                    ti_
                                                                                            25                                                                                                                                      25                                                                                                                     25


                  _1


                                                                                                                                               _1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _1
                                                                                                 6                                                                                                                                    6                                                                                                                      6


                ph


                                                                                                                                              ph


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ph
               al_


                                                                                                                                             al_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  al_
             nti


                                                                                                                                           nti


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nti
                                                                                                     108


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          108


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 108
          sse


                                                                                                                                        sse


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sse
                                                                                                      0ti_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0ti_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0ti_
     ng_s7e


                                                                                                                                   ng_s7e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ng_s7e
                                                                                                        32


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             32


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    32
  samsu


                                                                                                                                samsu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     samsu
                                                                                                             1080ti_1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1080ti_1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1080ti_1
                                                                                        0.93                                                                                                                                 0.1                                                                                                                    0.03
                                                                      0.85                                                                                                                                     0.2                                                                                                                   0.07
   titanx_1


                                                                                                                                 titanx_1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      titanx_1
                                                                                                            eyeriss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 eyeriss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        eyeriss
    titan


                                                                                                                                  titan


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       titan
       x_32


                                                                                                                                     x_32


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          x_32
                                                                                                      i4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i4
                                                                                                     rasp


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rasp


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rasp
              tita


                                                                                                                                            tita


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tita
               nx_


                                                                                                                                             nx_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nx_
                                                                                           el2                                                                                                                                   el2                                                                                                                    el2
                 256


                                                                                                                                               256


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    256
                          gold
                               _62                                                      pix                                                         gold
                                                                                                                                                        _62                                                                   pix                                                        gold
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             _62                                                     pix
                                    40                                                                                                                       40                                                                                                                                   40
                                          titan_r
                                                  tx_256 gold_6226     fpga                                                                                       titan_r
                                                                                                                                                                         tx_256 gold_6226                       fpga                                                                                   titan_r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tx_256 gold_6226         fpga

   MODNAS (Reinmax)                                  MODNAS (GDAS)                  MODNAS (MiLeNAS)                             MODNAS (Reinmax)                            MODNAS (GDAS)                                   MODNAS (MiLeNAS)                         MODNAS (Reinmax)                            MODNAS (GDAS)                     MODNAS (MiLeNAS)


                               (a) Hypervolume                                                                                                                         (b) GD+                                                                                                                             (c) IGD+

Figure 15: Hypervolume, GD+ and IGD+ of MODNAS with Reinmax as gradient estimator in the
Architect vs. the one from GDAS (Dong & Yang, 2019) and MiLeNAS (He et al., 2020) across 19
devices on NAS-Bench-201. Higher area in the radar indicates better performance for every metric.
Test devices are colored in red around the radar plot.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Global opt.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RS
                                   1.00
                                                                               Eyeriss                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RHPN
                                               0.97                                                                                                                                        0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MODNAS
                                   0.95                   0.94                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LS-BO
                                                                 0.91 0.91 0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.6                                                                                                                     MO-RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MO-ASHA
                                                                                                                                                                                eyeriss_energy


                                   0.90                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                     0.88
                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4                                                                                                                    NSGA-II
                     Hypervolume


                                   0.85
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RS-BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qEHVI
                                   0.80                                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1
                                   0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                   0.70
                                                                                                                 0.67                                                                              0.7
                                                                                                                         0.65 0.64 0.64                                                             0.6
                                   0.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                            eyer


                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  iss_l


                                   0.60                                                                                                                                                                  0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                     MO opt.
                                     MO NAS


                                            -II
                                           PN
                                                                                                                        RS

                                                                                                                         MO I
                                           HA
                                          -BO

                                      NS O


                                                                                                                            -RE


                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                            HV
                                          -B


                                                                                                                                                                                                       tenc
                                         GA
                                        RH
                                       -AS
                                       RS
                                       LS


                                                                                                                         qE


                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.1
                                       al
                                        D


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.25 0.30
                                   ob


                                                                                                                                                                                                          y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.15 0.20
                              Gl


                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0                                            0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.00                                       error



Figure 16: HV (left) and Pareto front (right) of MODNAS and baselines on Eyeriss with 3 normalized
objectives: error, latency and energy usage. HV was computed using the (1, 1, 1) reference point on
the right 3D plot.

                              1.00
                                                                 edgegpu_latency                                                                                                                               1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pixel3_latency
                              0.95                                                                                                                                                                             0.95
                                                    0.9                                                                                                                                                                        0.91 0.91 0.9
                              0.90                                                                                                                                                                             0.90                                                 0.89 0.89
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.88 0.87
                                                           0.87                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.86 0.86
                              0.85                                   0.85                                                                                                                                      0.85
                                                                               0.84
                Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hypervolume


                                                                                              0.81
                              0.80                                                                                                                                                                             0.80
                                                                                                               0.78
                                                                                                                         0.76
                              0.75                                                                                                0.73 0.73                                                                    0.75

                              0.70                                                                                                                                                                             0.70

                              0.65                                                                                                                                                                             0.65

                              0.60                                                                                                                                                                             0.60
                                           AS
                                                     -BO
                                                     -BO

                                                                       MO LS


                                                                              -II

                                                                                I


                                                                                                                                            RS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MO O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MO AS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -BO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -II
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RS
                                                                             HA


                                                                            -RE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -RE
                                                                            HV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -B
                                                                           GA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GA
                                         DN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DN
                                                                         -AS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -AS
                                                                         MO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MO
                                                                         qE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qE
                                                    LS
                                                           RS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RS
                                                                        NS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NS
                                   MO


               Figure 17: Hypervolume on CIFAR-                                                                                                                                                  Figure 18: Hypervolume on CIFAR-
               100 and edgegpu device.                                                                                                                                                           100 and Pixel3 device.



                                                                                                                                                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            pixel2                                                                                         raspi4                                                                                      eyeriss                                                                                          fpga
                     0.8
                                                                                                                 0.8                                                                                            0.7                                                                                                                                 Global opt.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.7                                    RHPN
                     0.7                                                                                         0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qEHVI+LaMOO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6                                                                                          0.6                                    CMA-ES+LaMOO
                     0.6                                                                                         0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CMA-ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5                                                                                          0.5                                    RS
Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                           Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Normalized latency
                                                                                            Normalized latency
                     0.5                                                                                         0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MO-ASHA
                     0.4                                                                                                                                                                                        0.4                                                                                          0.4                                    RS-BO
                                                                                                                 0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LS-BO
                     0.3                                                                                                                                                                                        0.3                                                                                          0.3                                    MO-RE
                                                                                                                 0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qEHVI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2                                                                                          0.2                                    NSGA-II
                     0.2                                                                                         0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MODNAS
                     0.1                                                                                         0.1                                                                                            0.1                                                                                          0.1
                     0.0                                                                                         0.0                                                                                            0.0                                                                                          0.0
                           0.0    0.2       0.4        0.6                           0.8                                0.0     0.1          0.2        0.3                          0.4                              0.0    0.2       0.4        0.6                           0.8                                0.0    0.2        0.4        0.6            0.8
                                        Normalized error                                                                               Normalized error                                                                            Normalized error                                                                              Normalized error
                                          gold_6226                                                                                    titan_rtx_256                                                                                  1080ti_1                                                                                        1080ti_32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.8
                     0.8                                                                                         0.7                                                                                            0.8                                                                                          0.7
                                                                                                                 0.6                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6
                     0.6                                                                                                                                                                                        0.6
Normalized latency


                                                                                            Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                           Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Normalized latency
                                                                                                                 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                 0.4                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4
                     0.4                                                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                                 0.3                                                                                                                                                                                         0.3

                     0.2                                                                                         0.2                                                                                            0.2                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                 0.1                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1
                     0.0                                                                                         0.0                                                                                            0.0                                                                                          0.0
                           0.0   0.2       0.4      0.6                       0.8                                       0.0     0.2        0.4        0.6                          0.8                                0.0   0.2       0.4      0.6                       0.8                                       0.0   0.2        0.4      0.6        0.8
                                        Normalized error                                                                               Normalized error                                                                            Normalized error                                                                              Normalized error
                                         1080ti_256                                                                                    essential_ph_1                                                                                gold_6240                                                                                         pixel3
                                                                                                                 0.6                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.7
                     0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.7
                                                                                                                 0.5                                                                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6
                     0.6                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
Normalized latency


                                                                                            Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                           Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Normalized latency
                                                                                                                 0.4                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.4
                                                                                                                 0.3                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4
                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.3                                                                                          0.3
                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2                                                                                          0.2
                     0.2
                                                                                                                 0.1                                                                                            0.1                                                                                          0.1
                     0.0                                                                                         0.0                                                                                            0.0                                                                                          0.0
                           0.0    0.2       0.4        0.6                           0.8                                0.0     0.2        0.4        0.6                          0.8                                0.0   0.2       0.4      0.6                       0.8                                       0.0    0.1         0.2        0.3             0.4
                                        Normalized error                                                                               Normalized error                                                                            Normalized error                                                                             Normalized error
                                         samsung_s7                                                                                     samsung_a50                                                                                 silver_4114                                                                                      silver_4210r
                     0.5                                                                                         0.30                                                                                           0.8                                                                                          0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.7                                                                                          0.7
                     0.4                                                                                         0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6                                                                                          0.6
Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                           Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Normalized latency
                                                                                            Normalized latency


                                                                                                                 0.20                                                                                           0.5                                                                                          0.5
                     0.3
                                                                                                                 0.15                                                                                           0.4                                                                                          0.4
                     0.2                                                                                                                                                                                        0.3                                                                                          0.3
                                                                                                                 0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2                                                                                          0.2
                     0.1                                                                                         0.05                                                                                           0.1                                                                                          0.1
                     0.0                                                                                         0.00                                                                                           0.0                                                                                          0.0
                           0.0   0.2       0.4       0.6                       0.8                                       0.0     0.2       0.4        0.6                          0.8                                0.0   0.2       0.4       0.6                       0.8                                      0.0   0.2        0.4       0.6        0.8
                                        Normalized error                                                                               Normalized error                                                                            Normalized error                                                                              Normalized error
                                                                                           titanx_1                                                                                      titanx_32                                                                                    titanx_256
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.0
                                                                  0.8                                                                                            0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.8
                                                                  0.6
                                             Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                            Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6

                                                                  0.4                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4

                                                                  0.2                                                                                            0.2                                                                                         0.2

                                                                  0.0                                                                                            0.0                                                                                         0.0
                                                                        0.0    0.2        0.4       0.6                        0.8                                     0.0   0.2        0.4       0.6                       0.8                                    0.0     0.2        0.4        0.6                           0.8
                                                                                       Normalized error                                                                              Normalized error                                                                             Normalized error


Figure 19: Pareto fronts of MODNAS and baselines on NAS-Bench-201. MODNAS-SoTL is not
shown for better visibility.


                                                                                                                                                                                         31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                          silv
                                                                                                                                    ng_a50 er_4210r silve
                                                                                                                              samsu                         r_41
                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                el3                                                         10
                                                                                                            pix                                                               80
                                                                                                                                                                                ti_
                                                                                                                                                                                       25


                                                                                           _1
                                                                                                                                                                                          6


                                                                                         ph
                                                                                    ial_
                                                                                 ent


                                                                                                                                                                                              108
                                                                           7ess


                                                                                                                                                                                                  0ti_
                                                                       ung_s


                                                                                                                                                                                                      32
                                                                     sams


                                                                                                                                                                                                        1080ti_1
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.86
                                                                                                                                                           0.72


                                                                      titanx_1


                                                                                                                                                                                                      eyeriss
                                                                       titan
                                                                           x_32


                                                                                                                                                                                                  i4
                                                                                                                                                                                              rasp
                                                                                  tita
                                                                                     nx_                                                                                            el2
                                                                                          256     gol
                                                                                                            d_6                                                                  pix
                                                                                                                240
                                                                                                                              titan_r
                                                                                                                                        tx_256 gold_6226    fpga

                                                                   MODNAS                                                     CMA-ES+LaMOO                  RS-BO                                   NSGA-II
                                                                   RS                                                         CMA-ES                        LS-BO                                   MODNAS-SoTL
                                                                   RHPN                                                       LS                            MO-RE                                   Global opt.
                                                                   qEHVI+LaMOO                                                MO-ASHA                       qEHVI

                                                                                                                                           (a) HV
                                                              silve                                                                                                                                              silve
                                                        ng_a50 r_4210r silve                                                                                                                               ng_a50 r_4210r silve
                                                 samsu                            r_41                                                                                                              samsu                      r_41
                                                                                         14                                                                                                                                           14
                                         el3                                                1                                                                                               el3                                            10
                                   pix                                                       08
                                                                                                0ti                                                                                    pix                                                   80
                                                                                                      _25                                                                                                                                        ti_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25
                          h_1


                                                                                                                                                                            h_1
                                                                                                         6                                                                                                                                               6
                         l_p


                                                                                                                                                                           l_p
                           a


                                                                                                                                                                             a
                       nti


                                                                                                                                                                         nti
                                                                                                             108


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             108
                   sse


                                                                                                                                                                     sse
                                                                                                              0ti_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0ti_
                   7e


                                                                                                                                                                     7e
             ung_s


                                                                                                                                                               ung_s
                                                                                                                  32


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  32
           sams


                                                                                                                                                             sams
                                                                                                                     1080ti_1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1080ti_1
                                                                                                0.06                                                                                                                                            0.08
                                                                                 0.13                                                                                                                                         0.15
            titanx_1


                                                                                                                                                              titanx_1
                                                                                                                    eyeriss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    eyeriss
             titan


                                                                                                                                                               titan
                x_32


                                                                                                                                                                  x_32
                                                                                                              i4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i4
                                                                                                             rasp


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rasp
                       tita


                                                                                                                                                                         tita
                        nx_


                                                                                                                                                                          nx_


                                                                                                   el2                                                                                                                                             el2
                            2


                                                                                                                                                                              2
                             56


                                                                                                                                                                               56


                                 gol
                                       d_6                                                      pix                                                                                gol
                                                                                                                                                                                       d_6                                                      pix
                                           240                                                                                                                                                240
                                                 titan_rt
                                                         x_256 gold_6226          fpga                                                                                                              titan_rt
                                                                                                                                                                                                            x_256 gold_6226    fpga

          MODNAS                                 CMA-ES+LaMOO                     RS-BO                        qEHVI                                        MODNAS                                  CMA-ES+LaMOO               RS-BO                           qEHVI
          RS                                     CMA-ES                           LS-BO                        NSGA-II                                      RS                                      CMA-ES                     LS-BO                           NSGA-II
          RHPN                                   LS                               MO-RE                        MODNAS-SoTL                                  RHPN                                    LS                         MO-RE                           MODNAS-SoTL
          qEHVI+LaMOO                            MO-ASHA                                                                                                    qEHVI+LaMOO                             MO-ASHA


                                                            (b) GD                                                                                                                                          (c) IGD
                                                              silve                                                                                                                                              silve
                                                        ng_a50 r_4210r silve                                                                                                                               ng_a50 r_4210r silve
                                                 samsu                            r_41                                                                                                              samsu                      r_41
                                                                                         14                                                                                                                                           14
                                         el3                                                1                                                                                               el3                                            10
                                   pix                                                       08
                                                                                                0ti                                                                                    pix                                                   80
                                                                                                      _25                                                                                                                                        ti_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25
                            _1


                                                                                                                                                                              _1


                                                                                                         6                                                                                                                                               6
                          ph


                                                                                                                                                                            ph
                        ial_


                                                                                                                                                                          ial_
                       ent


                                                                                                                                                                         ent
                                                                                                             108


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             108
                 7ess


                                                                                                                                                                   7ess
                                                                                                              0ti_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0ti_
               ung_s


                                                                                                                                                                 ung_s
                                                                                                                  32


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                32
           sams


                                                                                                                                                             sams
                                                                                                                     1080ti_1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1080ti_1


                                                                                                0.06                                                                                                                                            0.08
                                                                                 0.13                                                                                                                                         0.15
            titanx_1


                                                                                                                                                              titanx_1
                                                                                                                    eyeriss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    eyeriss
             titan


                                                                                                                                                               titan
                x_32


                                                                                                                                                                  x_32
                                                                                                              i4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i4
                                                                                                             rasp


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rasp
                       tita


                                                                                                                                                                         tita
                        nx_


                                                                                                                                                                          nx_


                                                                                                   el2                                                                                                                                             el2
                          256


                                                                                                                                                                            256


                                 gol
                                       d_6                                                      pix                                                                                gol
                                                                                                                                                                                       d_6                                                      pix
                                           240                                                                                                                                                240
                                                 titan_rt
                                                         x_256 gold_6226          fpga                                                                                                              titan_rt
                                                                                                                                                                                                            x_256 gold_6226    fpga

          MODNAS                                 CMA-ES+LaMOO                     RS-BO                        qEHVI                                        MODNAS                                  CMA-ES+LaMOO               RS-BO                           qEHVI
          RS                                     CMA-ES                           LS-BO                        NSGA-II                                      RS                                      CMA-ES                     LS-BO                           NSGA-II
          RHPN                                   LS                               MO-RE                        MODNAS-SoTL                                  RHPN                                    LS                         MO-RE                           MODNAS-SoTL
          qEHVI+LaMOO                            MO-ASHA                                                                                                    qEHVI+LaMOO                             MO-ASHA


                                                       (d) GD+                                                                                                                                           (e) IGD+

Figure 20: HV, GD, GD+, IGD and IGD+ of MODNAS and baselines across 19 devices on NAS-
Bench-201. For every device we optimize for 2 objectives, namely latency (ms) and test accuracy
on CIFAR-10. For method, metric and device we report the mean of 3 independent search runs.
Higher area in the radar indicates better performance for every metric. Test devices are colored in red
around the radar plot. Here we allocate double the budget to baselines, i.e. we run all baselines for 50
function evaluations.



                                                                                                                                              32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           eyeriss                                                              0.8
                                                                                                                                      gold_6226                                                                                      pixel2                                                                                       raspi4
                     0.7                                          Latency constraint                                                                           Latency constraint                                                                           Latency constraint                           0.7                          Latency constraint
                                                                      MODNAS                                    0.7                                                MODNAS                                  0.6                                                  MODNAS                                                                    MODNAS
                     0.6                                              MODNAS (0.2)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.2)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.2)                             0.6                              MODNAS (0.2)
                                                                      MODNAS (0.4)                              0.6                                                MODNAS (0.4)                            0.5                                                  MODNAS (0.4)                                                              MODNAS (0.4)
                     0.5                                              MODNAS (0.6)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.6)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.6)                             0.5                              MODNAS (0.6)
Normalized latency


                                                                                           Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                      Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Normalized latency
                                                                      MODNAS (0.8)                              0.5                                                MODNAS (0.8)                            0.4                                                  MODNAS (0.8)                                                              MODNAS (0.8)
                     0.4                                              MODNAS (1.0)                                                                                 MODNAS (1.0)                                                                                 MODNAS (1.0)                             0.4                              MODNAS (1.0)
                                                                      MetaD2A+HELP                              0.4                                                MetaD2A+HELP                                                                                 MetaD2A+HELP                                                              MetaD2A+HELP
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.3
                     0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.3
                                                                                                                0.3
                     0.2                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                0.2
                     0.1                                                                                        0.1                                                                                        0.1                                                                                           0.1
                     0.0                                                                                        0.0                                                                                        0.0                                                                                           0.0
                           0.0    0.2       0.4        0.6                      0.8                                    0.0    0.2       0.4        0.6                       0.8                                 0.0    0.2        0.4        0.6                         0.8                                  0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
                                        Normalized error                                                                            Normalized error                                                                           Normalized error                                                                           Normalized error
                                             fpga                                                                                   titan_rtx_256                                                                                   1080ti_1                                                                                     1080ti_32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.7
                                                                  Latency constraint                            0.7                                            Latency constraint                          0.8                                              Latency constraint                                                        Latency constraint
                     0.7                                              MODNAS                                                                                       MODNAS                                                                                       MODNAS                                                                    MODNAS
                                                                      MODNAS (0.2)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.2)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.2)                             0.6                              MODNAS (0.2)
                     0.6                                                                                        0.6
                                                                      MODNAS (0.4)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.4)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.4)                                                              MODNAS (0.4)
                                                                      MODNAS (0.6)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.6)                            0.6                                                  MODNAS (0.6)                             0.5                              MODNAS (0.6)
                     0.5                                                                                        0.5
Normalized latency


                                                                                           Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                      Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Normalized latency
                                                                      MODNAS (0.8)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.8)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.8)                                                              MODNAS (0.8)
                                                                      MODNAS (1.0)                              0.4                                                MODNAS (1.0)                                                                                 MODNAS (1.0)                             0.4                              MODNAS (1.0)
                     0.4                                              MetaD2A+HELP                                                                                 MetaD2A+HELP                                                                                 MetaD2A+HELP                                                              MetaD2A+HELP
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.4
                     0.3                                                                                        0.3                                                                                                                                                                                      0.3

                     0.2                                                                                        0.2                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.2
                     0.1                                                                                        0.1                                                                                                                                                                                      0.1
                     0.0                                                                                        0.0                                                                                        0.0                                                                                           0.0
                           0.0    0.2       0.4        0.6                      0.8                                    0.0    0.2       0.4        0.6                       0.8                                 0.0    0.2        0.4        0.6                         0.8                                  0.0   0.1       0.2     0.3    0.4    0.5
                                        Normalized error                                                                            Normalized error                                                                           Normalized error                                                                              Normalized error
                                         1080ti_256                                                                                 essential_ph_1                                                                                 gold_6240                                                                                      pixel3
                     0.8                                          Latency constraint                            0.5                                            Latency constraint                                                                           Latency constraint                                                        Latency constraint
                                                                      MODNAS                                                                                       MODNAS                                  0.8                                                  MODNAS                                   0.7                              MODNAS
                                                                      MODNAS (0.2)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.2)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.2)                                                              MODNAS (0.2)
                                                                      MODNAS (0.4)                              0.4                                                MODNAS (0.4)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.4)                             0.6                              MODNAS (0.4)
                     0.6                                              MODNAS (0.6)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.6)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.6)                                                              MODNAS (0.6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
Normalized latency


                                                                                           Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                      Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Normalized latency
                                                                      MODNAS (0.8)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.8)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.8)                             0.5                              MODNAS (0.8)
                                                                      MODNAS (1.0)                              0.3                                                MODNAS (1.0)                                                                                 MODNAS (1.0)                                                              MODNAS (1.0)
                                                                      MetaD2A+HELP                                                                                 MetaD2A+HELP                                                                                 MetaD2A+HELP                             0.4                              MetaD2A+HELP
                     0.4                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                                0.2                                                                                                                                                                                      0.3

                     0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                0.1                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1
                     0.0                                                                                        0.0                                                                                        0.0                                                                                           0.0
                           0.0    0.2       0.4        0.6                      0.8                                    0.0    0.2       0.4        0.6                       0.8                                 0.0   0.1       0.2     0.3    0.4                           0.5                              0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
                                        Normalized error                                                                            Normalized error                                                                           Normalized error                                                                           Normalized error
                                        samsung_s7                                                                                   samsung_a50                                                                                   silver_4114                                                                               silver_4210r
                     0.8                                          Latency constraint                            0.25                                           Latency constraint                          0.8                                              Latency constraint                                                        Latency constraint
                                                                      MODNAS                                                                                                                                                                                    MODNAS                                   0.7                              MODNAS
                                                                                                                                                                   MODNAS
                                                                      MODNAS (0.2)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.2)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.2)                                                              MODNAS (0.2)
                                                                      MODNAS (0.4)                                                                                                                                                                              MODNAS (0.4)                             0.6                              MODNAS (0.4)
                                                                                                                0.20                                               MODNAS (0.4)
                     0.6                                              MODNAS (0.6)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.6)                            0.6                                                  MODNAS (0.6)                                                              MODNAS (0.6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                      Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Normalized latency
                                                                                           Normalized latency


                                                                      MODNAS (0.8)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.8)                                                                                 MODNAS (0.8)                                                              MODNAS (0.8)
                                                                      MODNAS (1.0)                              0.15                                               MODNAS (1.0)                                                                                 MODNAS (1.0)                                                              MODNAS (1.0)
                                                                      MetaD2A+HELP                                                                                                                                                                              MetaD2A+HELP                             0.4                              MetaD2A+HELP
                     0.4                                                                                                                                           MetaD2A+HELP                            0.4
                                                                                                                0.10                                                                                                                                                                                     0.3

                     0.2                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1
                     0.0                                                                                        0.00                                                                                       0.0                                                                                           0.0
                           0.0   0.1      0.2     0.3    0.4                        0.5                                 0.0   0.2        0.4        0.6                      0.8                                 0.0   0.1       0.2     0.3    0.4                           0.5                              0.0    0.2        0.4        0.6     0.8
                                        Normalized error                                                                             Normalized error                                                                          Normalized error                                                                              Normalized error
                                                                                          titanx_1                                                                                  titanx_32                                                                                    titanx_256
                                                                 0.8                                             Latency constraint                           0.8                                           Latency constraint                             0.8                                            Latency constraint
                                                                 0.7                                                 MODNAS                                                                                     MODNAS                                     0.7                                                MODNAS
                                                                                                                     MODNAS (0.2)                             0.7                                               MODNAS (0.2)                                                                                  MODNAS (0.2)
                                                                 0.6                                                 MODNAS (0.4)                                                                               MODNAS (0.4)                               0.6                                                MODNAS (0.4)
                                                                                                                     MODNAS (0.6)                             0.6                                               MODNAS (0.6)                                                                                  MODNAS (0.6)
                                            Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                         Normalized latency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Normalized latency


                                                                 0.5                                                 MODNAS (0.8)                             0.5                                               MODNAS (0.8)                               0.5                                                MODNAS (0.8)
                                                                                                                     MODNAS (1.0)                                                                               MODNAS (1.0)                                                                                  MODNAS (1.0)
                                                                 0.4                                                 MetaD2A+HELP                             0.4                                               MetaD2A+HELP                               0.4                                                MetaD2A+HELP
                                                                 0.3                                                                                          0.3                                                                                          0.3
                                                                 0.2                                                                                          0.2                                                                                          0.2
                                                                 0.1                                                                                          0.1                                                                                          0.1
                                                                 0.0                                                                                          0.0                                                                                          0.0
                                                                       0.0    0.2       0.4        0.6                          0.8                                 0.0    0.2       0.4        0.6                          0.8                                 0.0    0.2       0.4        0.6                           0.8
                                                                                    Normalized error                                                                             Normalized error                                                                             Normalized error


                           Figure 21: Pareto fronts of MODNAS ran with different latency constraints during search.


                                                                                                                                                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           silv                                                                                                                           silv
                                                     ng_a50 er_4210r silve                                                                                                          ng_a50 er_4210r silve
                                               samsu                            r_41                                                                                          samsu                          r_41
                                         l3                                         14                                                                                  l3                                         14
                                    pixe                                                 10
                                                                                              80                                                               p    ixe                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80
                                                                                                   ti_                                                                                                                          ti_
                                                                                                      25                                                                                                                             25
                          _1


                                                                                                                                                     _1
                                                                                                          6                                                                                                                               6
                      ph


                                                                                                                                                    ph
                    al_


                                                                                                                                                   al_
                      i


                                                                                                                                                     i
                   ent


                                                                                                                                                  ent
                                                                                                              108


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               108
             7ess


                                                                                                                                           7ess
                                                                                                               0ti_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0ti_
         ung_s


                                                                                                                                       ung_s
                                                                                                                   32


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    32
       sams


                                                                                                                                      sams
                                                                                                                      1080ti_1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1080ti_1
                                                                                              0.04                                                                                                                            0.06
                                                                           0.09                                                                                                                           0.11
        titanx_1


                                                                                                                                      titanx_1
                                                                                                                     eyeriss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     eyeriss
         titan


                                                                                                                                       titan
             x_32


                                                                                                                                          x_32
                                                                                                               i4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i4
                                                                                                              rasp


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rasp
                   tita


                                                                                                                                                  tita
                     nx_


                                                                                                                                                   nx_
                                                                                                    el2                                                                                                                            el2
                         256


                                                                                                                                                     256
                               gol
                                    d_6                                                       pix                                                         gol
                                                                                                                                                                d_6                                                           pix
                                         240                                                                                                                           240
                                               titan_r
                                                      tx_256 gold_6226      fpga                                                                                              titan_r
                                                                                                                                                                                      tx_256 gold_6226      fpga

                     MODNAS                              MODNAS (0.6)                    MODNAS (1.0)                                              MODNAS                                MODNAS (0.6)                   MODNAS (1.0)
                     MODNAS (0.2)                        MODNAS (0.8)                    MetaD2A+HELP                                              MODNAS (0.2)                          MODNAS (0.8)                   MetaD2A+HELP
                     MODNAS (0.4)                                                                                                                  MODNAS (0.4)

                                                        (a) GD                                                                                                                          (b) IGD
                                                       _a50silver_4210r silv                                                                                                           _a50silver_4210r silv
                                               samsung                      er_41                                                                                             sa msung                       er_41
                                                                                   14                                                                                                                               14
                                        el3                                              10                                                                            el3                                               10
                                pix                                                        80                                                                   pix                                                           80
                                                                                                ti_                                                                                                                                ti_
                                                                                                    25                                                                                                                                25
                         _1


                                                                                                                                                         _1


                                                                                                         6                                                                                                                                 6
                     ph


                                                                                                                                                     ph
                    ial_


                                                                                                                                                   ial_
                   ent


                                                                                                                                                  ent
                                                                                                              108


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               108
             7ess


                                                                                                                                             7ess
                                                                                                               0ti_


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0ti_
        ung_s


                                                                                                                                        ung_s
                                                                                                                32


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  32
      sams


                                                                                                                                      sams
                                                                                                                     1080ti_1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1080ti_1
                                                                                              0.04                                                                                                                             0.06
                                                                          0.09                                                                                                                             0.11
       titanx_1


                                                                                                                                       titanx_1
                                                                                                                    eyeriss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      eyeriss
        titan


                                                                                                                                        titan
           x_32


                                                                                                                                            x_32
                                                                                                               i4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i4
                                                                                                             rasp


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               rasp
                   tita


                                                                                                                                                  tita
                    nx_


                                                                                                                                                    nx_


                                                                                                   el2                                                                                                                              el2
                      256


                                                                                                                                                     256


                              gol
                                 d_6                                                          pix                                                             gol
                                                                                                                                                                 d_6                                                           pix
                                        240                                                                                                                             240
                                               titan_r
                                                      tx_256 gold_6226      fpga                                                                                              titan_r
                                                                                                                                                                                      tx_2                   fpga
                                                                                                                                                                                          56 gold_6226
                    MODNAS                              MODNAS (0.6)                    MODNAS (1.0)                                                MODNAS                                MODNAS (0.6)                   MODNAS (1.0)
                    MODNAS (0.2)                        MODNAS (0.8)                    MetaD2A+HELP                                                MODNAS (0.2)                          MODNAS (0.8)                   MetaD2A+HELP
                    MODNAS (0.4)                                                                                                                    MODNAS (0.4)

                                                       (c) GD+                                                                                                                          (d) IGD+


Figure 22: GD, GD+, IGD and IGD+ of MODNAS with different latency constraints during search
across 19 devices on NAS-Bench-201. Higher area in the radar indicates better performance for every
metric. Test devices are colored in red around the radar plot.


                                                                                                                                 34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 fpga                                                                                   eyeriss                                                                        gold_6226                                                                             pixel2
                                                                                                RS                                                                              0.95
              0.95                                                                       0.95   qEHVI+LaMOO
                                                                                                CMA-ES+LaMOO                                                                    0.90                                                                              0.95
                                                                                                CMA-ES
              0.90                                                                       0.90   LS
                                                                                                MO-ASHA                                                                         0.85
              0.85                                                                              RS-BO                                                                                                                                                             0.90
                                                                                         0.85   LS-BO
Hypervolume


                                                                           Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                  Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Hypervolume
                                                      RS                                        MO-RE                                                                           0.80                                            RS                                                                     RS
                                                      qEHVI+LaMOO                               qEHVI                                                                                                                           qEHVI+LaMOO                                                            qEHVI+LaMOO
              0.80                                    CMA-ES+LaMOO                       0.80   NSGA-II                                                                                                                         CMA-ES+LaMOO                                                           CMA-ES+LaMOO
                                                      CMA-ES                                    MODNAS
                                                                                                                                                                                0.75                                            CMA-ES                            0.85                                 CMA-ES
                                                      LS                                                                                                                                                                        LS                                                                     LS
              0.75                                    MO-ASHA                                                                                                                   0.70                                            MO-ASHA                                                                MO-ASHA
                                                      RS-BO
                                                                                         0.75                                                                                                                                   RS-BO                                                                  RS-BO
              0.70                                    LS-BO                                                                                                                                                                     LS-BO                             0.80                                 LS-BO
                                                      MO-RE                              0.70                                                                                   0.65                                            MO-RE                                                                  MO-RE
                                                      qEHVI                                                                                                                                                                     qEHVI                                                                  qEHVI
              0.65                                    NSGA-II                                                                                                                   0.60                                            NSGA-II                                                                NSGA-II
                                                      MODNAS                             0.65                                                                                                                                   MODNAS                            0.75                                 MODNAS
                      10    20          30            40             50                             10         20          30                 40             50                        10         20          30                40             50                        10         20          30     40             50
                            Num. evaluations                                                                   Num. evaluations                                                                   Num. evaluations                                                                  Num. evaluations
                                 raspi4                                                                        titan_rtx_256                                                                           1080ti_1                                                                          1080ti_32
              0.975                                                                      0.95                                                                                                                                                                     0.95
                                                                                                                                                                                0.90
              0.950                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.90
                                                                                         0.90                                                                                   0.85
              0.925
                                                                                                                                                                                0.80                                                                              0.85
              0.900                                                                      0.85
                                                                           Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                  Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Hypervolume
Hypervolume


                                                      RS                                                                                      RS                                                                                RS                                                                     RS
                                                      qEHVI+LaMOO                                                                             qEHVI+LaMOO                       0.75                                            qEHVI+LaMOO                       0.80                                 qEHVI+LaMOO
              0.875                                   CMA-ES+LaMOO                                                                            CMA-ES+LaMOO                                                                      CMA-ES+LaMOO                                                           CMA-ES+LaMOO
                                                      CMA-ES                             0.80                                                 CMA-ES                            0.70                                            CMA-ES                                                                 CMA-ES
                                                      LS                                                                                      LS                                                                                LS                                0.75                                 LS
              0.850                                   MO-ASHA                                                                                 MO-ASHA                                                                           MO-ASHA                                                                MO-ASHA
                                                      RS-BO                                                                                   RS-BO                             0.65                                            RS-BO                                                                  RS-BO
              0.825                                   LS-BO
                                                                                         0.75                                                 LS-BO                                                                             LS-BO                                                                  LS-BO
                                                      MO-RE                                                                                   MO-RE                             0.60                                            MO-RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.70                                 MO-RE
              0.800                                   qEHVI                                                                                   qEHVI                                                                             qEHVI                                                                  qEHVI
                                                      NSGA-II                            0.70                                                 NSGA-II                           0.55                                            NSGA-II                           0.65                                 NSGA-II
                                                      MODNAS                                                                                  MODNAS                                                                            MODNAS                                                                 MODNAS
              0.775
                       10    20          30           40             50                             10         20          30                 40             50                        10         20          30                40             50                        10         20          30     40             50
                             Num. evaluations                                                                  Num. evaluations                                                                   Num. evaluations                                                                  Num. evaluations
                             1080ti_256                                                                        essential_ph_1                                                                          gold_6240                                                                             pixel3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.98
              0.9                                                                                                                                                               0.95
                                                                                         0.95                                                                                                                                                                     0.96
                                                                                                                                                                                0.90                                                                              0.94
              0.8
                                                                                         0.90
                                                                                                                                                                                0.85                                                                              0.92
Hypervolume


                                                                           Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                  Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Hypervolume
                                                      RS                                                                                      RS                                                                                RS                                                                     RS
              0.7                                     qEHVI+LaMOO                                                                             qEHVI+LaMOO                                                                       qEHVI+LaMOO                       0.90                                 qEHVI+LaMOO
                                                      CMA-ES+LaMOO                       0.85                                                 CMA-ES+LaMOO                      0.80                                            CMA-ES+LaMOO                                                           CMA-ES+LaMOO
                                                      CMA-ES                                                                                  CMA-ES                                                                            CMA-ES                                                                 CMA-ES
                                                      LS                                                                                      LS                                                                                LS                                0.88                                 LS
              0.6                                     MO-ASHA                                                                                 MO-ASHA                           0.75                                            MO-ASHA                                                                MO-ASHA
                                                      RS-BO                              0.80                                                 RS-BO                                                                             RS-BO                             0.86                                 RS-BO
                                                      LS-BO                                                                                   LS-BO                                                                             LS-BO                                                                  LS-BO
                                                      MO-RE                                                                                   MO-RE                             0.70                                            MO-RE                             0.84                                 MO-RE
              0.5                                     qEHVI
                                                                                         0.75                                                 qEHVI                                                                             qEHVI                                                                  qEHVI
                                                      NSGA-II                                                                                 NSGA-II                                                                           NSGA-II                                                                NSGA-II
                                                      MODNAS                                                                                  MODNAS                            0.65                                            MODNAS                            0.82                                 MODNAS
                      10    20          30            40             50                             10         20          30                 40             50                        10         20          30                40             50                        10         20          30     40             50
                            Num. evaluations                                                                   Num. evaluations                                                                   Num. evaluations                                                                  Num. evaluations
                             samsung_s7                                                                        samsung_a50                                                                            silver_4114                                                                       silver_4210r
                                                                                         0.98                                                                                   0.95                                                                              0.95
              0.95
                                                                                         0.96                                                                                   0.90                                                                              0.90

              0.90                                                                       0.94                                                                                   0.85                                                                              0.85
Hypervolume


                                                                           Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                  Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Hypervolume


                                                      RS                                                                                      RS                                                                                RS                                                                     RS
                                                      qEHVI+LaMOO                        0.92                                                 qEHVI+LaMOO                                                                       qEHVI+LaMOO                                                            qEHVI+LaMOO
                                                      CMA-ES+LaMOO                                                                            CMA-ES+LaMOO                      0.80                                            CMA-ES+LaMOO                      0.80                                 CMA-ES+LaMOO
              0.85                                    CMA-ES                                                                                  CMA-ES                                                                            CMA-ES                                                                 CMA-ES
                                                      LS                                 0.90                                                 LS
                                                                                                                                                                                0.75                                            LS                                                                     LS
                                                      MO-ASHA                                                                                 MO-ASHA                                                                           MO-ASHA                           0.75                                 MO-ASHA
                                                      RS-BO                                                                                   RS-BO                                                                             RS-BO                                                                  RS-BO
              0.80                                    LS-BO                              0.88                                                 LS-BO                             0.70                                            LS-BO                                                                  LS-BO
                                                      MO-RE                                                                                   MO-RE                                                                             MO-RE                             0.70                                 MO-RE
                                                      qEHVI                                                                                   qEHVI                                                                             qEHVI                                                                  qEHVI
                                                      NSGA-II                            0.86                                                 NSGA-II                                                                           NSGA-II                                                                NSGA-II
                                                      MODNAS                                                                                  MODNAS                            0.65                                            MODNAS                            0.65                                 MODNAS
              0.75
                      10    20          30            40             50                             10         20          30                 40             50                        10         20          30                40             50                        10         20          30     40             50
                            Num. evaluations                                                                   Num. evaluations                                                                   Num. evaluations                                                                  Num. evaluations
                                                                          titanx_1                                                                            titanx_32                                                                        titanx_256
                                               0.95                                                                                    0.95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.9
                                               0.90                                                                                    0.90

                                               0.85                                                                                    0.85                                                                              0.8
                                               0.80                                                                                    0.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hypervolume
                                 Hypervolume


                                                                                                                         Hypervolume


                                                                                                    RS                                                                                 RS                                                                                RS
                                                                                                    qEHVI+LaMOO                                                                        qEHVI+LaMOO                       0.7                                             qEHVI+LaMOO
                                               0.75                                                 CMA-ES+LaMOO                       0.75                                            CMA-ES+LaMOO                                                                      CMA-ES+LaMOO
                                                                                                    CMA-ES                                                                             CMA-ES                                                                            CMA-ES
                                                                                                    LS                                 0.70                                            LS                                                                                LS
                                               0.70                                                 MO-ASHA                                                                            MO-ASHA                                                                           MO-ASHA
                                                                                                    RS-BO                                                                              RS-BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6                                             RS-BO
                                               0.65                                                 LS-BO                              0.65                                            LS-BO                                                                             LS-BO
                                                                                                    MO-RE                                                                              MO-RE                                                                             MO-RE
                                                                                                    qEHVI                              0.60                                            qEHVI                                                                             qEHVI
                                               0.60                                                 NSGA-II                                                                            NSGA-II                           0.5                                             NSGA-II
                                                                                                    MODNAS                                                                             MODNAS                                                                            MODNAS
                                                                                                                                       0.55
                                                      10         20          30                     40             50                         10         20          30                40             50                       10         20          30                 40             50
                                                                 Num. evaluations                                                                        Num. evaluations                                                                 Num. evaluations



Figure 23: HV over number of evaluated architectures on NAS-Bench-201 of MODNAS and the
blackbox MOO baselines. Note that for MODNAS we only have 24 evaluations in the end.


                                                                                                                                                             35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       fpga                                                                       eyeriss                                                                gold_6226                                                                     pixel2
              0.95                                                                         0.95                                                                                                                                                 0.95
              0.90                                                                                                                                                    0.90
                                                                                           0.90                                                                                                                                                 0.90
              0.85                                                                                                                                                    0.85
                                                                                           0.85                                                                                                                                                 0.85
Hypervolume


                                                                             Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                        Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hypervolume
              0.80                                                                         0.80                                                                       0.80                                                                      0.80
              0.75                                                                         0.75                                                                       0.75                                                                      0.75
              0.70       MGD                                                               0.70                                                                       0.70                                                                      0.70
                         MC Sampling
              0.65       Sequential                                                        0.65                                                                       0.65                                                                      0.65
                         Mean
              0.60                                                                         0.60                                                                       0.60                                                                      0.60
                     0    20         40       60                80    100                         0    20     40       60                   80    100                        0    20     40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60    80   100
                                    Search Epochs                                                            Search Epochs                                                              Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs
                                      raspi4                                                                titan_rtx_256                                                                 1080ti_1                                                                 1080ti_32
              0.95                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.95
                                                                                                                                                                      0.90
              0.90                                                                         0.90                                                                                                                                                 0.90
                                                                                           0.85                                                                       0.85
              0.85                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.85
Hypervolume


                                                                             Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                        Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hypervolume
                                                                                           0.80                                                                       0.80
              0.80                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.80
                                                                                           0.75                                                                       0.75                                                                      0.75
              0.75
              0.70                                                                         0.70                                                                       0.70                                                                      0.70
              0.65                                                                         0.65                                                                       0.65                                                                      0.65
              0.60                                                                         0.60                                                                       0.60                                                                      0.60
                     0    20        40       60                 80    100                         0    20     40       60                   80    100                        0    20     40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60    80   100
                                   Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs                                                              Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs
                                    1080ti_256                                                              essential_ph_1                                                               gold_6240                                                                     pixel3
                                                                                           0.95                                                                       0.95                                                                      0.95
              0.90                                                                                                                                                    0.90
                                                                                           0.90                                                                                                                                                 0.90
              0.85                                                                                                                                                    0.85                                                                      0.85
                                                                                           0.85
Hypervolume


                                                                             Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                        Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hypervolume
              0.80                                                                         0.80                                                                       0.80                                                                      0.80
              0.75                                                                         0.75                                                                       0.75                                                                      0.75
              0.70                                                                         0.70                                                                       0.70                                                                      0.70
              0.65                                                                         0.65                                                                       0.65                                                                      0.65
              0.60                                                                         0.60                                                                       0.60                                                                      0.60
                     0    20        40       60                 80    100                         0    20     40       60                   80    100                        0    20     40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60    80   100
                                   Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs                                                              Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs
                                   samsung_s7                                                               samsung_a50                                                                 silver_4114                                             0.95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  silver_4210r
              0.95                                                                                                                                                    0.95
                                                                                           0.95
                                                                                                                                                                      0.90                                                                      0.90
              0.90                                                                         0.90
              0.85                                                                                                                                                    0.85                                                                      0.85
                                                                                           0.85
Hypervolume


                                                                             Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                        Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hypervolume


              0.80                                                                                                                                                    0.80                                                                      0.80
                                                                                           0.80
              0.75                                                                         0.75                                                                       0.75                                                                      0.75
              0.70                                                                         0.70                                                                       0.70                                                                      0.70
              0.65                                                                         0.65                                                                       0.65                                                                      0.65
              0.60                                                                         0.60                                                                       0.60                                                                      0.60
                     0    20        40       60                 80    100                         0    20     40       60                   80    100                        0    20     40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60    80   100
                                   Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs                                                              Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs
                                                                            titanx_1                                                                titanx_32                                                                 titanx_256
                                                     0.90                                                                        0.90
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.90
                                                     0.85                                                                        0.85
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.85
                                       Hypervolume


                                                                                                                   Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                             Hypervolume


                                                     0.80                                                                        0.80                                                                      0.80
                                                     0.75                                                                        0.75                                                                      0.75
                                                     0.70                                                                        0.70                                                                      0.70
                                                     0.65                                                                        0.65                                                                      0.65
                                                     0.60                                                                        0.60                                                                      0.60
                                                            0    20     40       60                   80    100                         0    20     40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60                  80    100
                                                                       Search Epochs                                                               Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs



Figure 24: HV over time on NAS-Bench-201 of MODNAS with different gradient update schemes.


                                                                                                                                                   36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  fpga                                                                            eyeriss                                                               gold_6226                                                                     pixel2
              0.96                                                                                                                                                   0.94
                                                                                      0.975                                                                                                                                                    0.96
              0.94                                                                                                                                                   0.92
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.94
              0.92                                                                    0.950                                                                          0.90                                                                      0.92
Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                       Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hypervolume
                                                                                      0.925
                                                                        Hypervolume


              0.90                                                                                                                                                   0.88                                                                      0.90
              0.88                                                                    0.900                                                                                                                                                    0.88
                                          # Search Devices                                                                                                           0.86
              0.86                                                                    0.875                                                                                                                                                    0.86
                                                   2                                                                                                                 0.84
              0.84                                 4                                  0.850                                                                                                                                                    0.84
              0.82                                 8                                  0.825                                                                          0.82
                                                   13                                                                                                                                                                                          0.82
              0.80                                                                    0.800                                                                          0.80                                                                      0.80
                     0   20    40       60       80       100                                 0        20     40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60    80   100
                              Search Epochs                                                                  Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs
                                 raspi4                                               0.94
                                                                                                            titan_rtx_256                                                                1080ti_1                                                                 1080ti_32
                                                                                                                                                                     0.92                                                                      0.94
              0.96                                                                    0.92
                                                                                                                                                                     0.90                                                                      0.92
              0.95                                                                    0.90
                                                                                                                                                                     0.88                                                                      0.90
Hypervolume


                                                                        Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                       Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hypervolume
              0.94                                                                    0.88                                                                                                                                                     0.88
              0.93                                                                    0.86                                                                           0.86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.86
              0.92                                                                    0.84                                                                           0.84
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.84
              0.91                                                                    0.82                                                                           0.82                                                                      0.82
              0.90                                                                    0.80                                                                           0.80                                                                      0.80
                     0   20    40       60                 80    100                         0     20         40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60    80   100
                              Search Epochs                                                                  Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs
                              1080ti_256                                                                    essential_ph_1                                                              gold_6240                                                                     pixel3
                                                                                      0.975                                                                          0.94                                                                      0.96
              0.90
                                                                                      0.950                                                                          0.92                                                                      0.95
              0.85                                                                    0.925                                                                          0.90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.94
Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                       Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hypervolume
                                                                        Hypervolume


                                                                                      0.900                                                                          0.88
              0.80                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.93
                                                                                      0.875                                                                          0.86
                                                                                                                                                                     0.84                                                                      0.92
                                                                                      0.850
              0.75
                                                                                      0.825                                                                          0.82                                                                      0.91
              0.70                                                                    0.800                                                                          0.80                                                                      0.90
                     0   20    40       60                 80    100                          0        20     40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60    80   100
                              Search Epochs                                                                  Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs
                              samsung_s7                                                                    samsung_a50                                                                silver_4114                                                               silver_4210r
              0.96                                                                    0.98                                                                           0.94                                                                      0.94
              0.94                                                                    0.97
                                                                                                                                                                     0.92                                                                      0.92
              0.92                                                                    0.96
                                                                                                                                                                     0.90                                                                      0.90
Hypervolume


                                                                        Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                       Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hypervolume


              0.90                                                                    0.95
                                                                                                                                                                     0.88                                                                      0.88
              0.88                                                                    0.94
              0.86                                                                    0.93                                                                           0.86                                                                      0.86
              0.84                                                                    0.92                                                                           0.84                                                                      0.84
              0.82                                                                    0.91                                                                           0.82                                                                      0.82
              0.80                                                                    0.90                                                                           0.80                                                                      0.80
                     0   20    40       60                 80    100                         0     20         40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60    80   100
                              Search Epochs                                                                  Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs
                                                                       titanx_1                                                                    titanx_32                                                                 titanx_256

                                                0.90                                                                            0.90                                                                      0.90

                                                0.85                                                                            0.85                                                                      0.85
                                  Hypervolume


                                                                                                                  Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                            Hypervolume


                                                0.80                                                                            0.80                                                                      0.80

                                                0.75                                                                            0.75                                                                      0.75

                                                0.70                                                                            0.70                                                                      0.70
                                                       0    20     40       60                    80        100                        0    20     40       60                  80    100                        0    20     40       60                  80    100
                                                                  Search Epochs                                                                   Search Epochs                                                             Search Epochs



Figure 25: HV over time on NAS-Bench-201 of MODNAS with different number of devices during
search. For number of devices less than 13 (default one) we randomly select a subset from these 13
devices.


                                                                                                                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H.1.2                         A LIGNMENT OF P REFERENCE V ECTORS WITH PARETO F RONT
In this section, we provide empirical ev-
idence that the solutions generated us-
ing the MetaHypernetwork align well
with the preference vectors. To this end,
we utilize one of our runs on the NAS-
Bench-201 test devices, namely Eyeriss.
In Figure 26, we show the Pareto front
of the normalized test error and latency
on Eyeriss. Note that of the 24 sam-
pled preference vectors, 17 generate so-
lutions that are in the Pareto set. Each
point in the Pareto front with a certain
color corresponds to the preference vec-
tor with the same color. In the figure,
there are actually 17 points in the Pareto
front; however, some of them are really
close to each other or are the same, since Figure 26: Pareto front and preference vectors on the nor-
the function mapping preference vectors malized Eyeriss latency and test error of NAS-Bench-201.
to architectures is a many-to-one function. Nevertheless, we can visually notice that the preference
vectors starting from the origin align very well with the generated solutions. The missing vectors are
mainly in the center, where there are not many solutions available for this particular device.

H.1.3                         T RAINING AND VALIDATION L OSS C URVES
In addition to the hypervolume indicator, in this section, we provide the training and validation loss
curves in Figure 27 (left). At each mini-batch iteration we plot the average cross entropy loss across
all devices. As expected both training and validation cross-entropy go down and we do not notice any
overfitting. The high noise is common for sample-based NAS optimizers, since a sampled different
architecture is activate at each mini-batch iteration. In the plot, for visualization purposes, we have
used a running average with a window size of 100 to smooth out the noise.
                                                                                                                                 silv
                                                                                                                           ng_a50 er_4210r silve
                                                                                                                     samsu                         r_41
                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                               el3                                             10
                                                                                                           pix                                                   80
                                                                                                                                                                   ti_
                                                                                                                                                                        25
                                                                                                    _1


                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                ph
                                                                                               ial_


                                                           Training Loss
                                                                                              ent


                                                                                                                                                                               108


                       2.15                                Validation Loss
                                                                                        7ess


                                                                                                                                                                                  0ti_
                                                                                      ung_s


                                                                                                                                                                                  32
                                                                                  sams


                       2.10
                                                                                                                                                                                       1080ti_1


                                                                                                                                                                 0.91
  Loss (Running Avg)


                                                                                                                                                 0.81
                                                                                   titanx_1


                       2.05
                                                                                                                                                                                      eyeriss


                       2.00
                                                                                    titan
                                                                                       x_32


                                                                                                                                                                                i4
                                                                                                                                                                               rasp


                       1.95
                                                                                              tita
                                                                                               nx_


                                                                                                                                                                     el2
                                                                                                   256


                       1.90                                                                              gol
                                                                                                            d_6                                                   pix
                                                                                                               240
                              102                    103                                                             titan_r
                                                                                                                             tx_256 gold_6226      fpga
                                             Steps
                                                                                               MODNAS                   MO-ASHA                 MO-RE                    NSGA-II
                                                                                               RS                       RS-BO                   qEHVI                    Global opt.
                                                                                               LS                       LS-BO


Figure 27: (left) Average training and validation cross-entropy loss across devices during the MOD-
NAS search on NAS-Bench-201. (right) HV of MODNAS and baselines across 19 devices on
NAS-Bench-201. For every device we optimize for 2 objectives, namely latency (ms) and test
accuracy on CIFAR-10. For method, metric and device we report the mean of 3 independent search
runs. Higher area in the radar indicates better performance for every metric. Test devices are colored
in red around the radar plot. Here we allocate 4 times the budget to baselines, i.e. we run all baselines
for 100 function evaluations.



                                                                             38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H.1.4                  M ULTI - OBJECTIVE O PTIMIZATION BASELINES WITH M ORE B UDGET
Black-box multi-objective optimizers can potentially reach the global Pareto front if the compute
resources are not a concern and given enough time. However, it is not practical to train or even
evaluate these architectures, especially for larger model sizes (e.g. Transformer spaces from HW-
GPT-Bench). Sometimes in practice, the user wants to get a quick estimation of the Pareto front
instead the global optimum, and this is the use-case where MODNAS shines. Given enough budget,
even a random search (RS) will find a near-optimal solution. For example, in NAS-Bench-201, the
size of the search space is K = 15625 architectures. The optimal theoretical number of RS steps
n to achieve a success probability α is approximately: n ≥ Kln(1/1 − α), therefore, for random
search to have a success probability higher than 0.5 it requires n ≥ 10781 iterations in theory. For
the other guided search methods, this number is even smaller, though similar to MODNAS, they have
the same limitation that they can converge to a local minimum. We conducted the same experiment
as the one in Figure 3, but this time with baselines given 4 times more budget than MODNAS. We
show the result in Figure 27 (right). As we can see, some of the methods such as LS-BO can reach
results closer to the global Pareto front compared to MODNAS.

H.2                 A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON H ARDWARE - AWARE T RANSFORMERS (E N -D E )
We show the Pareto fronts of MODNAS compared to baselines for the Transformer space in Figure 28,
as well as their comparison with respect to hypervolume for the SacreBLEU metric in Figure 30.
These results demonstrate the superior performance of our method compared to the other baselines
on this benchmark. All evaluations are done by inheriting the weights of a pretrained supernet.

                                   RaspberryPi-CPU                                                GPU-TitanXP                               0.046
                                                                                                                                                              CPU-Xeon
                    0.046                            RS                                                             MO-RE                                                     MO-RE
                                                     MO-RE                     0.043                                LS                                                        LS
                                                     LS                                                             NSGA-II                                                   NSGA-II
                                                     NSGA-II                   0.042                                LS-BO                   0.044                             LS-BO
                    0.044                            LS-BO                                                          RS-BO                                                     RS-BO
                                                     RS-BO                     0.041                                MO-ASHA                                                   MO-ASHA
                                                     MO-ASHA                                                        qEHVI                   0.042                             qEHVI
                    0.042
      1/BLEU


                                                                 1/BLEU


                                                                                                                              1/BLEU


                                                     qEHVI                                                          RS                                                        RS
                                                     RHPN                      0.040                                RHPN                                                      RHPN
                                                     MODNAS                                                         MODNAS                                                    MODNAS
                    0.040                            HAT                       0.039                                HAT                     0.040                             HAT

                                                                               0.038
                    0.038                                                                                                                   0.038
                                                                               0.037
                            3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000                         50   100     150       200     250                       100   150   200 250 300       350   400
                                        Latency (ms)                                               Latency (ms)                                                Latency (ms)

                                   RaspberryPi-CPU                                                GPU-TitanXP                                                 CPU-Xeon
                                                     RS                                                             MO-RE                   0.046                             MO-RE
                    0.046                            MO-RE                     0.043                                LS                                                        LS
                                                     LS                                                             NSGA-II                                                   NSGA-II
                                                     NSGA-II                                                        LS-BO                                                     LS-BO
                                                     LS-BO                     0.042                                RS-BO                   0.044                             RS-BO
                    0.044                            RS-BO                                                          MO-ASHA                                                   MO-ASHA
                                                     MO-ASHA                                                        qEHVI                                                     qEHVI
      1/SacreBLEU


                                                                 1/SacreBLEU


                                                                                                                              1/SacreBLEU


                                                     qEHVI                     0.041                                RS                                                        RS
                                                                                                                                            0.042
                    0.042                            RHPN                                                           RHPN                                                      RHPN
                                                     MODNAS                    0.040                                MODNAS                                                    MODNAS
                                                     HAT                                                            HAT                                                       HAT
                    0.040                                                                                                                   0.040
                                                                               0.039

                    0.038                                                      0.038                                                        0.038
                            3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000                         50   100     150       200     250                       100   150   200 250 300       350   400
                                        Latency (ms)                                               Latency (ms)                                                Latency (ms)


Figure 28: Pareto fronts of MODNAS and baselines on the HAT space for the WMT’ En-De task.
All performance metrics are obtained from the inherited supernet weights.


H.3                 A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON THE HW-GPT SPACE
In figure 31, we present the Pareto fronts on all the 8 GPU types for MODNAS and different baselines.
The Pareto fronts are obtained using the perplexity and energy predictors trained on data collected in
the HW-GPT-Bench (Sukthanker et al., 2024).


                                                                                                   39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               0.74
                                    RaspberryPi-CPU                                                                                             TitanXP-GPU                                                               0.82
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Xeon-CPU
                                                                                                                    0.82     0.82
                        0.72                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.81
               0.72                                                                                                                 0.81 0.81                                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                0.8                                                                       0.80
                                                                                                                    0.80                              0.8 0.8                                                                                         0.79
                                                                                                                                                                       0.79 0.79                                                                              0.79
               0.70                                                                                                                                                                  0.79                                                                             0.78 0.78
                                0.69 0.69 0.69                                                                                                                                                                            0.78                                                    0.78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.78 0.77
                                                                                                                    0.78
 Hypervolume


                                                                                                      Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hypervolume
               0.68                              0.68                                                                                                                                       0.77
                                                        0.67                                                                                                                                                              0.76
                                                                                                                    0.76
               0.66
                                                               0.65                                                                                                                                0.74
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.74
               0.64                                                   0.64 0.64                                     0.74                                                                                                                                                                             0.73
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.73

               0.62                                                                                                 0.72                                                                                                  0.72
                                                                                         0.61

               0.60                                                                                                 0.70                                                                                                  0.70
                        AS

                   NS VI
                  MO A-II


                    MO S

                                                          RS
                                                          PN
                                                                         -BO
                                                                         -BO


                                                                                                                            AS
                                                                                                                                       RS


                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                   RS S


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RS
                        HA


                       -RE


                                                                                                                                       PN
                                                                                                                                  NS O
                                                                                                                                   MO -II
                                                                                                                                      -RE
                                                                                                                                 MO HAT
                                                                                                                                       HA



                                                                                                                                      -BO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MO A-II
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MO NAS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MO A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -RE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RS N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -BO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LS S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -BO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T
                                                                                                                                      HV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HA
                        L


                                                                                                                                       L


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                                                      -B
                                                                                                                                     GA
                       H
                     DN


                                                                                                                       DN
                                                               RH


                                                                                                                                    RH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RH
                    -AS


                                                                                                                                   -AS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -AS
                      G


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G
                    qE


                                                                                                                                   qE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qE
                                                                      LS
                                                                      RS


                                                                                                                                   LS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NS
                MO


                                                                                                                     MO
Figure 29: Hypervolume (HV) of MODNAS and baselines across devices on the HAT space. The
objectives used to compute the HV are latency and BLEU score. Leftmost plot is for the test device.


                0.74
                                     RaspberryPi-CPU                                                                                            TitanXP-GPU                                                                0.82
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Xeon-CPU
                                                                                                                     0.82
                0.72                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.80
                                                                                                                             0.81 0.8
                         0.71                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.79
                                                                                                                     0.80                 0.8 0.79                                                                                            0.79
                0.70                                                                                                                                  0.79 0.79
                                                                                                                                                                       0.78 0.78                                           0.78                            0.78
                                0.68 0.68 0.68                                                                       0.78                                                            0.78                                                                         0.77 0.77
  Hypervolume


                                                                                                       Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hypervolume
                0.68                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.77 0.77
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.76                                                                  0.76
                                                 0.66                                                                0.76
                0.66                                    0.66
                                                               0.64                                                                                                                         0.74 0.74                      0.74
                0.64                                                                                                 0.74
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.73
                                                                       0.63 0.63
                                                                                                                     0.72                                                                                                  0.72                                                                                0.72
                0.62
                                                                                         0.61
                0.60                                                                                                 0.70                                                                                                  0.70
                            AS

                       NS VI
                      MO A-II


                        MO S

                                                              RS
                                                             -BO
                                                              PN
                                                             -BO


                                                                                                                         AS


                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                       RS
                            HA


                           -RE


                                                                                                                                   qE S


                                                                                                                                       PN
                                                                                                                                  NS O
                                                                                                                                   MO -II
                                                                                                                                      -RE

                                                                                                                                   R T
                                                                                                                                 MO S-BO
                                                                                                                                       HA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MO A-II
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MO NAS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MO A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qE E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -BO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LS S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -BO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T
                                                                                                                                      HV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HV
                                                                                                                                      HA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HA
                            L


                                                                                                                                       L


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -R


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                                      -B
                                                                                                                                     GA
                           H
                         DN


                                                                                                                       DN
                                                          RH


                                                                                                                                    RH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RH
                        -AS


                                                                                                                                   -AS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -AS
                          G


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G
                        qE


                                                               LS


                                                          RS


                                                                                                                                   LS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NS
                 MO


                                                                                                                     MO


Figure 30: Hypervolume (HV) of MODNAS and baselines across devices on the HAT space. The
objectives used to compute the HV are latency and SacreBLEU score. Leftmost plot is for the test
device. MODNAS is the best or on par to the baselines across all three devices.


                                        A40                                                                           RTX3080                                                                        V100                                                                           RTX2080
                                                        RS                             40.8                                             RS                            40.8                                                RS                               40.8                                          RS
               40.8                                     MOREA                                                                           MOREA                                                                             MOREA                                                                          MOREA
                                                        LS                                                                              LS                                                                                LS                                                                             LS
                                                        NSGA2                                                                           NSGA2                                                                             NSGA2                            36.3                                          NSGA2
               36.3                                     LSBO                           36.3                                             LSBO                          36.3                                                LSBO                                                                           LSBO
                                                        RSBO                                                                            RSBO                                                                              RSBO                                                                           RSBO
  Perplexity


                                                                          Perplexity


                                                                                                                                                         Perplexity


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity


                                                        MOASHA                                                                          MOASHA                                                                            MOASHA                           31.8                                          MOASHA
               31.8                                     EHVI                           31.8                                             EHVI                          31.8                                                EHVI                                                                           EHVI
                                                        MODNAS                                                                          MODNAS                                                                            MODNAS                                                                         MODNAS
               27.3                                                                    27.3                                                                           27.3                                                                                 27.3

               22.8                                                                    22.8                                                                           22.8                                                                                 22.8
                      0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00                                      0.5           1.0            1.5          2.0                                    0.3     0.4      0.5 0.6 0.7                      0.8                                    1          2       3                   4
                                  Energy (Wh)                                                                        Energy (Wh)                                                               Energy (Wh)                                                                        Energy (Wh)

                                      A6000                                                                             H100                                                                         A100                                                                            P100
               40.8                                     RS                             40.8                                             RS                            40.8                                                RS                               40.8                                          RS
                                                        MOREA                                                                           MOREA                                                                             MOREA                                                                          MOREA
                                                        LS                                                                              LS                                                                                LS                                                                             LS
                                                        NSGA2                                                                           NSGA2                         36.3                                                NSGA2                                                                          NSGA2
               36.3                                     LSBO                           36.3                                             LSBO                                                                              LSBO                             36.3                                          LSBO
                                                        RSBO                                                                            RSBO                                                                              RSBO                                                                           RSBO
  Perplexity


                                                                          Perplexity


                                                                                                                                                         Perplexity


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perplexity


                                                        MOASHA                                                                          MOASHA                                                                            MOASHA                                                                         MOASHA
               31.8                                     EHVI                           31.8                                             EHVI                          31.8                                                EHVI                             31.8                                          EHVI
                                                        MODNAS                                                                          MODNAS                                                                            MODNAS                                                                         MODNAS
               27.3                                                                    27.3                                                                           27.3                                                                                 27.3

               22.8                                                                    22.8                                                                           22.8                                                                                 22.8
                           0.6        0.8       1.0              1.2                                0.3              0.4      0.5         0.6                                0.2        0.3        0.4     0.5                                                    0           5      10       15                   20
                                    Energy (Wh)                                                                      Energy (Wh)                                                               Energy (Wh)                                                                        Energy (Wh)


Figure 31: Pareto fronts of MODNAS and baselines optimizing for GPU energy consumption (Wh)
and perplexity on the HW-GPT-Bench space.



                                                                                                                                                      40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H.3.1                   E XPERIMENTS ON P ERPLEXITY AND M EMORY USAGE O BJECTIVES
In this section, we showcase the application of MODNAS
for optimizing memory usage (using Bfloat16 precision
and context size of 1024) and perplexity on OpenWeb-
text within the HW-GPT-Bench (Sukthanker et al., 2024)
GPT-L search space, featuring Transformer models up
to 774M parameters. Since memory usage does not de-
pend on the device type, our approach does not utilize the
MGD updates in Algorithm 1 for computing the common
gradient descent direction, instead leveraging only pref-
erence vectors to calculate the scalarized objective. This
highlights once again the flexibility of MODNAS across
diverse settings, even the ones it was not designed for.
Despite this adjustment, MODNAS remains competitive,
delivering a Pareto front comparable to leading black-box Figure 32: MODNAS vs. baselines on
MOO baselines. We show the results in Figure 32.           optimizing memory usage and perplexity
                                                           on GPT-L (774M) of HW-GPT-Bench.
H.4 A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON M OBILE N ET V3
In Figure 33, we present the Pareto fronts of our method compared to different baselines for
12 different hardware devices on the MobileNetV3 space. We show as well the Pareto front of
OFA+HELP (Lee et al., 2021b), ran with the original setting.

Table 6: HV of MODNAS and baselines on the OFA search space. For every device we optimize for
2 objectives: latency (ms) and validation accuracy on ImageNet-1k.
 Device Name                   RS          RHPN        HELP                    EHVI             LS         LS-BO       MO-ASHA                      RS-BO       MO-REA          NSGA-II                      Zico-NSGA-II                  MODNAS
 v100_64                      0.677         0.683       0.638                  0.748        0.697          0.749              0.740                 0.747          0.750             0.744                        0.689                          0.757
 titan_rtx_64                 0.722         0.698       0.663                  0.751        0.734          0.755              0.736                 0.753          0.752             0.744                        0.690                          0.763



                               2080ti_1                                                          v100_1                                                     v100_32                                                             v100_64

                                                                        0.78                                                             0.78                                                    0.78
           0.78
                                                                        0.76                                                             0.76                                                    0.76
                                               RS                                                                RS                                                        RS                                                                     RS
           0.76                                RHPN                     0.74                                                             0.74                              RHPN                  0.74                                             RHPN
                                                                                                                 RHPN
                                               HELP                                                                                                                        HELP                                                                   HELP
Accuracy


                                                                                                                              Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                      Accuracy


                                                                                                                 HELP
                                                             Accuracy


                                               MODNAS                   0.72                                                             0.72                              MODNAS                0.72                                             MODNAS
                                                                                                                 MODNAS
           0.74                                NSGA-II                                                           NSGA-II                 0.70                              NSGA-II               0.70                                             NSGA-II
                                               qEHVI                    0.70                                     qEHVI                                                     qEHVI                                                                  qEHVI
                                               LS                       0.68                                     LS                      0.68                              LS                    0.68                                             LS
           0.72                                LS-BO                                                             LS-BO                                                     LS-BO                                                                  LS-BO
                                               MO-ASHA                  0.66                                     MO-ASHA                 0.66                              MO-ASHA               0.66                                             MO-ASHA
                                               RS-BO                                                             RS-BO                                                     RS-BO                                                                  RS-BO
                                               MO-RE                    0.64                                     MO-RE                   0.64                              MO-RE                 0.64                                             MO-RE
           0.70
                   8     10       12    14       16                                    8          10          12         14                          10         15         20                               10             20             30            40
                                Latency                                                          Latency                                                     Latency                                                            Latency
                               2080ti_32                                                        2080ti_64                                                   titan_xp_1                                                     titan_xp_32
                                                                                                                                         0.79
           0.78                                                         0.78                                                                                                                     0.78
           0.76                                                         0.76                                                             0.78                                                    0.76
                                               RS                                                               RS                                                         RS                                                                     RS
           0.74                                RHPN                     0.74                                    RHPN                     0.77                              RHPN                  0.74                                             RHPN
                                               HELP                                                             HELP                                                       HELP                                                                   HELP
Accuracy


                                                             Accuracy


                                                                                                                              Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                      Accuracy


           0.72                                MODNAS                   0.72                                    MODNAS                                                     MODNAS                0.72                                             MODNAS
                                                                                                                                         0.76
           0.70                                NSGA-II                  0.70                                    NSGA-II                                                    NSGA-II               0.70                                             NSGA-II
                                               qEHVI                                                            qEHVI                                                      qEHVI                                                                  qEHVI
                                               LS                                                               LS                       0.75                              LS                                                                     LS
           0.68                                LS-BO                    0.68                                    LS-BO                                                      LS-BO                 0.68                                             LS-BO
           0.66                                MO-ASHA                  0.66                                    MO-ASHA                  0.74                              MO-ASHA               0.66                                             MO-ASHA
                                               RS-BO                                                            RS-BO                                                      RS-BO                                                                  RS-BO
           0.64                                MO-RE                    0.64                                    MO-RE                    0.73                              MO-RE                 0.64                                             MO-RE
                   10     15          20       25                              10      20        30      40        50                           8     10      12     14        16                           10        20          30           40       50
                                Latency                                                          Latency                                                     Latency                                                            Latency
                              titan_xp_64                                                       titan_rtx_1                                                titan_rtx_32                                                    titan_rtx_64
           0.78                                                         0.78                                                             0.78                                                    0.78
           0.76                                                                                                                          0.76                                                    0.76
                                               RS                       0.76                                     RS                                                        RS                                                                    RS
           0.74                                RHPN                                                              RHPN                    0.74                              RHPN                  0.74                                            RHPN
                                                                                                                 HELP                                                      HELP                                                                  HELP
                                                             Accuracy


                                                                                                                              Accuracy


                                               HELP
                                                                                                                                                                                      Accuracy
Accuracy


           0.72                                MODNAS                   0.74                                     MODNAS                  0.72                              MODNAS                0.72                                            MODNAS
                                               NSGA-II                                                           NSGA-II                 0.70                              NSGA-II                                                               NSGA-II
           0.70                                qEHVI                                                             qEHVI                                                     qEHVI                 0.70                                            qEHVI
                                                                        0.72
           0.68                                LS                                                                LS                      0.68                              LS                    0.68                                            LS
                                               LS-BO                                                             LS-BO                                                     LS-BO                                                                 LS-BO
           0.66                                MO-ASHA                  0.70                                     MO-ASHA                 0.66                              MO-ASHA               0.66                                            MO-ASHA
                                               RS-BO                                                             RS-BO                                                     RS-BO                                                                 RS-BO
           0.64                                MO-RE                                                             MO-RE                   0.64                              MO-RE                 0.64                                            MO-RE
                                                                        0.68
                  20     40         60        80       100                      4           5         6         7        8                      5    10      15      20       25                        5        10         15      20           25      30
                                Latency                                                          Latency                                                     Latency                                                         Latency


                        Figure 33: Pareto fronts of MODNAS and baselines on the MobileNetV3 space.



                                                                                                                          41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               0.80
                                            titan_rtx_1                                                         0.80
                                                                                                                                        titan_rtx_32                                                                                  titan_rtx_64
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.76
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.76          0.76 0.75 0.75 0.75
                                                                                                                       0.76 0.76 0.75                                                                                                             0.74
               0.75                                                                                             0.75                    0.75 0.75 0.75
                      0.74 0.74 0.73                                                                                                                         0.74 0.74                                        0.74                                       0.74 0.73
                                           0.72                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.72
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.72
               0.70                               0.7                                                           0.70                                                       0.69 0.69
 Hypervolume


                                                                                                  Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                Hypervolume
                                                        0.67 0.66                                                                                                                                             0.70                                                            0.7
               0.65                                                                                             0.65
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.63                 0.68
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.66
               0.60                                                                                             0.60                                                                                          0.66
                                                                      0.59
                                                                             0.58
                                                                                    0.57                                                                                                                      0.64
               0.55                                                                                             0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.62
                                                                                           0.52
               0.50                                                                                             0.50                                                                                          0.60
                 MO -BO

                   RS S
                   MO O
                   qE E
                          I
                 MO LS


                       LP


                                                                                                                       MO LS
                       HA


                  NS PN
                        -II
                       RS


                                                                                                                         LS S
                                                                                                                           -BO

                                                                                                                         RS I
                                                                                                                        NS O
                                                                                                                       MO GA-II

                                                                                                                         MO A
                                                                                                                            -RE
                                                                                                                             PN
                                                                                                                             RS
                                                                                                                             LP


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LS S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -BO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MO O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qE E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NS VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                MO GA-II


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HA



                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LP
                      HV


                                                                                                                            HV
                       A

                      -R


                                                                                                                             A


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -R
                                                                                                                             H
                      -B


                                                                                                                           -B


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -B
                     GA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                    HE


                                                                                                                          HE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HE
                    DN


                                                                                                                          DN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DN
                    RH


                                                                                                                          RH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RH
                   -AS


                                                                                                                         -AS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -AS
                                                                                                                         qE
                   LS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MO
               0.80
                                              2080ti_1                                                          0.80
                                                                                                                                          2080ti_32                                                           0.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2080ti_64
                      0.78
                                                                                                                       0.77
                             0.76                                                                                             0.75 0.75 0.75                                                                         0.76 0.76 0.75 0.75
               0.75                 0.75                                                                        0.75                                                                                          0.75                         0.75 0.74
                                                                                                                                               0.74 0.74
                                           0.74                                                                                                              0.74 0.73
                                                                                                                                                                           0.71                                                                          0.71
               0.70                               0.7                                                           0.70                                                                                          0.70                                              0.69
                                                        0.68 0.68                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.68
 Hypervolume


                                                                                                  Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                Hypervolume
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.67
                                                                      0.67 0.66
                                                                                    0.66                                                                                                                                                                                      0.66
               0.65                                                                                             0.65                                                                     0.64                 0.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.64

               0.60                                                                                             0.60                                                                                          0.60
                                                                                           0.59

               0.55                                                                                             0.55                                                                                          0.55


               0.50                                                                                             0.50                                                                                          0.50
                    qE II
                  MO HVI

                    LS S
                       -BO
                        PN

                    MO P
                  MO -RE



                        RS
                                                                                     LS
                    RS A
                       -BO


                                                                                                                    AS
                                                                                                                         MO LS


                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                           MO S
                                                                                                                               HA


                                                                                                                          NS RE
                                                                                                                            RH I
                                                                                                                           RS N
                                                                                                                              -BO
                                                                                                                              -BO
                                                                                                                                LP


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MO S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -RE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                MO S-BO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NS A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RS II
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LP
                                                                                                                              HV



                                                                                                                                 -I


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HV
                         -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -
                        L
                        A


                                                                                                                                R


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                        H


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H
                                                                                                                               P
                      GA


                                                                                                                             GA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GA
                     HE


                                                                                                                            HE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HE
                     DN


                                                                                                                  DN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DN
                                                                                                                              -
                     RH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RH
                    -AS


                                                                                                                           -AS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -AS
                                                                                                                           qE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qE
                                                                                                                           LS
                NS


                                                                                                                MO


                                             titan_xp_1                                                                                  titan_xp_32                                                          MO                       titan_xp_64
               0.80                                                                                             0.80                                                                                          0.80

                      0.76                                                                                             0.75 0.75 0.75                                                                                0.76 0.75 0.75 0.75
               0.75          0.75 0.75                                                                          0.75                                                                                          0.75                         0.75 0.74
                                           0.74                                                                                         0.74 0.74 0.74
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.73
                                                  0.71 0.71                                                                                                  0.72                                                                                               0.71
                                                                                                                                                                    0.71
               0.70                                            0.7 0.69                                         0.70                                                       0.69                               0.70                                                     0.69
 Hypervolume


                                                                                                  Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                  0.66 0.66
               0.65                                                                                             0.65                                                                                          0.65
                                                                             0.63
                                                                                    0.62                                                                                                                                                                                      0.62
               0.60                                                                                             0.60                                                                                          0.60

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.56
               0.55                                                                                             0.55                                                                                          0.55
                                                                                           0.53

               0.50                                                                                             0.50                                                                                          0.50
                   R S
                 MO S-BO


                   LS I

                                                         RS

                                                    MO P


                                                                                                                                                       RS S
                       HA

                     -BO


                                                   NS RE
                                                     RH I
                                                        PN
                                                         LS


                                                                                                                    LS S
                                                                                                                       -BO
                                                                                                                  MO HVI
                                                                                                                   NS A
                                                                                                                    MO -II
                                                                                                                       -RE

                                                                                                                                                         -BO
                                                                                                                                                          PN
                                                                                                                                                           LP
                                                                                                                                                          LS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                MO -BO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qE S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MO VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                MO -RE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NS A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LS II
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -BO


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LS
                      HV


                                                          -I


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                         L
                       A


                                                                                                                        A


                                                                                                                                                          R


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                        H


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H
                                                      GA


                                                                                                                      GA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                                     HE


                                                                                                                                                        HE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HE
                    DN


                                                                                                                     DN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DN
                                                       -


                                                                                                                                                       RH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RH
                   -AS


                                                                                                                    -AS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -AS
                   qE


                                                                                                                    qE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RS
               MO


                                                                                                                MO


               0.80
                                                  v100_1                                                        0.80
                                                                                                                                            v100_32                                                           0.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          v100_64
                      0.78 0.77
                                    0.76                                                                               0.77 0.76 0.76
                                           0.75                                                                                         0.76                                                                         0.76 0.75 0.75
               0.75                                                                                             0.75                           0.75                                                           0.75                    0.75 0.75 0.74
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.74
                                                                                                                                                      0.72
                                                  0.7                                                                                                        0.7                                                                                                0.7
               0.70                                                                                             0.70                                                0.69                                      0.70
                                                                                                                                                                           0.68                                                                                        0.68 0.68
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.68
 Hypervolume


                                                                                                  Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                                                Hypervolume


               0.65                                                                                             0.65                                                                                          0.65                                                                   0.64

                                                        0.61
               0.60                                            0.59                                             0.60                                                                                          0.60
                                                                      0.58 0.58
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.57
               0.55                                                                 0.54                        0.55                                                                                          0.55
                                                                                           0.53

               0.50                                                                                             0.50                                                                                          0.50
                 MO -BO

                   R S
                 MO S-BO


                  NS LP



                   MO VI
                      -RE
                       RS
                                                                                     LS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LP
                       HA


                    RH I
                       PN


                                                                                                                   NS AS
                                                                                                                    L II
                                                                                                                  MO S-BO

                                                                                                                    MO A
                                                                                                                    RS E
                                                                                                                       -BO

                                                                                                                     RH I
                                                                                                                        PN
                                                                                                                        RS
                                                                                                                        LP
                                                                                                                        LS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MO S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -BO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RS I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NS O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                MO GA-II


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PN
                        -I


                                                                                                                       HV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HV
                                                                                                                         -
                       A


                                                                                                                       -R


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                        H


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -B
                     GA


                                                                                                                      GA
                      H
                    HE


                                                                                                                     HE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HE
                    DN


                                                                                                                     DN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RH
                   -AS


                                                                                                                    -AS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -AS
                   qE


                                                                                                                    qE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qE
                   LS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LS
                                                                                                                MO


                                                                                                                                                                                                              MO


Figure 34: Hypervolume across devices on the MobileNetV3 search space of MODNAS and baselines.
Here the Nvidia Titan RTX is the test device.


                                                                                                                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I   F URTHER D ISCUSSION ON THE ROBUSTNESS OF MODNAS
Initially observed by (Zela et al., 2020), differentiable NAS methods can be very sensitive to their
hyperparameter choices, especially the regularization ones responsible for the loss landscape in the
upper level problem. In our experiments, there were three crucial components that made MODNAS
robust and to work reliably across benchmarks:
1. Choice of MetaHypernetwork update scheme: this played a pivotal role in the performance
   of MODNAS. Although other gradient update strategies underperformed or started diverging
   (Figure 6), MGD converged relatively quickly to a hypervolume close to that of the global Pareto
   front. The convergence of MGD to a pareto stationary point is discussed in Désidéri (2012) and
   more recently in Zhang et al. (2025). The convergence of MGD in bilevel optimization is an open
   research topic (see recent results from Ye et al. (2024) and Yang et al. (2024)). One potential
   scenario when MGD could fail is when the gradient directions of the objectives it is optimizing
   point in different opposing directions; however, this becomes practically unlikely, especially as
   the number of objectives grows (in our case we use it to find the common gradient across devices,
   which is for instance 13 on NAS-Bench-201).
2. Choice of gradient estimation method in the Architect: In Section 3, we discuss our choice
   for the method that enables gradient estimation through discrete variables (since architectures are
   discrete variables). We noticed that the ReinMax (Liu et al., 2023) estimator always outperformed
   previous estimators such as the one in GDAS (Dong & Yang, 2019) (Figure 15a), so we believe
   this choice is crucial.
3. Weight entanglement vs. weight sharing in the Supernetwork: In early experiments on NB201
   we noticed that weight sharing in the Supernetwork, was not only more expensive, but much
   more unstable as well when compared to weight entanglement (Cai et al., 2020; Sukthanker et al.,
   2023), even yielding diverging solutions quite often (common pattern seen in differentiable NAS
   with shared weights as you mention; see Zela et al. (2020) for instance).
We hypothesize that all design choices mentioned above play an implicit regularization effect on the
upper level optimization in the bi-level problem, leading to a faster convergence and robustness (Chen
& Hsieh, 2020; Smith et al., 2021; Zela et al., 2020).

J   E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK
Multi-objective optimization. Multi-objective optimization (MOO) (Gunantara, 2018) is a crucial
field in optimization theory, tackling decision-making scenarios with multiple conflicting objectives.
MOO techniques can be categorized into gradient-based and gradient-free approaches. Gradient-free
MOO approaches, such as evolutionary algorithms and dominance-based methods like NSGA-II
(Deb et al., 2000), often suffer from sample inefficiency and are typically unsuitable for deep
learning applications. On the other hand, gradient-based MOO methods leverage gradients. The
foundational work by Désidéri (2012) has been significantly extended in multi-task learning contexts,
demonstrating considerable potential (Lin et al., 2019; Liu & Vicente, 2021; Mahapatra & Rajan,
2020; Sener & Koltun, 2018). However, these methods are primarily applied to fixed architectures,
and adapting them to architecture search spaces is complex. This adaptation would require retraining
each architecture with multiple objectives, which is impractically expensive for large search spaces.
Another major challenge in MOO is balancing the different objectives. To address this, preference
vectors have been proposed to guide the prioritization of objectives on the Pareto Front (Momma
et al., 2022; Ye & Liu, 2022). An emerging approach to mitigate the retraining issue involves
hypernetworks, which determine the weights of the main network in MOO scenarios (Lin et al.,
2020), often incorporating preference vector (Hoang et al., 2023; Navon et al., 2021; Phan et al.,
2022).
Neural Architecture Search. A major challenge in the automated design of neural network architec-
tures is the efficient exploration of vast search spaces. Early NAS methods relied on Reinforcement
Learning (Zoph & Le, 2017), evolutionary algorithms (Deb et al., 2002; Elsken et al., 2019b; Lu
et al., 2020), and other black-box optimization techniques (Daulton et al., 2022) to train and evalu-
ate numerous architectures from scratch. The advent of one-shot NAS introduced weight sharing
among architectures by training an over-parameterized network, known as a supernet, to expedite
the evaluation of individual networks within the search space (Bender et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019b;


                                                 43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pham et al., 2018; Saxena & Verbeek, 2016). Differentiable one-shot NAS methods (Cai et al., 2018;
Fu et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2019; 2021) further improved efficiency by applying a
continuous relaxation to the search space, enabling the use of gradient descent to identify optimal
sub-models within the supernet. In contrast, two-stage NAS methods initially train a supernet, often
through random sampling of subnetworks, and subsequently employ black-box optimization to
identify optimal subnetworks (Bender et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2020; Li & Talwalkar, 2020).
Hardware-aware and Multi-objective Neural Architecture Search. Early NAS methods primarily
focused on maximizing accuracy for a given task. In contrast, hardware-aware NAS aims to optimize
architectures for efficient performance on specific hardware devices (Benmeziane et al., 2021; Lee
et al., 2020; Shaw et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020), naturally leading to multi-objective NAS (Hsu
et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2021; Tan et al., 2019). Two-stage NAS methods can be adapted to this context
by incorporating a multi-objective search in the second stage (Cai et al., 2018; Ito & Von Zuben,
2023). However, most two-stage methods depend on random sampling during supernet training,
which doesn’t prioritize promising architectures. Differentiable NAS methods, such as those in Cai
et al. (2018); Fu et al. (2020); Jiang et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2021); Wu et al. (2019; 2021); Xu et al.
(2020b), use latency proxies like layer-wise latencies and FLOPS (Dudziak et al., 2020) to evaluate
hardware performance, combining task and hardware objectives with fixed weighting to find a single
optimal solution. However, changing the objective weighting requires a complete search rerun, which
is computationally demanding.
In contrast, our proposed search algorithm offers the entire Pareto Front of objectives in a single run,
making it more efficient. While our focus is on multi-objective NAS for hardware constraints, our
technique is applicable to other objectives such as fairness (Das & Dooley, 2023; Dooley et al., 2023;
Martinez et al., 2020), suggesting promising avenues for future research.

Application to Other Tasks. Finally, we want to briefly discuss the potential application of
MODNAS to other tasks not mentioned in this work. Object detection is a very important application
since it is probably one of the most important use cases of neural networks on embedded devices
(e.g., in self-driving cars) (Baller et al., 2021; Lazarevich et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023). An interesting
benchmark is YOLOBench (Lazarevich et al., 2023), where the authors benchmark more than 550
architectures on four datasets and four different hardware platforms. One way to leverage the
Supernetwork here would be to parameterize the search space via the AutoDeepLab (Liu et al.,
2019a) supernetwork model, which parameterizes the resolution too. This parameterization would
not only leverage MODNAS to work for object detection, but for other computer vision tasks such as
semantic segmentation, disparity estimation, etc (Mohan et al., 2023).


                                                    44
