Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D IFFUSION G UARD : A ROBUST D EFENSE AGAINST
M ALICIOUS D IFFUSION - BASED I NPAINTING
  June Suk Choi1 , Kyungmin Lee1 , Jongheon Jeong2 ,
  Saining Xie3 , Jinwoo Shin1 , Kimin Lee1
 1
   KAIST, 2 Korea University, 3 NYU



                                            A BSTRACT

         Recent advances in diffusion models have introduced a new era of text-guided
         image manipulation, enabling users to create realistic edited images with simple
         textual prompts. However, there is significant concern about the potential misuse
         of these methods, especially in creating misleading or harmful content. Although
         recent defense strategies, which introduce imperceptible adversarial noise to in-
         duce model failure, have shown promise, they remain ineffective against more
         sophisticated manipulations, such as editing with a mask. In this work, we propose
         DiffusionGuard, a robust and effective defense method against unauthorized edits
         by diffusion-based image editing models, even in challenging setups. Through a
         detailed analysis of these models, we introduce a novel objective that generates
         adversarial noise targeting the early stage of the diffusion process. This approach
         significantly improves the efficiency and effectiveness of adversarial noises. We
         also introduce a mask-augmentation technique to enhance robustness against var-
         ious masks during test time. Finally, we introduce a comprehensive benchmark
         designed to evaluate the effectiveness and robustness of methods in protecting
         against privacy threats in realistic scenarios. Through extensive experiments, we
         show that our method achieves stronger protection and improved mask robustness
         with lower computational costs compared to the strongest baseline. Additionally,
         our method exhibits superior transferability and better resilience to noise removal
         techniques compared to all baseline methods. Our source code is publicly available
         at our project page: https://choi403.github.io/diffusionguard.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Text-to-image diffusion models trained on large-scale datasets have demonstrated impressive results
in generating high-quality images from text prompts (Betker et al., 2023; Sauer et al., 2024; Saharia
et al., 2022b). These models have expanded beyond simple image generation to support text-guided
image editing (Wang et al., 2023; Brooks et al., 2023; Yenphraphai et al., 2024), enabling users to
modify existing images with both ease and precision. For instance, Imagen Editor (Wang et al., 2023)
allows users to manipulate images using masks and textual descriptions. This facilitates detailed and
intuitive adjustments to specific areas of an image. Similarly, Image Sculpting (Yenphraphai et al.,
2024) identifies 3D objects in photos. With this tool, users can then manipulate these objects directly,
unlocking new possibilities for altering images. These approaches improve the user-friendliness
of image editing tools, which significantly enhance the creative process by allowing for precise
modifications based on textual input.
However, alongside these advances, there exists a significant concern regarding the potential misuse
of text-guided image editing models. With their ability to create highly realistic and convincing
content, image editing models can be exploited for malicious purposes such as generating fake news,
spreading disinformation, and creating deceptive visual content. For example, with open-sourced
text-to-image models (Rombach et al., 2023), one could easily manipulate a photo to falsely depict
a celebrity being arrested, as shown in the bottom row of Fig. 1. As text-to-image models become
more powerful, it is paramount to address these risks and implement safeguards to prevent misuse.
To mitigate the potential risks associated with the misuse of text-to-image diffusion models, protection
methods based on adversarial noises have shown promise recently (Liang et al., 2023; Liang &


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                   Defender                     Sensitive region:       Malicious user
                                                               Face (Shared idea)
                                         Let's protect                                       I will manipulate
                                          the face!                                         context of the face!

                            Released with protection                                    Malicious editing

                                 …
                                                                 Protected image                                     Failed edit
                        Augmented         Tune imperceptible
                       masks for face       noise on face                           Mask to select face region

      Original image
                           Released without protection                                  Malicious editing


                                                                 Original image                                    Successful edit

                                Malicious editing prompt: "A man being arrested by the police"

Figure 1: Protecting against the misuse of text-to-image models using DiffusionGuard. (Bottom
row) Images without protection are vulnerable to malicious editing, such as altering the background
while preserving the face to create fake images (e.g., a celebrity being arrested). (Top row) Diffu-
sionGuard protects the image by focusing on the face, a defining feature of personal identity. It
disrupts diffusion models and results in failed edits when attackers attempt malicious changes.
Wu, 2023; Salman et al., 2024; Xue et al., 2024). These techniques involve adding imperceptible
adversarial noise to the original image, which is designed to cause the model to fail in generating
high-quality images (see Fig. 1). By publishing images with this adversarial noise, the cost and
difficulty of malicious editing are significantly increased. However, current methods do not provide
robust protection against real-life scenarios, such as editing with freely chosen masks by adversaries,
which can bypass the protection. This issue is especially problematic as adversaries may select the
smallest possible region containing sensitive identities (e.g., a person’s face), thereby minimizing the
effectiveness of these protection methods.

Contributions In this work, we introduce DiffusionGuard, a robust and effective defense method
against text-guided image editing models in challenging setups, such as editing with user-selected
masks. Specifically, we propose a novel objective to generate adversarial noises targeting the early
stage of the diffusion process. Through our analysis, we observe that editing models tend to generate
key regions within the mask during these initial diffusion steps. Therefore, by directing adversarial
perturbations at the early stages, we prevent the models from maintaining the key regions, which are
crucial for high-quality editing. Additionally, we propose a mask-augmentation method to find robust
adversarial perturbations that are effective against mask inputs of various shapes.
For concrete evaluation, we introduce InpaintGuardBench, a challenging evaluation benchmark
designed to assess defense methods against image editing models. InpaintGuardBench comprises
images paired with handcrafted masks of diverse shapes and text prompts for editing, enabling
a comprehensive evaluation of robustness against various misuse scenarios. We conduct human
surveys and measure qualitative metrics to evaluate DiffusionGuard. Through extensive experiments,
we demonstrate both qualitatively and quantitatively that DiffusionGuard is effective, and most
importantly, robust against changes in mask inputs. This makes it exceptionally useful in real-life
scenarios. Moreover, our method proves to be more compute-efficient and performs well even in low
noise budget setups compared to existing baselines (Liang et al., 2023; Salman et al., 2024).

2     P RELIMINARIES
This section provides an overview of text-to-image diffusion models, emphasizing inpainting models
and adversarial examples against them.

2.1     D IFFUSION MODELS

We consider denoising diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021) in discrete time. Suppose x ∼ pdata (x) represents the data distribution. A diffusion
model defines a sequence of latent variables with noise scheduling functions αt , σt such that the
log signal-to-noise ratio λt = log(αt2 /σt2 ) decreases with t. The forward process of a diffusion


                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


model is described by gradually adding noise to the data x, where the marginal distribution is given
as q(xt |x) = N (xt ; αt x, σt2 I). For sufficiently large λT , xT becomes indistinguishable from pure
Gaussian noise, and for sufficiently small λ0 , x0 is nearly identical to the data distribution. The
reverse process starts from random noise xT , and sequentially denoises it to generate x0 , which
matches the training distribution.

Text-to-Image diffusion models Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2023;
Saharia et al., 2022b; Betker et al., 2023) are a class of diffusion models specifically designed to
generate images conditioned on text prompts. These models incorporate text embeddings extracted
from pre-trained text encoders like T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) or CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) to guide the
image generation process. Given a pair of image x and text ytext , these models commonly employ a
noise prediction model ϵθ (xt ; t) and are trained using a noise prediction loss as follows:
                  Ldiff (θ; x) = Et∼U (1,T ),ϵ∼N (0,I) ω(λt )∥ϵθ (xt ; ytext , t) − ϵ∥22 ,

                                                                                                     (1)
where ω(λt ) is a weighting function of a timestep t.

Text-guided inpainting models In addition to T2I generation, it is of a great interest to edit a
desired region of a given image with text prompts. To this end, T2I image inpainting models (Nichol
et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022c;a) propose to fine-tune pretrained T2I diffusion models to leverage
its rich generative prior. In specific, inpainting models are fine-tuned by adding conditions of source
image xsrc and binary mask M that designates the region to infill to the noise prediction loss in
Eq. 1. During fine-tuning, random regions of an image are masked, and the source image and a mask
are concatenated to the noisy latent xt as an input of the diffusion model. The training objective of
diffusion-based inpainting models is given as follows:
         LInpaint (θ; xsrc , M ) = Et∼U (1,T ),ϵ∼N (0,I) ω(λt )∥ϵθ (xt ; ytext , t, M, xsrc ) − ϵ∥22 .

                                                                                                       (2)

2.2   A DVERSARIAL EXAMPLES AGAINST DIFFUSION MODELS

Adversarial examples are deliberately fabricated data to manipulate model behaviors (Szegedy et al.,
2014; Biggio et al., 2013), often with malicious intent. Given a clean image x and a model, an
adversarial example adds a perturbation δ to x so that x + δ deceives the model. These perturbations
are typically crafted to be imperceptible to human eyes, e.g., via constrained optimization using
ℓ∞ bound ∥δ∥∞ ≤ η for some η > 0. In this paper, we consider crafting an adversarial example
for text-guided image editing models, where we aim to find a perturbation δ of source image that
enforces the editing models to generate low-quality images. A line of research (Liang et al., 2023;
Liang & Wu, 2023; Xue et al., 2024; Salman et al., 2024) has investigated adversarial examples of
this purpose, using them as a protective measure against unauthorized image editing. These works
either perturb each individual step of the denoising process to maximize the diffusion model training
loss (i.e., Eq. 1), or force diffusion models to generate a specifically undesirable image as follows:
                                               x(xsrc + δ; ϵ, ytext , M ) − xtarget ∥22 ,

                    δ = arg min Eϵ∼N (0,I) ∥b                                                       (3)
                       ||δ||∞ ≤η

where x
      b is a generated image given source image xsrc + δ, prompt ytext , and mask M .

3     M AIN METHOD
In this section, we outline DiffusionGuard, a method designed to protect images against inpainting
methods in challenging scenarios (Sec. 3.1). First, based on the unique behaviors of inpainting
models, we develop a novel objective to target the early stages of the reverse diffusion process
(Sec. 3.2). Next, we propose a mask-augmentation method to find a robust adversarial perturbation
that remains effective against mask inputs of various shapes (Sec. 3.3).

3.1   P ROBLEM SETUP

Previous protection methods (Liang et al., 2023; Liang & Wu, 2023; Xue et al., 2024) typically
consider a global perturbation δ applied across the entire image, i.e., x + δ, as described in Sec. 2.2.
However, such methods become ineffective against diffusion inpainting models, where a binary mask


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 (a) Denoising process of standard diffusion models       (b) Denoising process of inpainting diffusion models

Figure 2: Denoising diffusion process of standard and inpainting diffusion models. (a) Standard
text-to-image models typically generate only coarse features in the early stages of the denoising
process. (b) In contrast, inpainting models, which are fine-tuned versions of these standard models,
produce fine details (e.g., face) from the very first denoising step (T − 1).

M is additionally applied to the source image, i.e., it processes masked source images (x + δ) ⊙ M .
This realistic setup poses a unique challenge for adversarial defense, given that now only the part of
adversarial noise that intersects with the mask M can affect the model’s behavior.

Threat model We assume that a malicious user attempts to successfully edit an image protected
by adversarial perturbations applied by a defender. This malicious user can freely choose the mask
input M , and text prompt ytext for editing. Because it is challenging to develop a defense method
against any arbitrary mask, we consider a feasible yet practical scenario where both defender and
malicious user share a common understanding of the sensitive region in the source image; typically,
in a portrait, this could be the face or the body of a person, while in other contexts, it might be a
specific object. We assume that the defender uses this sensitive region as a training mask Mtr in
generating adversarial noises. Meanwhile, a malicious user can utilize a different mask Mte but
based on the same conceptual sensitive region.

3.2   P ERTURBING THE EARLY STAGES OF THE DIFFUSION PROCESS

In this section, we introduce a novel objective that specifically exploits a unique behavior we have
observed in inpainting models. As shown in Fig. 2a, it is well-known that during the denoising
process of diffusion models, coarse features (such as the image outline) emerge first, while fine details
are generated in the later stages (Ho et al., 2020; Hertz et al., 2023). However, we have found that
this pattern does not hold for inpainting models. As illustrated in Fig. 2b, these models first produce
fine details (e.g., facial features) even at the first denoising step.
This unique behavior likely originates from the additional inputs given during the fine-tuning process
of inpainting models. Unlike standard diffusion models that only receive random noises as input,
inpainting models are fine-tuned to utilize two additional inputs by modifying the input channel of
the noise prediction model ϵθ . Specifically, these models take a binary mask Mtr , and a masked
source image xsrc ⊙ Mtr as inputs. Inpainting models are fine-tuned using a reconstruction loss
(Eq. 2), which encourages them to copy and paste the unmasked region of the image, leading to the
emergent behavior observed in Fig. 2b.
Inspired by the unique behavior of inpainting models, we develop a novel objective that targets the
initial step of the denoising process. Suppose we have a source image xsrc to protect, an inpainting
model ϵθ , and a binary mask Mtr which designates the part of the image to keep while rest of the
image is recreated. We aim to find an adversarial perturbation δ that maximizes the ℓ2 norm of the
initial predicted noise only (e.g., see Fig. 3):
                                                                                 2
                          δ = arg max ∥ϵθ (xT ; ytext , T, Mtr , xsrc + δ)∥2 ,                              (4)
                               ||δ||∞ ≤η

where T corresponds to the initial denoising step and xT is random noise. Our proposed objective
focuses on targeting the early stage of the diffusion process, in contrast to prior methods that target
the entire diffusion process Liang et al. (2023) or the output images Salman et al. (2024). This
approach makes generating adversarial noise both efficient and effective because only one forward
pass through the noise prediction model is necessary. Additionally, unlike previous methods that aim
to maximize reconstruction loss (Eq. 1) or minimize the distance to an arbitrary target image (Eq. 3),
we propose to increase the norm of the noise. We have found that this maximum norm objective is
more effective than previous approaches (see Fig. 6a for supporting results).


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                              Augmented masks       Prompt: "A person getting arrested by the police"


                                                                                               Inpainting
                                                                                                diffusion
                                                                                                 model
                                                                                                             Edited image
                              Mask
                           augmentation


      Training mask


                      (a) Mask augmentation                         (b) Targeting the early stages of the denoising process

Figure 3: Overview of DiffusionGuard. We propose (a) mask augmentation for improving robust-
ness, and (b) early state perturbation loss for generating effective noises.

3.3       M ASK - ROBUST ADVERSARIAL PERTURBATION

In practice, malicious users may utilize a mask that differs from the mask Mtr that is seen during the
generation of adversarial noise. Therefore, it is crucial to find robust perturbations that are effective
across various mask shapes. To achieve this, we propose a mask augmentation A(·) that generates
a new binary mask with a similar shape to Mtr . Specifically, we first obtain the points along the
contours of Mtr using contour detection. We then adjust these points inward by a random offset to
define a new contour. The area inside this new contour is filled to form the augmented mask (see
Fig. 3).
To make these modifications more realistic, we apply smoothing to the random offsets. The full
procedure of mask augmentation is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Using the proposed mask augmentation function A(·), we generate a robust η-bounded adversarial
perturbation δ by maximizing the following loss over the set M of augmented masks A(Mtr ):
                                                                                      2
        δ = arg max Ladv (θ; x + δ, Mtr ) = EM ∼A(Mtr ) ϵθ (xT ; ytext , T, M, x + δ) 2 ,  (5)
                  ||δ||∞ ≤η

where Ladv is from our adversarial loss in Eq. 4.1 In practice, we optimize δ by stochastically
sampling masks from M during the adversarial noise generation. Each iteration, we sample a mask
M ∼ A(Mtr ) and perform a projected gradient descent (PGD) step (Madry et al., 2018) to update δ:
                                     δ ← Proj||δ||∞ ≤η (δ − γ · sign(∇δ Ladv )) ,                                             (6)
where γ is the step size and Proj||δ||∞ ≤η (·) projects δ onto the ℓ∞ ball of radius η. By iteratively
updating δ using different augmented masks, we effectively minimize the expected adversarial loss
over the set of masks M. This stochastic optimization approach allows us to find a perturbation δ
that is robust to various mask shapes similar to Mtr .

4       E XPERIMENTS
4.1       I NPAINT G UARD B ENCH : I NPAINTING - SPECIALIZED PROTECTION BENCHMARK

Benchmark dataset To thoroughly validate protection effectiveness and mask robustness, we
construct a benchmark specialized for masked inpainting models. Our benchmark, named Inpaint-
GuardBench, consists of 42 images, each associated with five unique masks. Out of these, one mask
per image is generated using SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023), a state-of-the-art segmentation method,
and the remaining four masks are handcrafted using the most common tools employed by end-users.
The most commonly used tool for drawing a mask is the circle brush, where users select the region
to keep by painting over the image. This method is employed by popular inpainting tools such as
OpenAI DALL-E inpainting (Ramesh et al., 2022) and Stable Diffusion web UI,2 the most widely
used open-source GUI for diffusion models. We also incorporate simple handcrafted mask shapes
    1
        Note that this applies to any mask-dependent adversarial loss (Salman et al., 2024), see Appendix E.3.2.
    2
        https://github.com/AUTOMATIC1111/stable-diffusion-webui


                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Source image Unprotected   AdvDM       Mist       SDS(-)   PhotoGuard DiffusionGuard
             Seen mask


            Unseen mask
                             Edit prompt: "A man in a hospital"
             Seen mask


            Unseen mask
                  Edit prompt: "A photo of a construction worker"
             Seen mask


            Unseen mask
                 Edit prompt: "A man wearing a halloween costume"
             Seen mask


            Unseen mask
                         Edit prompt: "A dog in a gaming convention"

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison between DiffusionGuard and baseline methods. Diffu-
sionGuard demonstrates greater protective effectiveness (i.e., the ability to prevent editing diffusion
models from generating images well-aligned with the edit prompt) compared to all baseline methods.
Additionally, DiffusionGuard exhibits better robustness, maintaining its protective effectiveness
despite changes in the mask shape.

such as rectangles and circles. Our benchmark contains 42 images, divided into three categories: 32
celebrity portraits, 5 inanimate objects, and 5 animals. We consider 10 edit prompts for each image,
resulting in a total of 2,100 edit tasks (42 images, 5 masks, and 10 prompts).

Baselines We compare our method to various baseline methods. Our primary baseline is Pho-
toGuard (Salman et al., 2024), a protection method specialized for inpainting models. It adds
perturbation within the mask region, optimized to cause diffusion models to generate incorrect
images, as detailed in Eq. 3. We also consider AdvDM (Liang et al., 2023), a protection method
that targets standard text-to-image diffusion models. This approach involves perturbing the entire
image to disrupt the denoising process, aiming to maximize reconstruction loss (Eq. 1). Furthermore,
we consider Mist (Liang & Wu, 2023) and SDS(-) (Xue et al., 2024), both of which build on top
of AdvDM to improve the method. These three methods originally propose to add perturbation to
the entire image, without considering specific mask regions. In our main experiments, we report the
results obtained from the original approaches of these methods. However, we also consider variants


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Results on InpaintGuardBench. Our method achieves strong protection in both Seen
and Unseen set, across all metrics. The lower number represents better protective effectiveness,
indicating failed edits. All methods were optimized using constraint of ∥δ∥∞ = 16/255.

 Method                             PSNR ↓    CLIP Dir. Sim. ↓     ImageReward ↓        CLIP Sim. ↓
                                       Seen (1 Mask, Train set)
 Unprotected                          N/A           24.40               -1.365             30.15
 PhotoGuard (Salman et al., 2024)    12.87      21.17 (∆-3.23)     -1.537 (∆-0.172)    27.89 (∆-2.26)
 DiffusionGuard                      12.60      18.95 (∆-5.45)     -1.807 (∆-0.442)    26.55 (∆-3.60)
                                      Unseen (4 Masks, Test set)
 Unprotected                          N/A           24.29               -1.315             30.72
 PhotoGuard (Salman et al., 2024)    14.53      23.30 (∆-0.99)     -1.357 (∆-0.042)    30.30 (∆-0.42)
 DiffusionGuard                      13.19      21.84 (∆-2.45)     -1.557 (∆-0.242)    29.05 (∆-1.67)
 AdvDM (Liang et al., 2023)          13.37      24.27 (∆-0.02)     -1.361 (∆-0.046)   30.97 (∆+0.25)
 Mist (Liang & Wu, 2023)             14.51      23.93 (∆-0.36)     -1.307 (∆+0.008)   30.79 (∆+0.07)
 SDS(-) (Xue et al., 2024)           14.32      23.85 (∆-0.44)     -1.237 (∆+0.078)   30.78 (∆+0.06)


of these methods that introduce perturbations only within the mask region Mtr , and the results of this
modified approach are reported in Appendix E.3.1.

Setup and evaluation metrics As the target model, we use Stable Diffusion Inpainting (Rombach
et al., 2023), an open-sourced inpainting diffusion model. For generating adversarial noises, we use
the SAM-generated mask as the training ("seen") mask. We then evaluate the effectiveness of the
generated adversarial perturbations on all 5 masks, including the handcrafted 4 "unseen" masks.
For evaluation, we employ quantitative metrics to measure the fidelity of the prompt and the quality
of the image. We use the following metrics:
• CLIP directional similarity (Gal et al., 2022): This measures the alignment between the deviation
  in the image (from the source to the edited result) and the deviation in the text (from the source
  caption to the edit instruction). The source caption, which describes the source image, is generated
  using the BLIP-Large model (Li et al., 2022).
• CLIP similarity (Radford et al., 2021): This measures the text fidelity of the edited image using
  the cosine similarity between their CLIP embeddings.
• ImageReward (Xu et al., 2023): A human-aligned vision-language model (Li et al., 2022) fine-
  tuned on a human preference dataset, assesses both the resulting image quality and text fidelity.
Additionally, we measure the PSNR between the edited results of unprotected and protected images,
as done by (Salman et al., 2024), to quantify the differences in the edited result compared to the
unprotected version.

4.2   M AIN RESULTS

We compare DiffusionGuard with the baseline methods (PhotoGuard, AdvDM, Mist, SDS(-)) on
InpaintGuardBench. For all experiments, we ensure a fair comparison by running the protection
methods for an equal amount of GPU time.

Qualitative comparison As shown in Fig. 4, DiffusionGuard demonstrates superior protective
effectiveness, causing the edit result to become nearly devoid of any recognizable content in most
examples. In contrast, the baseline methods generate images that are more realistic and well-aligned
with the prompts. Notably, the protected results of DiffusionGuard effectively prevent the diffusion
inpainting model from ’recognizing’ the object, as illustrated in the final example where a different
dog is drawn in place of the original. Additionally, DiffusionGuard demonstrates its robustness
against mask changes, in contrast to PhotoGuard (Salman et al., 2024), a protection method utilizing
mask information, which loses the protective effectiveness even with small deviations in mask shape.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       100                                                            Data Type        Method                          Method        Data Type
                     25.0%       22.2%
           75                                        17                   Unseen        PhotoGuard           17         PhotoGuard      Unseen
                                                                          Seen          Ours                            Ours            Seen
Win rate   50                                        16                                                      16


                                             PSNR (dB)


                                                                                                     PSNR (dB)
           25        41.9%       39.0%
                                                     15                                                      15
               0                                     14                                                      14
                     Seen Unseen
                       Mask type                     13                                                      13
                     Photoguard
                     Tied                                      20       40      60       80                       16           12          8     6   4
                     DiffusionGuard (Ours)                    Wall Time (seconds optimized)                                 Noise budget (1/255)
           (a) Human survey                              (b) Compute budget comparison                            (c) Noise budget comparison

Figure 5: (a) Human survey results. We visualize the win rates of DiffusionGuard and Photo-
Guard (Salman et al., 2024) strength grouped into Seen and Unseen groups. (b) Comparison
under limited compute budget. PSNR values are presented per running time. (c) Comparison
under limited noise budget. With varying noise threshold values, we measure PSNR values of each
method. For (b) and (c), the protection is stronger if the PSNR value is lower.

Quantitative results Table 1 reports the quantitative metrics for DiffusionGuard and the baseline
methods.3 DiffusionGuard exhibits strongest protection among all methods for both Seen and
Unseen masks. Note that DiffusionGuard outperforms the baseline methods in both mask categories
by a significant margin, in line with the results presented in Fig. 4.

Human evaluation We also conduct a human evaluation as follows: for each edit instance, defined
by a triplet of source image, mask shape, and edit instruction, we display two edit results using
DiffusionGuard and PhotoGuard in random order. Human raters then select which result is better
or tie (i.e., the two editing results are similar) for all 2100 pairs. We ask human evaluators to make
decisions based on both image quality and edit prompt fidelity simultaneously. We calculate the win
rates of a protection method by counting how often its result was not chosen (i.e., deemed worse). As
shown in Fig. 5a, DiffusionGuard results in a superior win rate against PhotoGuard in both Seen
and Unseen sets of masks, with approximately a 17% higher win rate gap over the baseline.

4.3                C OMPARISON UNDER RESOURCE - RESTRICTED SCENARIOS

In this section, we compare our method against baselines in two resource-restricted scenarios.
First, we evaluate each method with varying running times to compare computational efficiency.
Second, we test each method under limited noise budget by setting the noise threshold ∥δ∥∞ to
4/255, 6/255, 8/255, 12/255, and 16/255 in order to compare them under tighter noise constraints.

Comparison under limited compute budget Fig. 5b shows that DiffusionGuard is more effective
than PhotoGuard when both are optimized for an equal number of steps. Specifically, our method with
compute budget of 11 seconds achieves a similar PSNR of PhotoGuard at 90 seconds. Additionally,
when comparing the performance gaps between the Unseen and Seen mask categories for each
method, the gap is notably smaller for DiffusionGuard (blue). These results demonstrate that our
method is faster, cheaper, and more effective than PhotoGuard.

Comparison under limited noise budget Fig. 5c shows that DiffusionGuard consistently achieves
stronger performance (i.e., lower PSNR) under a tighter noise budget. In particular, our method
with a noise budget of 6/255 is similar to PhotoGuard even when PhotoGuard uses a higher budget
of 16/255. These results show that DiffusionGuard maintains high levels of protection even with
reduced perturbations (i.e., less visible). This makes it suitable for real-life applications where
generating less detectable noise and preserving the original image quality are crucial.

4.4                A BLATION STUDY

We conduct a comprehensive analysis on the effects of loss functions in adversarial noise generation,
mask augmentation, and the efficacy of using an inpainting-specialized method.
           3
               Baselines optimized without mask information are omitted from Seen group of the table for fair comparison.


                                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Image-Space Loss                          DiffusionGuard, w/o mask aug.       AdvDM
            Reconstruction Loss                       DiffusionGuard, with mask aug.      DiffusionGuard
            Early Stage Perturbation Loss


                                                                                                               -1.36
                                               14.1


                                                                                                                           31.0
                                                                    -1.41


                                                                                                  24.3
                                                                             29.9
            -1.51

             29.9
             23.9


                                                                                        13.4
           -1.54


                                                                 -1.56


                                                                                                           -1.56
                                            13.2


                                                                                       13.2
                                                        23.0


                                                                            29.1


                                                                                                                       29.1
          12.9


                                                       21.8


                                                                                               21.8
         12.6
         21.2


        27.9
        12.4


       19.5

      -1.79

      26.8
      PSNR CDS          IR        CS        PSNR CDS                IR        CS       PSNR CDS               IR         CS
  (a) Optimization loss comparison (b) Mask augmentation comparison (c) Against mask-free protection

Figure 6: Ablation study reporting PSNR, CLIP directional similarity (CDS), ImageReward (IR), and
CLIP similarity (CS). Lower metric indicates better performance, indicating failed edits. (a) Loss
functions in adversarial noise generation. We visualize Seen set results of the three loss functions
with the same training mask. (b) Effect of mask augmentation. Using Unseen set, we present the
effect of mask augmentation on the effectiveness of DiffusionGuard. (c) Comparison to mask-free
protection. We visualize the protection effectiveness of using mask-free protection (AdvDM (Liang
et al., 2023)) and mask-dependent protection (DiffusionGuard) on the Unseen mask set.

Loss functions in adversarial noise generation To verify the effectiveness of the early stage
perturbation loss (Eq. 4) in generating adversarial noises, we compare it with image-space loss (used
in PhotoGuard (Salman et al., 2024)) and reconstruction loss (used in AdvDM (Liang et al., 2023)).
To isolate the effects of mask augmentation, we use a single fixed mask Mtr for generation and
evaluate using the Seen set of InpaintGuardBench. As shown in Fig. 6a, our early stage perturbation
loss consistently outperforms both the other losses across most metrics.

Effect of mask augmentation Additionally, we evaluate how much mask augmentation improves
the protection strength on the Unseen mask set by measuring the performance of DiffusionGuard
with and without mask augmentation. Fig. 6b shows that mask augmentation consistently improves
all metrics for the Unseen set of InpaintGuardBench, clearly demonstrating its effectiveness in
enhancing mask robustness. We provide qualitative examples in Appendix E.1.

Comparison with mask-free protection We compare DiffusionGuard with a mask-free protection
method that applies a global perturbation over the entire image. As a baseline, we use AdvDM, a
mask-free protection method based on reconstruction loss (Eq. 1). Fig. 6c presents the results on the
Unseen set of InpaintGuardBench, showing that DiffusionGuard, by focusing on the mask region,
provides significantly stronger protection than AdvDM across all metrics. We also remark that the
noise perceptibility is much lower with DiffusionGuard. This is because the per-pixel noise threshold
∥δ∥∞ is identical between the two methods, but DiffusionGuard adds δ over a smaller, focused region,
whereas in AdvDM δ occupies the entire image, making it more visible.

4.5    R ESILIENCE AGAINST PURIFICATION METHODS

We also evaluate the robustness of DiffusionGuard and the baseline methods against noise purification
tools. Specifically, we applied commonly used purification tools such as JPEG (Wallace, 1992) com-
pression, crop-and-resize, and AdverseCleaner (Zhang, 2023), an algorithmic adversarial perturbation
remover, to the protected images. As visualized in Fig. 7a, DiffusionGuard (blue) shows superior
protection strength, maintaining its effectiveness even after noise removal. This demonstrates its
reliable protection in real-world scenarios, where malicious users may attempt to circumvent defenses
by eliminating noise. We include the full results for the purification experiments in Appendix F.

4.6    B LACK - BOX TRANSFER

Finally, we verify whether our method and the baselines can be black-box transferred to a differ-
ent model. Our adversarial perturbations are optimized against Stable Diffusion Inpainting (SD
Inpainting), which is based on the pre-trained model weights of SD 1.2. In this section, we test
these perturbations on SD 2 Inpainting, which is based on the weights of SD 2.0 (Rombach et al.,
2023). Since SD 2.0 was trained from scratch and does not build on SD 1.2, it represents a different
model family, making this evaluation a test of black-box transfer. Fig. 7b shows the edited results for
DiffusionGuard and PhotoGuard (Salman et al., 2024) using 4 different editing prompts ("A man
in a hospital", "A man in a gym", "A man getting on a bus", "Photo of


                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                       PhotoGuard           AdvDM      Mist     SDS(-)         DiffusionGuard


                                              23.9


                                                               -1.18
                              15.0


                                                                                 30.3
                                             23.6
                                             23.6


                                                                                30.0
                                                             -1.23
                                                             -1.24
                                            23.4
JPEG 90


                                                                               29.8
                                                                               29.7
                                                           -1.28
                                                                                                     Unprotected


                        14.4
                       14.2

                                    14.2


                                                                                        28.4
                                 13.7


                                                    21.6


                                                                       -1.49
                              15.2


                                                24.1


                                                                                  30.5
                                                                      -1.42

                                                                      -1.42


                                                                                 30.3
Crop&Resize AdvClean


                                              23.7


                                                                   -1.46
                                             23.6


                                                                               30.0


                                                                               29.9
                                            23.3
                                                                                                     PhotoGuard
                        14.6


                                                                -1.53
                       14.4

                                     14.3


                                                                                        29.0
                                                    22.1


                                                           -1.62
                                 13.8
                       15.3


                                                                                28.6
                                                                                28.6
                                                                     -1.67


                                                                               28.6
                                              22.4


                                                                               28.5
                                             22.2
                                            22.1


                                                                  -1.72
                                  15.0


                                            22.1
                                14.8


                                                                                                           Ours


                                                               -1.76
                                                              -1.78
                              14.6
                          14.4


                                                           -1.81


                                                                                        27.8
                                                    21.2
                          PSNR                CDS                IR                CS                Edit prompt   A man in a hospital   A man in the gym      A photo of a
                                                                                                                                                            construction worker


                                 (a) Purification comparison                                                (b) Transfer to SD Inpainting 2.0
Figure 7: Comparison of DiffusionGuard and the baseline methods after noise removal and black-box
transferring. (a) Purification. We visualize the Seen set results for each method after removing
protection using three different purification methods. Lower metric value represents stronger pro-
tection. (b) Black-box transfer. We visualize the protection effectiveness of DiffusionGuard and
PhotoGuard (Salman et al., 2024) by demonstrating editing results after black-box transfer to SD
Inpainting 2.0 on Unseen mask set, using 4 different editing prompts.

a construction worker" from left to right). As presented, DiffusionGuard maintains its
effectiveness even when transferred to another model, resulting in failed edits, while PhotoGuard
loses its protection and results in successful edits that are aligned with the editing prompt. We include
the full evaluation results and comparisons with other baselines in Appendix G.

 5                     R ELATED WORK
Safety concerns of generative diffusion models Generative diffusion models have raised public
safety concerns, particularly regarding the potential misuse for generating realistic but harmful
content. There have been various studies that seek to mitigate these concerns by developing safety
measures against them. Some works focus on watermarking the images to identify manipulated
images (Cui et al., 2023; Fernandez et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023). A line of
studies explore ways to remove potentially harmful concepts (Gandikota et al., 2023; 2024; Heng &
Soh, 2023). SPM (Lyu et al., 2024) introduced one-dimensional adapters for precise and transferable
concept erasure, while MACE (Lu et al., 2024) massively scaled concept erasure to 100+ concepts.
Recent methods, such as SepME (Zhao et al., 2024), have further explored efficient multi-concept
erasure. Another line of research explores and identifies biases embedded in diffusion models and
ways to mitigate them (Friedrich et al., 2023; Choi et al., 2024; Shen et al., 2024). These safety issues
need continued focus and attention to ensure the responsible use of generative diffusion models.

Adversarial examples against diffusion-based image editing Several works have explored adver-
sarial examples against diffusion-based image editing to protect images from being manipulated by
these models. AdvDM (Liang et al., 2023) proposed to maximize diffusion model training loss to
create adversarial examples. Xue et al. (2024) further improved AdvDM by applying score distillation
sampling (Poole et al., 2023). However, most prior works did not specialize for inpainting models
specifically. PhotoGuard (Salman et al., 2024) considered a defense against inpainting models but
did not evaluate the protection under a challenging setup such as mask robustness.

 6                     C ONCLUSION
This work presents DiffusionGuard, a robust and effective defense method against malicious diffusion-
based image editing. We introduce a novel adversarial objective in order to target the vulnerability
of inpainting models and disrupt the early stages of the denoising process, where key regions are
generated. Furthermore, we identify key limitations in existing protection methods, such as their
inability to handle various shapes of masks, and address this with mask augmentation to develop a
robust protection method. By leveraging these strategies, our method achieves stronger protection
and improved mask robustness with lower computational costs, when compared to several baselines.
Additionally, DiffusionGuard demonstrates robustness against various purification methods, and
proves effective in black-box transfer settings.


                                                                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS STATEMENT
Text-to-image diffusion models have demonstrated superior capabilities in generating and editing
images based on text prompts and additional user inputs such as masks, offering significant potential
across creative industries, including art, graphics, and entertainment. However, it comes with the
risk of misuse, such as creating fake or deceptive visual contents. For example, malicious users can
manipulate images to spread misinformation, deliberately fabricate events, or misrepresent individuals
using the generated fake content.
Our work presents a defense mechanism against the malicious usage of text-to-image models, in
specific, we focus on protecting sensitive areas of images from unauthorized modifications. While
our method provides robust defenses, we recognize a remaining risk that advanced adversaries may
find ways to circumvent protections. As such, we highlight that the necessity of ethical guidelines
and legal frameworks to prevent any malicious use.
Therefore, we have made a concerted effort to evaluate and document the limitations of our approach
through rigorous testing. Specifically, we conducted purification experiments (e.g., Sec. 4.5 and
Appendix F) to assess the resilience of our method against attempts to remove adversarial noise, as
well as transfer experiments (e.g., Sec. 4.6 and Appendix G) to evaluate its generalizability under a
black-box transferring scenario. These experiments demonstrate the robustness of our method even
when attackers employ noise-removal techniques or apply it to different models.
Nevertheless, we acknowledge the possibility of future threats and emphasize the future research on
strengthening these defenses. We encourage open discussion and regulatory measures to mitigate the
broader ethical implications of advancements in text-to-image models.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
To ensure the reproducibility of our results, we provide detailed descriptions of our methods, datasets,
and evaluation criteria in Sec. 4, Appendix C, and Appendix D. Specifically, we describe how we
generate adversarial perturbations, how we evaluate the protective effectiveness and the robustness of
these perturbations against different test-time mask shapes, and the setup for our experiments. Addi-
tionally, we attach the executable code for adversarial perturbation generation, mask augmentation,
and the evaluation suites in the supplementary materials. Full experimental details regarding setups,
used inpainting models, and the evaluation metrics are in Sec. 4, Appendix C and Appendix D.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dongjun Lee, Dongyoon Hahm, Haeone Lee, and Daewon Chae for helping conduct the
human survey experiments. We also appreciate Juyong Lee and Seojin Kim for providing feedback
and reviewing the paper. This work was supported by Artificial Intelligence Industrial Convergence
Cluster Development project funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT(MSIT, Korea)&Gwangju
Metropolitan City, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (KAIST) (RS-2019-II190075),
the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) (No. RS-2024-00414822), Institute of Information
& communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) (No.RS-2021-II212068, Artificial
Intelligence Innovation Hub), and Development and Study of AI Technologies to Inexpensively
Conform to Evolving Policy on Ethics (RS-2022-II220184, 2022-0-00184) grant funded by the Korea
government (MSIT). Jongheon Jeong acknowledges support from the Institute of Information &
communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government
(MSIT) (No. RS-2019-II190079, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (Korea University)),
and the Culture, Sports and Tourism R&D Program through the Korea Creative Content Agency grant
funded by the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism (No. RS-2024-00345025, International Col-
laborative Research and Global Talent Development for the Development of Copyright Management
and Protection Technologies for Generative AI).

R EFERENCES
James Betker, Gabriel Goh, Li Jing, Tim Brooks, Jianfeng Wang, Linjie Li, Long Ouyang, Juntang
  Zhuang, Joyce Lee, Yufei Guo, et al. Improving image generation with better captions. In Annual


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023.

Battista Biggio, Igino Corona, Davide Maiorca, Blaine Nelson, Nedim Šrndić, Pavel Laskov, Giorgio
  Giacinto, and Fabio Roli. Evasion attacks against machine learning at test time. In Hendrik
  Blockeel, Kristian Kersting, Siegfried Nijssen, and Filip Železný (eds.), Machine Learning and
  Knowledge Discovery in Databases, 2013.

Kevin Black, Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Training diffusion models
  with reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.

Yujin Choi, Jinseong Park, Hoki Kim, Jaewook Lee, and Saeroom Park. Fair sampling in diffusion
  models through switching mechanism. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.

Kevin Crowston. Amazon mechanical turk: A research tool for organizations and information systems
  scholars. In Shaping the Future of ICT Research. Methods and Approaches, 2012.

Yingqian Cui, Jie Ren, Han Xu, Pengfei He, Hui Liu, Lichao Sun, Yue Xing, and Jiliang Tang.
  Diffusionshield: A watermark for copyright protection against generative diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.03436, 2023.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Ying Fan, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Kangwook Lee, and Kimin Lee. Dpok: Reinforcement learning for
  fine-tuning text-to-image diffusion models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023.

Pierre Fernandez, Guillaume Couairon, Hervé Jégou, Matthijs Douze, and Teddy Furon. The stable
  signature: Rooting watermarks in latent diffusion models. In IEEE International Conference on
  Computer Vision, 2023.

Felix Friedrich, Manuel Brack, Lukas Struppek, Dominik Hintersdorf, Patrick Schramowski, Sasha
  Luccioni, and Kristian Kersting. Fair diffusion: Instructing text-to-image generation models on
  fairness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03436, 2023.

Stephanie Fu, Netanel Tamir, Shobhita Sundaram, Lucy Chai, Richard Zhang, Tali Dekel, and Phillip
  Isola. Dreamsim: Learning new dimensions of human visual similarity using synthetic data. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.

Rinon Gal, Or Patashnik, Haggai Maron, Amit H. Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
  Stylegan-nada: Clip-guided domain adaptation of image generators. ACM Trans. Graph., 2022.

Rohit Gandikota, Joanna Materzyńska, Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, and David Bau. Erasing concepts
  from diffusion models. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023.

Rohit Gandikota, Hadas Orgad, Yonatan Belinkov, Joanna Materzyńska, and David Bau. Unified
  concept editing in diffusion models. In IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
  Vision, 2024.

Alvin Heng and Harold Soh. Selective amnesia: A continual learning approach to forgetting in deep
  generative models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.

Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Prompt-
 to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2023.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment anything. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023.

Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2022.

Chumeng Liang and Xiaoyu Wu. Mist: Towards improved adversarial examples for diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12683, 2023.

Chumeng Liang, Xiaoyu Wu, Yang Hua, Jiaru Zhang, Yiming Xue, Tao Song, Zhengui Xue, Ruhui
  Ma, and Haibing Guan. Adversarial example does good: Preventing painting imitation from
  diffusion models via adversarial examples. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2023.

Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A fast
  ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Shilin Lu, Zilan Wang, Leyang Li, Yanzhu Liu, and Adams Wai-Kin Kong. Mace: Mass concept
  erasure in diffusion models. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  2024.

Mengyao Lyu, Yuhong Yang, Haiwen Hong, Hui Chen, Xuan Jin, Yuan He, Hui Xue, Jungong Han,
 and Guiguang Ding. One-dimensional adapter to rule them all: Concepts, diffusion models and
 erasing applications. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.

Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2018.

Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.

Sen Peng, Yufei Chen, Cong Wang, and Xiaohua Jia. Intellectual property protection of diffusion
  models via the watermark diffusion process. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03436, 2023.

Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2021.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of machine learning research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2023.

Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris Lee, Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David Fleet,
  and Mohammad Norouzi. Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2022
  Conference Proceedings, 2022a.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022b.
Chitwan Saharia, Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Tim Salimans, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi.
  Image super-resolution via iterative refinement. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
  intelligence, 45(4):4713–4726, 2022c.
Hadi Salman, Alaa Khaddaj, Guillaume Leclerc, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Raising the
  cost of malicious ai-powered image editing. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024.
Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, Tim Dockhorn, Andreas Blattmann, Patrick Esser, and Robin Rombach.
  Fast high-resolution image synthesis with latent adversarial diffusion distillation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.12015, 2024.
Xudong Shen, Chao Du, Tianyu Pang, Min Lin, Yongkang Wong, and Mohan Kankanhalli. Fine-
  tuning text-to-image diffusion models for fairness. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2024.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2014.
G.K. Wallace. The jpeg still picture compression standard. IEEE Transactions on Consumer
  Electronics, 1992.
Su Wang, Chitwan Saharia, Ceslee Montgomery, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Shai Noy, Stefano Pellegrini,
  Yasumasa Onoe, Sarah Laszlo, David J Fleet, Radu Soricut, et al. Imagen editor and editbench:
  Advancing and evaluating text-guided image inpainting. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao
   Dong. Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation. In
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Haotian Xue, Chumeng Liang, Xiaoyu Wu, and Yongxin Chen. Toward effective protection against
  diffusion based mimicry through score distillation. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024.
Junliang Ye, Fangfu Liu, Qixiu Li, Zhengyi Wang, Yikai Wang, Xinzhou Wang, Yueqi Duan,
  and Jun Zhu. Dreamreward: Text-to-3d generation with human preference. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.14613, 2024.
Jiraphon Yenphraphai, Xichen Pan, Sainan Liu, Daniele Panozzo, and Saining Xie. Image sculpting:
   Precise object editing with 3d geometry control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01702, 2024.
Lvmin Zhang. AdverseCleaner. https://github.com/lllyasviel/AdverseCleaner,
  2023.
Mengnan Zhao, Lihe Zhang, Tianhang Zheng, Yuqiu Kong, and Baocai Yin. Separable multi-concept
 erasure from diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05947, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yunqing Zhao, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Xiao Yang, Ngai-Man Cheung, and Min Lin. A recipe for
  watermarking diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10137, 2023.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         Appendix:
                 DiffusionGuard: A Robust Defense Against
                  Malicious Diffusion-based Image Editing

A Mask augmentation algorithm                                                                      17

B InpaintGuardBench                                                                                17
    B.1 Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17

C Evaluation details                                                                               19
    C.1 Quantitative metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
    C.2 Human survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20

D Experimental details                                                                             22

E More experimental results                                                                        22
    E.1 More editing results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
    E.2 Additional analysis under scenarios with limited resources . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22
    E.3 Additional analysis on mask region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24
    E.4 Experiments with instruction-based editing model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31
    E.5 Experiments with masks larger at test-time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     31
    E.6 Experiments with different sampling steps and different sampler . . . . . . . . . .        31

F Protection resilience against noise purification                                                 32

G Transferability to black-box models                                                              34

H Comparison of noise visibility                                                                   35

I   Comparison of instruction-based editing and inpainting                                         36
    I.1   Editing a malicious image to change the face . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     37
    I.2   Editing a celebrity image to change the background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     38

J   Editing the inside of the mask                                                                 40
    J.1   Generating sub-perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40

K Comparison of masks with different sizes                                                         43

L Limitation                                                                                       45


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A        M ASK AUGMENTATION ALGORITHM

The full procedure of mask augmentation is summarized in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Mask augmentation via contour shrinking
Require: Training mask Mtr , perturbation range ζ, smoothing parameter s, iterations N
 1: M ← Mtrain
 2: for i ← 1 to N do
 3:     P ← findContours(M )
 4:     Porig ← P
 5:     Xoffset , Yoffset ∼ U(−ζ, ζ) ∀(xi , yi ) ∈ P                                                ▷ Random offsets
 6:     Xoffset , Yoffset ← GaussianFilter(Xoffset , s), GaussianFilter(Yoffset , s) ▷ Smooth
    out
 7:     for each point (xi , yi ) ∈ P do
 8:         (xi , yi ) ← (xi + Xoffset [i], yi + Yoffset [i])
 9:     for each point (xi , yi ) ∈ P do                                    ▷ Ensure P stays within the original mask
10:         if Mtr [yi , xi ] = 0 then                                                    ▷ Point is outside the mask
11:               (xclosest
                     i      , yi
                                closest
                                        ) ←  closest     point to (x i , yi ) on P orig
12:               (xi , yi ) ← (xclosest
                                      i    , yiclosest )
13:     M ← mask from new contour P
14: return M



B        I NPAINT G UARD B ENCH

To assess the ability of a protection method to prevent unauthorized adversaries from editing an
image in a challenging yet practical scenario as outlined in Sec. 3.1, we construct a benchmark out of
various images, mask shapes, and edit prompt instructions.

B.1       DATASET

B.1.1       I MAGES

To take into account realistic scenarios of privacy threat posed by inpainting models, we collect 42
images consisting of 32 images of celebrities and 10 images of non-human objects. The 32 celebrity
images were collected from the web, and consist of 20 front-view images and 12 side-view images
of racial and domain diversity. Out of each, 30 images are focused on faces, and 2 images focus
on the body of the person. 10 non-human images were sourced from the DreamBooth (Ruiz et al.,
2023) dataset. Out of them, 5 images contain animals, and 5 images include inanimate objects. We
visualize all images that we have used in Fig. 8 and all masks that we have used in Fig. 9.

B.1.2       M ASKS

In order to measure the robustness of a protection method against mask variations, we prepare 5
masks per image. For the first mask, we obtain a training mask Mtr , which determines the sensitive
region (e.g. face, body or object) using an automated segmentation tool (Kirillov et al., 2023) (see
Sec. 3.1 for more details about the definition of the sensitive region). This mask is used for training in
both DiffusionGuard and the baselines. For the remaining 4 masks, we handcraft 4 additional masks
that contain the same sensitive region. The handcrafted masks are drawn using either circle brush or
simple shapes such as rectangles or circles. Circle brush is a simple yet the most commonly used user
interface (UI) to draw a mask, and it is used by popular inpainting tools such as DALL-E 3 ChatGPT
integration (Betker et al., 2023), DALL-E 2 playground (Ramesh et al., 2022), or Stable Diffusion
web UI.4
    4
        https://github.com/AUTOMATIC1111/stable-diffusion-webui


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Figure 8: All images used in InpaintGuardBench. Best seen zoomed in.


B.1.3   E DIT TEXT PROMPTS

Finally, we use 10 different editing text prompts in order to take into account the robustness of each
protection method against different editing prompt choices. All prompts are available in Table 2 and
Table 3.


         A [man/woman] in a hospital
         A [man/woman] riding a motorcycle
         A [man/woman] walking in the street
         A [man/woman] driving a car
         A [man/woman] dancing in a club
         A [man/woman] dressed up in halloween costume
         A [man/woman] in the gym
         A [man/woman] in a gaming convention
         A photo of a construction worker
         A [man/woman] getting on a bus

                              Table 2: All prompts for portrait images.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Figure 9: All masks used in InpaintGuardBench. Best seen zoomed in.
          A [object] in a hospital
          A [object] on a motorcycle
          A [object] in the street
          A [object] in a car
          A [object] in a club
          A [object] in halloween
          A [object] in the gym
          A [object] in a gaming convention
          A photo of [object] at a construction site
          A [object] on a bus

                            Table 3: All prompts for non-portrait images.


C     E VALUATION DETAILS

C.1     Q UANTITATIVE METRICS

In order to quantitatively measure the protection strength of each method, we employ multiple
metrics in order to measure both edit instruction fidelity and edit image quality (i.e. how realistic the
generated image is). Because these metrics measure the degree of alignment, and our goal is to stop
adversaries from obtaining desirable edits, these metrics should be lower if the protection is better.

C.1.1    CLIP SIMILARITY

Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) (Radford et al., 2021) is a set of vision and text
encoder trained together to align vision and text representations. To measure edit instruction fidelity,
we calculate the cosine similarity between the textual description CLIPtext (yedit ) and the actual
edited image representation CLIPimage (xedit ), where xedit is the edit result image, and CLIP is the


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CLIP encoder. Higher similarity scores indicate that the edit more closely aligns with the desired
instruction. This metric helps us evaluate how accurately the edits reflect the specified changes.

C.1.2    CLIP DIRECTIONAL SIMILARITY
CLIP directional similarity (Gal et al., 2022) is a metric specifically intended to measure the perfor-
mance of a text-guided image editing model. Specifically, CLIP directional similarity measures the
alignment between the deviation in the text space (from the source caption to the edit instruction) and
the deviation in the image space (from the source to the edited result). The source caption is a caption
that describes the source image and in our case, it is obtained using BLIP-Large model (Li et al.,
2022), which is an open-source captioning model. The formulation of CLIP directional similarity can
be written as follows:
                                            (eimage, edit − eimage, source ) · (etext, edit − etext, source )
          CLIP directional similarity =                                                                       .
                                            ∥eimage, edit − eimage, source ∥∥etext, edit − etext, source ∥

C.1.3    I MAGE R EWARD
ImageReward (Xu et al., 2023) is a human-aligned vision-language model and a reward model, which
is fine-tuned on a human preference dataset. As stated and used by several works (Ye et al., 2024;
Fan et al., 2023; Black et al., 2024), ImageReward is suitable for evaluating edit prompt fidelity as
well as overall image quality, and shows improvement especially in terms of the ability to measure
prompt-image alignment.

C.1.4    PSNR
Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) is a widely used metric to assess the similarity between two
images by calculating the ratio between the maximum possible power of a signal and the power of
corrupting noise that affects the quality of its representation. In our context, PSNR is used to measure
the similarity between the edit result of an unprotected clean image xedit and a protected image
xsrc + δ. This serves as an indicator of how much the protection alters the edited result compared to
the edited result of a clean image. PSNR is defined as follows:

                                                                    MAX(xedit, unprotected )
      PSNR(xedit, protected , xedit, unprotected ) = 20 · log10 p
                                                                 MSE(xedit, unprotected , xedit, protected )
where MAX(xedit, unprotected ) is the maximum possible pixel value of the unprotected edited result
image, and MSE is the mean squared error. Lower PSNR values indicate that the edited result of
the protected image is different from the edited result of the unprotected image, indicating that the
protection alters the edited result of the image.

C.2     H UMAN SURVEY

In order to assess the edited result of the protected images perceived by human eyes, we perform a
human survey with the 2,100 edit instances from InpaintGuardBench. We collected 10,500 labels
using the Amazon Mechanical Turk (Crowston, 2012) platform, from 5 unique human annotators for
each edit instance. An edit instance is defined by a triplet of (source image, mask, edit instruction),
with fixed random seed value. We draw one edit instance from each of the two methods that are
compared and present them to the rater in a shuffled order. Then, the rater is instructed to choose the
method with better edited result in terms of the criteria, or whether it is tie. For detailed explanation
about the human survey criteria, refer to Appendix C.2.1.
We created the labeling interface using HTML and CSS, which is the default method accepted by
Amazon Mechanical Turk. We shuffled the 2,100 edit instances in a random order and split it into 42
batches, each with 50 edit instances. Then, we distributed the 42 batches on Amazon Mechanical
Turk with 5 unique annotators assigned for each batch, resulting in 10,500 annotations in total.
When aggregating the results, we applied majority voting to the collected 5 votes per each edit
instance and counted all ambiguous, tied cases as ties. Additionally, we report the 95% confidence
interval of the voting results, as visualized as error bars in Fig. 5a.


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                      In this task, you will see a source image and two edited results that follow an edit prompt.
                      Your job is to determine which edited image is MORE successful and realistic based on the following criteria:

                           Realism and Quality: How realistic or high-quality is the edited result?
                           Edit Alignment: How well does the edit match the intended edit prompt?
                      Consider both criteria equally when making your decision.

                      Example:

                      If both images depict a dog at a gaming convention (meaning they align equally with the prompt),
                      but the left image has bad artifacts and noticeable borders around the face, making it look unrealistic,
                      you would select "Right" as the MORE successful edit.

                      If you cannot determine which is more successful or both are equal, you may select "Tie."


                      Comparison #1


                                             ➔

                        Source Image



                                                                   Left Image                            Right Image
                      Which edit is more successful (realistic and aligned with prompt)?
                      Editing Prompt: "A woman in the gym"

                         Left       Tie       Right


Figure 10: The human survey labeling user interface, with the instruction given to the annotators
included.

C.2.1    H UMAN SURVEY CRITERIA
The purpose of the protection is to prevent adversaries from achieving desired edit results that
are aligned with their edit instructions, and are natural and realistic enough to spread malicious
information. In order to assess this, we ask raters to choose the edit result that is better in terms of the
following criteria and count the cases where a given method was not chosen (i.e. had worse results)
as a winning case. The actual instruction given to the raters are visualized in Fig. 10.
 • Overall image quality: Raters are instructed to assess how natural, realistic, and high-quality the
   edited image is.
• Edit prompt fidelity: Raters are instructed to assess how aligned the edit result image and the edit
  prompt are.

Due to the need for a large quantity of labels, we optimized the annotation process based on feedback
from human annotators. One major issue was confusion when asked to choose a worse image, leading
to slower labeling and less accurate annotations. As a result, we decided to ask annotators to select
the better edit instance, counting the cases where a method was not chosen as the winner. Details on
the win rate computation are provided in Appendix C.2.

C.2.2    BASELINE FOR HUMAN SURVEY
For the baseline, we choose PhotoGuard (Salman et al., 2024) as our baseline, as (1) PhotoGuard
achieves the best result overall in terms of quantitative metrics as presented in Table 1, Fig. 6, and
Fig. 4, which is also visually notable, and (2) PhotoGuard proposed to target the diffusion model in a
mask-dependent manner, which is more aligned with our setup outlined in Sec. 3.1, allowing a fairer
comparison in contrast to other baselines, which are not necessarily mask-specific.


                                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
In this section, we outline the experimental details of our experimental setup for reproducibility. We
conduct all our experiments on a single NVIDIA H100 80GB HBM3 GPU. For fair comparison, we
match the time taken for running PGD optimization to 90 seconds in all comparisons throughout
the paper. Additionally, we fix the random seed for a reliable comparison of the edited results of
different methods, and we also follow the same projected gradient descent (PGD) (Madry et al., 2018)
optimization configuration proposed by each method. For the generation of adversarial perturbation,
we fix the input text prompt to an empty string ("") to maximize generalization to any test-time
prompt. After protection is done, each image is edited using DDIM (Song et al., 2021) sampler with
50 inference steps, following the default implementation of Stable Diffusion Inpainting (Rombach
et al., 2023).
All demonstrations as well as quantitative measurements (except Fig. 2) are done after a post-
processing procedure, in which the masked region from the source image is copied and pasted over
the generated result, following the visualization practice of the baseline works (Liang et al., 2023;
Salman et al., 2024; Xue et al., 2024). To provide insights as to what the raw generated results
look like without the post-processing, we include generated results of the images protected using
DiffusionGuard before and after post-processing in Fig. 11. As illustrated, the region of the edited
result of the protected image inside the mask area looks noisy and blurry before post-processing
(third column). Post-processing overlays the mask region of the source image onto the generated
result (fourth column).
                                           Before post-processing        After post-processing
                                           (Raw generated result)    (Mask area overlaid with source)


      Source image
       (Protected)          Mask



                                                   Edit prompt: "A woman in a hospital"


                                                   Edit prompt: "A woman riding a bike"

Figure 11: Comparison of edited results of images protected using DiffusionGuard before and
after visualization post-processing. Best seen zoomed in.


E     M ORE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
E.1    M ORE EDITING RESULTS

In this section, we include additional editing results using DiffusionGuard. We attach the additional
editing results in Fig. 30, Fig. 31, Fig. 32, Fig. 33.

E.2    A DDITIONAL ANALYSIS UNDER SCENARIOS WITH LIMITED RESOURCES

We compare our method to the baseline method in Sec. 4 by optimizing the adversarial perturbation
using under two different scenarios with limited resources. The two scenarios were using tighter


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Results of each protection method using various noise strength threshold values. Our
method achieves strong protection, exhibiting best protection strength in every evaluation even under
tighter noise budget, in both Seen and Unseen set, across all metrics. Noticeably, the gap between
our method and the baselines grows as noise budget gets tighter, showing that our method is more
robust under limited noise budget scenario. Lower metric is better, indicating failed edits.

   |δ|∞       Method       PSNR ↓    CDS ↓     IR ↓       CS ↓    PSNR ↓   CDS ↓     IR ↓     CS ↓
                               Seen (1 Mask, Train set)              Unseen (4 Masks, Test set)
              PhotoGuard   12.87     21.17    -1.537      27.89   14.53     23.30    -1.357   30.30
              AdvDM        13.62     23.77    -1.438      30.04   13.37     24.27    -1.361   30.97
   16/255     Mist         14.22     24.25    -1.368      30.27   14.51     23.93    -1.307   30.79
              SDS(-)       14.44     23.42    -1.337      29.89   14.32     23.85    -1.237   30.78
              Ours         12.60     18.95    -1.807      26.55   13.19     21.84    -1.557   29.05
              PhotoGuard   13.19     21.79    -1.499      28.42   15.07     23.32    -1.365   30.26
              AdvDM        13.99     24.10    -1.404      30.19   14.02     24.27    -1.302   30.84
   12/255     Mist         14.87     23.96    -1.374      30.04   15.05     24.13    -1.281   30.75
              SDS(-)       15.07     23.85    -1.333      29.92   14.88     23.96    -1.207   30.64
              Ours         12.78     20.08    -1.762      27.15   13.55     22.13    -1.499   29.25
              PhotoGuard   13.67     22.25    -1.475      28.76   15.84     23.64    -1.337   30.29
              AdvDM        14.89     24.15    -1.386      30.02   15.01     24.18    -1.302   30.71
   8/255      Mist         15.84     24.10    -1.383      30.02   16.01     23.90    -1.313   30.50
              SDS(-)       15.66     24.09    -1.369      29.87   15.58     23.92    -1.250   30.58
              Ours         13.12     20.53    -1.674      27.43   14.12     22.65    -1.455   29.48
              PhotoGuard   14.23     23.18    -1.432      29.35   16.55     23.57    -1.341   30.26
              AdvDM        15.83     24.49    -1.409      30.22   15.88     24.08    -1.308   30.64
   6/255      Mist         16.54     24.42    -1.367      30.01   16.75     24.01    -1.321   30.52
              SDS(-)       16.22     24.14    -1.341      29.82   16.31     23.92    -1.279   30.45
              Ours         13.63     21.65    -1.594      28.05   14.79     22.93    -1.415   29.66
              PhotoGuard   15.00     23.77    -1.397      29.58   17.59     23.78    -1.315   30.40
              AdvDM        17.37     24.61    -1.398      30.10   17.62     24.21    -1.297   30.66
   4/255      Mist         17.54     24.41    -1.392      29.97   17.98     24.00    -1.327   30.50
              SDS(-)       17.36     24.09    -1.361      29.94   17.35     23.95    -1.298   30.53
              Ours         14.55     22.68    -1.533      28.68   15.87     23.16    -1.387   29.92


noise strength threshold (i.e. noise budget), and using constrained optimization time (i.e. compute
budget).
Verifying whether a protection method is still effective under such constraints is crucial, as they are
closely related to the usefulness in realistic scenarios. For instance, a stricter noise budget plays a
crucial role in generating adversarial perturbations that are both subtle and imperceptible to human
eyes or automated detection systems. This ensures that the noises remain less noticeable and at the
same time preserve the quality and integrity of the original image, making the protection method more
applicable in practical scenarios. Tighter compute budget, on the other hand, is vital for developing
a cost-effective defense measure as the defender likely has to protect a large number of images
in real-life scenarios, where computational resources are limited and deploying efficient defenses
quickly becomes critical for maintaining security without compromising the protective effectiveness.

E.2.1       L IMITED NOISE BUDGET SCENARIO
In this section, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of DiffusionGuard and all baseline methods
using 5 different noise strength threshold values, and present the evaluation results in Table 4. As
shown in the table, DiffusionGuard (noted as "Ours" in the table, highlighted in grey color) results
in the best protection strength in every case across all noise perturbation threshold and across all
evaluation metrics, providing better stealthiness compared to the baseline methods. We also visualize
the qualitative results for each noise budget value in Fig. 12 and Fig. 13, in which DiffusionGuard
sustains its protective strength even when the noise budget gets tighter (i.e. lower), while other
methods quickly lose protection and results in successful edits as the noise budget value decreases.
This makes DiffusionGuard especially more useful in real-life applications, in which small noise


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Noise budget   Unprotected   AdvDM        Mist         SDS(-)      PhotoGuard   DiffusionGuard



      16/255


      12/255


      8/255


      6/255


      4/255


Figure 12: Image editing results of each protection method using varying noise budget (∥δ∥∞ )
values (Seen mask). Editing prompt is "A man in a hospital".

threshold is crucial for a less detectable image protection and for preserving the original image
quality.

E.2.2     L IMITED COMPUTE BUDGET SCENARIO
In this section, we evaluate DiffusionGuard and all baseline methods by applying projected gradient
descent (PGD) optimization with varying time constraints for each method. Specifically, we optimize
DiffusionGuard and all baseline methods with 5 different time durations, and present the evaluation
results in Table 5. As shown in the table, DiffusionGuard ("Ours" in the table, highlighted in grey
color) results in the best or the second best protection effectiveness in most cases across all most
PGD optimization durations and across all evaluation metrics, exhibiting better resource efficiency
compared to the baseline methods. This makes DiffusionGuard more useful in practical scenarios
where multiple images need to be protected using a limited amount of computational resources.
We also visualize both limited compute budget and limited noise budget scenario measured in CLIP
directional similarity in Fig. 14. In this figure, the CLIP directional similarity metric is shown against
both the wall time and the noise budget. Notably, the protective effectiveness of DiffusionGuard in
the Unseen set is similar to that of PhotoGuard in the Seen, which underlines the effectiveness of
mask augmentation in generalizing to unseen mask inputs, resulting in a more mask-robust protection.

E.3     A DDITIONAL ANALYSIS ON MASK REGION

In this section, we conduct additional analysis to further explore the behavior and the protective
effectiveness of the methods related to mask regions selected during generation of the adversarial
perturbation.

E.3.1     U SING D IFFUSION G UARD AND BASELINE METHODS WITH A FIXED MASK
We evaluate whether the loss function of DiffusionGuard provides better protective effectiveness
compared to the baseline methods when ruling out the influences of the mask, i.e. by using the same,
fixed mask during optimization. Specifically, we fix the mask used for optimization to Mtr for all


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Noise budget    Unprotected    AdvDM           Mist          SDS(-)      PhotoGuard      DiffusionGuard



    16/255


    12/255


    8/255


    6/255


    4/255


Figure 13: Image editing results of each protection method using varying noise budget (∥δ∥∞ )
values (Seen mask). Editing prompt is "A woman in a gaming convention".

                     Data Type     Method                                  Method         Data Type
                          Unseen     PhotoGuard                             PhotoGuard       Unseen
                          Seen       Ours                                   Ours             Seen
                                                            24
        23                                                  23
        22                                                  22
    CDS


                                                          CDS


        21                                                  21

        20                                                  20

        19                                                  19
                    20       40      60       80                 16          12          8 6            4
                   Wall Time (seconds optimized)                          Noise budget (1/255)
             (a) Compute budget comparison                        (b) Noise budget comparison

Figure 14: (a) Comparison under limited compute budget, measured in CLIP directional
similarity (CDS). CDS values are presented per running time. (b) Comparison under limited noise
budget, measured in CLIP directional similarity (CDS). With varying noise threshold values, we
measure CDS values of each method. The protection is stronger if the CDS value is lower.


methods including DiffusionGuard and all baseline methods, and assess the performance on the
Seen mask set (which only consists of Mtr ).
Baseline methods like AdvDM (Liang et al., 2023), and methods that build on top of AdvDM such
as Mist (Liang & Wu, 2023) or SDS(-) (Xue et al., 2024) originally propose to add a perturbation
over the entire image, without considering specific mask regions, as discussed in Sec. 4. For this
analysis, however, we adapt these methods to apply perturbations only within the mask region Mtr .
Similarly, we modify DiffusionGuard by removing the mask augmentation component and fixing


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Results of each protection method under various compute budget values. The compute
budget is defined by the time limit of PGD optimization, given in seconds. Our method achieves
strong protection, exhibiting best or second-to-best protection strength in most evaluations even
under tighter compute budget, in both Seen and Unseen set. All methods were trained using
constraint of |δ|∞ = 16/255. Lower metric is better, indicating failed edits.

 Compute
             Method                    PSNR ↓                CDS ↓                 IR ↓     CS ↓         PSNR ↓            CDS ↓          IR ↓     CS ↓
  budget
                                                   Seen (1 Mask, Train set)                                    Unseen (4 Masks, Test set)
             PhotoGuard                    12.87              21.17            -1.537       27.89            14.53         23.30          -1.357   30.30
             AdvDM                         13.62              23.77            -1.438       30.04            13.37         24.27          -1.361   30.97
    90
             Mist                          14.22              24.25            -1.368       30.27            14.51         23.93          -1.307   30.79
 seconds
             SDS(-)                        14.44              23.42            -1.337       29.89            14.32         23.85          -1.237   30.78
             Ours                          12.60              18.95            -1.807       26.55            13.19         21.84          -1.557   29.05
             PhotoGuard                    13.15              21.78            -1.487       28.50            14.86         23.62          -1.325   30.43
             AdvDM                         13.59              23.63            -1.483       30.09            13.47         24.29          -1.357   30.90
    45
             Mist                          14.36              23.94            -1.417       30.09            14.46         23.93          -1.291   30.71
 seconds
             SDS(-)                        14.46              23.80            -1.336       30.04            14.31         24.02          -1.240   30.83
             Ours                          12.81              19.75            -1.763       27.06            13.43         21.74          -1.532   29.05
             PhotoGuard                    13.51              22.65            -1.448       29.02            15.35         23.57          -1.324   30.39
             AdvDM                         13.84              23.56            -1.455       29.91            13.70         24.00          -1.369   30.69
    23
             Mist                          14.18              23.82            -1.462       30.04            14.33         24.09          -1.306   30.70
 seconds
             SDS(-)                        14.44              23.37            -1.403       29.90            14.26         24.02          -1.267   30.79
             Ours                          13.28              20.98            -1.654       27.73            13.76         22.14          -1.496   29.24
             PhotoGuard                    14.06              23.05            -1.446       29.07            16.19         23.49          -1.331   30.23
             AdvDM                         14.24              23.90            -1.398       30.20            14.25         24.04          -1.319   30.68
    11
             Mist                          14.23              23.58            -1.395       29.79            14.32         23.97          -1.300   30.60
 seconds
             SDS(-)                        14.43              23.53            -1.373       29.97            14.24         23.93          -1.288   30.73
             Ours                          14.06              21.69            -1.564       28.28            14.44         22.55          -1.451   29.49
             PhotoGuard                    15.06              23.49            -1.391       29.36            17.61         23.74          -1.339   30.33
             AdvDM                         15.57              24.22            -1.373       30.04            15.59         23.99          -1.329   30.60
    6
             Mist                          14.19              23.73            -1.407       29.83            14.37         23.95          -1.303   30.54
 seconds
             SDS(-)                        14.37              23.54            -1.393       29.92            14.18         24.08          -1.306   30.72
             Ours                          15.22              22.99            -1.509       29.04            15.56         23.15          -1.392   29.95


the mask to Mtr , as done for the baseline methods. This ensures a fair comparison by isolating the
impact of the loss function after eliminating the mask factor. Note that no modifications were made to
PhotoGuard (Salman et al., 2024), as it already applies perturbations exclusively to the mask region
Mtr .


                                   Comparison of each method with mask fixed to Mtr
                                                                   23.90
                                   13.12


                                                                                                                          29.88
                                                                                           -1.512
                                  13.08


                                                                                          -1.526


                                                                                                                         29.66
                                                                                         -1.537
                                                               23.13


                                                                                        -1.554


                                                                                                                       29.31
                  12.87


                                                            22.56
                                           12.57


                                                                                                               27.89
                                                    21.17
                          12.37


                                                                                                                                  26.81
                                                                                                    -1.786
                                                                           19.48


                             PSNR                              CDS                          IR                           CS
                                    PhotoGuard               AdvDM                 Mist   SDS(-)      DiffusionGuard
Figure 15: Evaluation results on the Seen mask set after generating adversarial perturbation
using each method with Mtr mask. Note that Seen mask set consists only of Mtr mask. We
report PSNR, CLIP directional similarity (CDS), ImageReward (IR), and CLIP similarity (CS). Lower
metrics indicate failed edits, representing better protection effectiveness of the defense method.

                                                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The evaluation results are visualized in Fig. 15. As shown in the figure, DiffusionGuard achieves
significantly better protective effectiveness compared to the baseline methods across most metrics,
verifying that even when the mask factor is isolated, DiffusionGuard exhibits the most effective
protection strength.

E.3.2   U SING BASELINE METHODS IN COMBINATION WITH MASK AUGMENTATION
In this section, we evaluate the performance of each baseline method when combined with mask
augmentation, a component of DiffusionGuard introduced in Sec. 3. As discussed in Appendix
E.3.1, baseline methods can be adapted to use different masks. For AdvDM, Mist, and SDS(-), we
modified them to add adversarial perturbations only within the mask region given by Mtr . The
purpose of this experiment was to analyze the effects of the loss function exclusively, after ruling
out the mask-related factors. This section extends the previous analysis by applying the same mask
augmentation algorithm from DiffusionGuard during the optimization process of all methods, while
preserving their original loss functions.
As illustrated in Fig. 16, DiffusionGuard demonstrates superior performance compared to the baseline
methods when the baselines are used in combination with mask augmentation. These experimental
results, combined with those presented in Appendix E.3.1 (where the mask is fixed to Mtr to
isolate the effects of the loss function), verify that (1) the early-stage perturbation loss proposed by
DiffusionGuard provides the strongest protection, and (2) both components of DiffusionGuard work
synergistically to provide effective protection against diffusion-based malicious image editing. We
note that no changes were made to DiffusionGuard in this experiment, as it already incorporates mask
augmentation.

             Comparison of each method used in combination with mask augmentation
                                                                                                   -1.385


                                                                                                                           30.77
                                                           24.17


                                                                                                 -1.404
                                  14.53


                                                                                                                         30.56
                                                                                                -1.412
                                                                                                -1.412
                  14.44


                                                                           23.70


                                                                                                                      30.15

                                                                                                                     30.06
                                                   23.14

                                                                   22.92
                                           13.30


                                                                                                                                   29.05
                                          13.19


                                                                                                            -1.557
                                                                                   21.84
                          13.00


                             PSNR                              CDS                                  IR                    CS
                                     PhotoGuard              AdvDM                         Mist   SDS(-)      DiffusionGuard
Figure 16: Evaluation results on the Unseen mask set after generating adversarial perturbation
using each method in combination with mask augmentation. We report PSNR, CLIP directional
similarity (CDS), ImageReward (IR), and CLIP similarity (CS). Lower metrics indicate failed edits,
representing better protection effectiveness of the defense method.

E.3.3   D IFFUSION G UARD WITH AND WITHOUT MASK AUGMENTATION
In this section, we report a detailed analysis of the effect of mask augmentation on the performance of
DiffusionGuard, specifically the performance of DiffusionGuard with and without mask augmentation
in both Seen and Unseen sets of InpaintGuardBench. The results are illustrated in Fig. 17. As
visualized, while mask augmentation does not have a notable impact or only marginally improves the
performance of the protection in the case of Seen masks, it significantly improves the protection in
the case of Unseen masks.


                                                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Comparison of DiffusionGuard with and without mask augmentation


                                                                                               -1.413
                                                                       14.09


                                                                                  23.02


                                                                                                         29.95
                                                                                                        29.05
                                                                                          -1.557
                                                                               21.84
                                                                    13.19
                  12.60
                  12.57


                                                           Unseen
                                               26.81
                                               26.55
           Seen


                           19.48
                          18.95

                                    -1.786
                                   -1.807
                  PSNR     CDS        IR         CS                 PSNR        CDS           IR           CS
                      DiffusionGuard without mask augmentation                 DiffusionGuard
Figure 17: Evaluation results of DiffusionGuard and DiffusionGuard after removing mask
augmentation. We evaluate using the Seen set (left) and the Unseen set (right) of InpaintGuard-
Bench. We report PSNR, CLIP directional similarity (CDS), ImageReward (IR), and CLIP similarity
(CS). Lower metric indicates failed edits, representing better protection effectiveness of the defense
method.

Table 6: Editing results of each protection method after applying adversarial noise purification
with various algorithms. Our method achieves strong protection, exhibiting best or second-to-best
protection strength in most evaluations even after applying noise purification, in both Seen and
Unseen set, across all metrics. All methods were optimized using the constraint of |δ|∞ = 16/255.
Lower metric is better, indicating failed edits.

  Puri.     Method          PSNR ↓         CDS ↓       IR ↓          CS ↓       PSNR ↓           CDS ↓           IR ↓    CS ↓
                                   Seen (1 Mask, Train set)                           Unseen (4 Masks, Test set)
            PhotoGuard        14.57          23.33     -1.417       29.98         15.73            23.79        -1.355   30.59
            AdvDM             14.37          23.74     -1.460       30.31         14.34            24.12        -1.354   31.04
  Adv-      Mist              15.23          24.10     -1.420       30.48         15.44            23.75        -1.332   30.79
  Clean     SDS(-)            14.34          23.57     -1.527       29.95         14.68            24.02        -1.353   30.73
            Ours              13.81          22.10     -1.622       28.99         14.55            22.84        -1.451   29.94
            PhotoGuard        14.36          23.44     -1.227       29.74         15.69            23.43        -1.177   30.47
            AdvDM             14.24          23.89     -1.236       30.04         14.18            23.89        -1.168   30.80
  JPEG      Mist              14.99          23.61     -1.182       30.26         15.29            23.64        -1.137   30.85
   (90)     SDS(-)            14.16          23.59     -1.280       29.77         14.67            23.77        -1.136   30.71
            Ours              13.72          21.61     -1.490       28.45         14.49            22.85        -1.279   29.84
            PhotoGuard        15.21          23.76     -1.152       30.18         16.28            23.64        -1.127   30.75
            AdvDM             14.64          23.90     -1.154       30.20         14.68            23.70        -1.143   30.77
  JPEG      Mist              15.46          23.81     -1.149       30.46         15.65            23.52        -1.109   30.86
   (80)     SDS(-)            14.75          23.69     -1.182       30.06         15.29            23.68        -1.109   30.74
            Ours              14.68          22.74     -1.292       29.28         15.25            23.18        -1.171   30.33
            PhotoGuard        15.54          23.86     -1.091       30.35         16.59            23.64        -1.098   30.83
            AdvDM             15.07          23.62     -1.157       30.12         15.07            23.70        -1.104   30.86
  JPEG      Mist              15.64          23.55     -1.085       30.39         15.89            23.44        -1.100   30.84
   (70)     SDS(-)            15.21          23.96     -1.125       30.36         15.62            23.67        -1.080   30.86
            Ours              15.27          23.45     -1.198       29.93         15.83            23.50        -1.133   30.66
            PhotoGuard        15.66          23.92     -1.057       30.30         16.56            23.64        -1.091   30.88
            AdvDM             15.33          23.57     -1.087       30.11         15.21            23.63        -1.094   30.81
  JPEG      Mist              15.75          23.79     -1.073       30.48         15.95            23.50        -1.089   30.83
   (65)     SDS(-)            15.23          23.69     -1.104       30.13         15.73            23.59        -1.079   30.82
            Ours              15.51          23.51     -1.169       29.91         16.01            23.53        -1.099   30.69
            PhotoGuard        15.29          22.39     -1.674       28.60         15.66            22.55        -1.629   29.63
            AdvDM             14.42          22.22     -1.778       28.62         14.07            22.68        -1.731   29.83
  Crop&     Mist              14.96          22.15     -1.719       28.52         15.00            22.12        -1.655   29.48
  Resize    SDS(-)            14.56          22.12     -1.761       28.55         14.64            22.41        -1.689   29.74
            Ours              14.80          21.24     -1.814       27.75         15.11            22.01        -1.707   29.19



                                                         28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Purification   Unprotected   AdvDM       Mist        SDS(-)     PhotoGuard   DiffusionGuard



 Unpurified


 AdvClean


 Crop&
 Resize


 JPEG 90


 JPEG 80


 JPEG 70


 JPEG 65


Figure 18: Image editing results after applying purification method to images protected using
each method (Unseen mask). Editing prompt is "A man dancing in a club".


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Purification   Unprotected   AdvDM       Mist        SDS(-)     PhotoGuard   DiffusionGuard



 Unpurified


 AdvClean


 Crop&
 Resize


 JPEG 90


 JPEG 80


 JPEG 70


 JPEG 65


Figure 19: Image editing results after applying purification method to images protected using
each method (Seen mask). Editing prompt is "A man dancing in a club".


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.4   E XPERIMENTS WITH INSTRUCTION - BASED EDITING MODEL

In this section, we compare the protective effectiveness of DiffusionGuard and the baseline methods
when applied to an instruction-based editing model. Specifically, we edit images protected with
DiffusionGuard and the baseline methods using InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023), without
providing a mask and only using the same editing prompts. For this experiment, we remove the mask
augmentation component of DiffusionGuard and only use early-stage loss to generate adversarial
perturbation against the model. Same applies for PhotoGuard, which adds the perturbation only in
the mask region. The other three baseline methods were uses without any modification. The results
are shown in Table 7.
Table 7: Editing results of each protection method applied to InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al.,
2023). Our method achieves strong protection, exhibiting best or second-to-best protection strength
in most evaluations even when used with InstructPix2Pix, across all metrics. All methods were
trained using constraint of |δ|∞ = 16/255. Lower metric is better, indicating failed edits.

                         Method           PSNR ↓         CDS ↓    IR ↓     CS ↓
                         PhotoGuard         17.19        15.02    -1.508   22.95
                         AdvDM              14.53        22.15    -1.234   27.18
                         Mist               14.35        22.82    -1.204   27.48
                         SDS(-)             11.50        25.21    -1.290   29.34
                         DiffusionGuard     17.42        14.07    -1.591   21.74



E.5   E XPERIMENTS WITH MASKS LARGER AT TEST- TIME

Our proposed algorithm of mask augmentation shrinks the contour of the masks inwards to generate
augmented masks. In this section, we verify whether such mask augmentation algorithm can be also
generalized to when a mask larger than what was used for the generation of the adversarial perturbation
is given at test-time, i.e. when a mask given at test time is larger than Mtr of DiffusionGuard. For
this experiment, we algorithmically dilate the seen mask and one of the unseen masks to obtain two
larger masks, until the masks became 26% larger on average compared to Mtr . Then, directly test
the images protected using each method from Section 4 with these new larger masks. Note that
both masks are novel for all protection methods. The evaluation results for this experiments are
presented in Table 8. As shown, even when a mask larger than what was used during the generation
of the perturbation is given at test time, DiffusionGuard continues to demonstrate strong protective
effectiveness, outperforming the baseline methods in most metrics. Even though mask augmentation
of DiffusionGuard only shrinks the given mask and results in smaller masks, it is able to generalize
to masks thar are larger as well.

Table 8: Evaluation of DiffusionGuard and baseline methods using masks larger than the masks
used during the generation of the perturbation (i.e. larger than Mtr of DiffusionGuard). Our
method still achieves strong protection, exhibiting best protection strength in most evaluations, across
all metrics. All methods were trained using constraint of |δ|∞ = 16/255. Lower metric is better,
indicating failed edits.

                         Method            PSNR ↓        CDS ↓    IR ↓     CS ↓
                         PhotoGuard         22.07        -1.588   28.55    15.45
                         AdvDM              21.76        -1.593   28.46    13.20
                         Mist               22.19        -1.562   28.64    13.99
                         SDS(-)             21.29        -1.587   28.20    13.96
                         DiffusionGuard     20.71        -1.709   27.86    14.72


E.6   E XPERIMENTS WITH DIFFERENT SAMPLING STEPS AND DIFFERENT SAMPLER

As explained in Appendix D, we use DDIM (Song et al., 2021) sampler with 50 denoising steps
for the generation of the edited images throughout this work. In this section, we verify whether
DiffusionGuard is also effective when using DDIM sampler with different number of timesteps, or


                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


even an entirely different sampler. This can be especially important as different timesteps or different
samplers may start the denoising process with a different initial timestep. Specifically, we use DDIM
sampler with 4 timesteps {25, 40, 50, 75}, and also experiment with DPM-Solver (Lu et al., 2022),
which uses 25 denoising steps by default.
We report the comprehensive evaluation results in Table 9. As shown, DiffusionGuard consistently
exhibits a strong protective effectiveness in all sampling setups.

Table 9: Experiments with DDIM (Song et al., 2021) sampler with 3 additional denoising steps
({25, 40, 75}) and DPMS (Lu et al., 2022) sampler with 25 denoising steps. Our method achieves
strongest protection, exhibiting best protection strength in all evaluations, in both Seen and Unseen
set, across all metrics. All methods were trained using constraint of |δ|∞ = 16/255. Lower metric is
better, indicating failed edits.

 Method                    PSNR ↓     CDS ↓      IR ↓       CS ↓    PSNR ↓   CDS ↓     IR ↓     CS ↓
                                 Seen (1 Mask, Train set)              Unseen (4 Masks, Test set)
 PhotoGuard DDIM (25)        13.79     20.24    -1.673      27.35   15.43     22.93    -1.421   30.04
 AdvDM DDIM (25)             14.43     23.50    -1.462      29.89   14.16     23.92    -1.382   30.73
 Mist DDIM (25)              15.18     23.72    -1.463      29.86   15.24     23.54    -1.356   30.49
 SDS(-) DDIM (25)            15.31     23.28    -1.399      29.70   15.07     23.52    -1.313   30.67
 Ours DDIM (25)              13.45     18.86    -1.852      26.25   14.04     21.29    -1.596   28.59
 PhotoGuard DDIM (40)        13.04     20.93    -1.555      27.71   14.69     23.21    -1.357   30.23
 AdvDM DDIM (40)             13.73     23.76    -1.449      30.07   13.52     24.27    -1.358   30.94
 Mist DDIM (40)              14.36     24.10    -1.403      30.21   14.59     23.75    -1.300   30.65
 SDS(-) DDIM (40)            14.55     23.39    -1.324      29.93   14.45     23.79    -1.251   30.82
 Ours DDIM (40)              12.72     19.02    -1.800      26.52   13.29     21.59    -1.562   28.90
 PhotoGuard DDIM (50)        12.87     21.17    -1.537      27.89   14.53     23.30    -1.357   30.30
 AdvDM DDIM (50)             13.62     23.77    -1.438      30.04   13.37     24.27    -1.361   30.97
 Mist DDIM (50)              14.22     24.25    -1.368      30.27   14.51     23.93    -1.307   30.79
 SDS(-) DDIM (50)            14.44     23.42    -1.337      29.89   14.32     23.85    -1.237   30.78
 Ours DDIM (50)              12.60     18.95    -1.807      26.55   13.19     21.84    -1.557   29.05
 PhotoGuard DDIM (75)        13.15     21.27    -1.564      28.06   14.59     23.53    -1.368   30.31
 AdvDM DDIM (75)             13.69     23.70    -1.434      30.04   13.36     24.20    -1.376   30.90
 Mist DDIM (75)              14.48     23.76    -1.399      30.00   14.56     23.84    -1.321   30.67
 SDS(-) DDIM (75)            14.70     23.51    -1.363      29.95   14.33     23.81    -1.237   30.71
 Ours DDIM (75)              12.87     19.07    -1.806      26.68   13.29     22.08    -1.572   29.12
 PhotoGuard DPMS (25)         9.49     17.37    -1.779      24.82   11.83     18.75    -1.682   26.73
 AdvDM DPMS (25)             10.70     18.29    -1.776      25.75   10.63     19.37    -1.744   27.27
 Mist DPMS (25)              11.28     18.51    -1.754      26.05   11.67     19.21    -1.690   27.15
 SDS(-) DPMS (25)            11.57     17.91    -1.796      25.69   11.74     18.77    -1.734   26.99
 Ours DPMS (25)               9.31     15.58    -1.931      23.61   10.20     17.48    -1.816   25.53


F    P ROTECTION RESILIENCE AGAINST NOISE PURIFICATION

In this section, we report the protection effectiveness of each method after applying purification
methods. It is known that adversarial perturbations can be "purified" by applying modification (e.g.
JPEG compression, crop-and-resize) to the image which contains an adversarial perturbation. Because
adversarial perturbations added by image protection methods are optimized in pixel-space using the
PGD algorithm, any operation that modifies the image may impair the adversarial perturbation and
decrease the protection effectiveness. Commonly used methods include the following methods.
• Crop-and-resize: The image is cropped at the center and is resized up to match the original
  resolution.
• JPEG compression: A universally adopted algorithmic image compression method. It accepts a
  quality parameter ranging from 0 to 100, where lower values result in worse image quality (hence
  greater noise removal and stronger purification).


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• AdverseCleaner (Zhang, 2023): An algorithmic filter which removes adversarial perturbation
  targeted at diffusion models.

In this section, we conduct additional experiments extending from Sec. 4 to evaluate DiffusionGuard
and the baseline methods after processing the protected images using each of the purification methods
and present the full results in Table 6. As presented, As shown in the table, DiffusionGuard (noted as
"Ours" in the table, highlighted in grey color) results in the best or the second best protection strength
in most cases across all most PGD optimization durations and across all evaluation metrics, exhibiting
better resource efficiency compared to the baseline methods. Additionally, we include the qualitative
results for each protection method and each purification method in Fig. 18 and Fig. 19 (edited using
Unseen and Seen in order). As shown in the figures, DiffusionGuard is resilient against various
noise purification methods compared to the baselines, maintaining its protective strength even after a
malicious user attempts to remove the adversarial perturbation.

Table 10: Editing results of each protection method when black-box transferred to Stable
Diffusion 2.0 Inpainting. Our method achieves strong protection, exhibiting best or second-to-best
protection strength in most evaluations even when transferred to a different model, in both Seen and
Unseen set, across all metrics. All methods were trained using constraint of |δ|∞ = 16/255. Lower
metric is better, indicating failed edits.

     Method             PSNR ↓     CDS ↓       IR ↓        CS ↓    PSNR ↓       CDS ↓      IR ↓     CS ↓
                              Seen (1 Mask, Train set)                  Unseen (4 Masks, Test set)
     PhotoGuard          14.85      22.17      -1.468      28.34      16.16      23.66     -1.234   30.32
     AdvDM               14.95      22.88      -1.402      28.98      14.67      23.29     -1.255   30.21
     Mist                15.82      22.73      -1.341      29.02      16.15      23.71     -1.180   30.39
     SDS(-)              15.82      22.33      -1.325      28.70      15.65      22.88     -1.191   29.99
     DiffusionGuard      14.97      21.64      -1.616      28.03      15.12      23.21     -1.395   29.96


      Unprotected       AdvDM               Mist             SDS(-)           PhotoGuard    DiffusionGuard


Figure 20: Black-box transfer to Stable Diffusion 2.0 Inpainting from Stable Diffusion In-
painting, comparison between DiffusionGuard and baselines (Unseen mask). Editing prompts
for each row are "A man in a hospital", "A man in the gym", "A photo of a
construction worker", and "A man getting on a bus" in order.


                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



      Unprotected      AdvDM             Mist           SDS(-)        PhotoGuard    DiffusionGuard


Figure 21: Black-box transfer to Stable Diffusion 2.0 Inpainting from Stable Diffusion Inpaint-
ing, comparison between DiffusionGuard and the baseline methods (Seen mask). Editing
prompts for each row are "A man in a hospital", "A man in the gym", "A photo
of a construction worker", and "A man getting on a bus" in order.

G    T RANSFERABILITY TO BLACK - BOX MODELS
In this section, we conduct additional experiments to assess the black-box transfer effectiveness
of DiffusionGuard and the baseline methods. Specifically, we use Stable Diffusion Inpainting
1.0 (Rombach et al., 2023) for generating adversarial examples, and test them on Stable Diffusion
2.0 Inpainting. We note that Stable Diffusion Inpainting 1.0 is a fine-tuned checkpoint of Stable
Diffusion 1.2, and Stable Diffusion 2.0 Inpainting is a fine-tuned checkpoint of Stable Diffusion
2.0. Because Stable Diffusion 2.0 was pre-trained from scratch independently from the weights of
Stable Diffusion 1.2, the weights of the two inpainting models are significantly different, making this
evaluation setup a black-box transfer setting. The full evaluation results are presented in Table 10. As
shown in the table, DiffusionGuard exhibits strong protection when transferred to a different model
(i.e. used against a different editing model), achieving either best or second-to-best value in most
cases across both Seen and Unseen of InpaintGuardBench. We also present the qualitative results
in Fig. 20 and Fig. 21, respectively for Unseen and Seen masks. As visualized, DiffusionGuard
maintains its protective effectiveness when transferred to a different model, while baseline methods
fail to protect the image and results in successful edits.


                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    C OMPARISON OF NOISE VISIBILITY
In this section, we both quantitatively and qualitatively compare the visibility, hence the stealthiness
of each protection method. For the quantitative comparison, we compute distance metrics between
the clean (unprotected) image and the protected image in order to verify how similar the protected
image is to the clean image. We outline the qualitative comparison of the visibility of the adversarial
perturbation generated by each noise in Fig. 22. As illustrated, the noise itself do not vary significantly
in it visibility, as all methods including DiffusionGuard and the baselines were optimized using
PGD with the same perturbation strength threshold (|δ|∞ = 16/255). In fact, DiffusionGuard and
PhotoGuard are significantly more stealthy compared to the other three baselines as they add noise
only within the small mask region, whereas the noise occupies the entire image in the case of Mist,
AdvDM, and SDS(-).
The quantitative results presented in Table 11 are also aligned with these findings. DiffusionGuard
achieves significantly higher SSIM and PSNR compared to the baseline methods, meaning it is closer
to the clean image and thus has less visible noise. Additionally, we measure the L2 distance, which
DiffusionGuard achieves the lowest value, representing similarity to the clean image. Finally, we
report DreamSim (Fu et al., 2023), a perceptual distance metric based on an ensemble of foundational
vision encoders such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). DiffusionGuard also achieves the lowest value
in this metric as well.
              Unprotected (Clean)   AdvDM            Mist           SDS (-)      PhotoGuard   DiffusionGuard


Figure 22: Qualitative comparison of noise visibility of DiffusionGuard and the baseline methods.
First column represents the zoom-in location, and the other rows represent protection methods. As
visible in the second row (red outlines), PhotoGuard and DiffusionGuard only add noise inside the
mask, resulting in a less visible noise overall, whereas other three methods add noise to the entire
image.

Table 11: Quantitative comparison of the visibility of the adversarial perturbation generated
using DiffusionGuard and baselines. Each metric measures the similarity (PSNR, SSIM) or the
distance (L2, DreamSim) of the protected image from the clean image.

                        Method              PSNR ↑     SSIM ↑       L2 ↓      DreamSim ↓
                        AdvDM                32.19          0.873   21.81       0.0419
                        Mist                 32.61          0.883   20.80       0.0408
                        SDS(-)               31.61          0.851   23.33       0.0467
                        PhotoGuard           41.39          0.989   7.875      0.00693
                        DiffusionGuard       41.58          0.990   7.639      0.00689



                                                        35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I   C OMPARISON OF INSTRUCTION - BASED EDITING AND INPAINTING
In our work, we propose DiffusionGuard, a protection method specialized against inpainting meth-
ods and inpainting models. While we perform additional study in Appendix E.4 to verify that
DiffusionGuard can also be used with non-inpainting editing methods such as instruction-based,
our focus on inpainting models is based on the practical usefulness of these models compared to
instruction-based models.
Instruction-based models are easier to use because they do not require binary masks, but they tend
to preserve high-level structures such as body postures, large objects, backgrounds, and text. This
limits their ability to make drastic edits, as illustrated in Fig. 23. For example, InstructPix2Pix often
over-conditions on the original image structure, failing to follow instructions precisely. In the first row
of Fig. 23, instead of showing a man being arrested, it generates a police officer due to the original
posture conditioning. Additionally, it changes the face, limiting its potential as an identity-stealing
privacy threat. In the third row, the inpainting result in the third row shows a woman dancing, while
InstructPix2Pix retains her posture same as the source image.
Note that we modified the text prompt into an appropriate instruction-like form for InstructPix2Pix
models (e.g. "A man dressed up in halloween costume" → "Make the man be dressed in halloween
costume").
                                             InstructPix2Pix result    Inpainting result
                          Source image       (edited without mask)    (edited with mask)


                                 Edit prompt: "A man arrested by the police"


                            Edit prompt: "A man dressed up in halloween costume"


                                  Edit prompt: "A woman dancing in a club"


                                Edit prompt: "A woman arrested by the police"

Figure 23: Qualitative comparison instruction-based editing (InstructPix2Pix) and masked
inpainting (Stable Diffusion Inpainting). Inpainting allows a complete regeneration of the area
designated by the mask, enabling a more flexible change of the overall structure of the image. In
contrast, instruction-based editing preserves the overall structure of the image, resulting in images
less aligned with the instruction especially if it requires a more drastic change.


                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I.1     E DITING A MALICIOUS IMAGE TO CHANGE THE FACE

It is also possible to start an image that already contains a malicious context, such as an image of
a person being arrested, and instruct an instruction-based editing model to change the face of the
image to that of a desired person (e.g., a celebrity). In this section, we edit an image of a person being
arrested and use InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) and Stable Diffusion Inpainting (Rombach
et al., 2023) to edit it into a celebrity being arrested. Specifically, we use the instruction "Turn the
man into celebrity name" with 10 different well-known celebrities that the editing model is aware
of. We visualize the editing results in Fig. 24. As visualized in the figure, InstructPix2Pix results in
less desirable results compared to Stable Diffusion Inpainting, modifying the unrelated area such as
the face of the police officer (all images), or the background (Lionel Messi and Christiano Ronaldo).
The generated face quality is also lower for InstructPix2Pix. In contrast, Stable Diffusion Inpainting
results in more successful editing results as it receives a mask to designate which part of the image
should be modified.
                                                                Mask (Stable Diffusion
                                         Source image             Inpainting only)


                                                                                                   Dwayne Johnson
                        Lionel Messi   Cristiano Ronaldo        Will Smith         Barack Obama     "The Rock"



      InstructPix2Pix


          Stable
        Diffusion
        Inpainting



                        Keanu Reeves   Robert Downey Jr.        Elon Musk            Tom Cruise   Leonardo DiCaprio



      InstructPix2Pix


          Stable
        Diffusion
        Inpainting



Figure 24: Edited results starting from a person being arrested and changing the face using
InstructPix2Pix and Stable Diffusion Inpainting using the prompt "Turn the man into {celebrity
name}". As shown, the images edited using InstructPix2Pix result in relatively more unrealistic
images, always changing the police officer to the celebrity together with the person being arrested,
and resulting in low-quality face images. Additionally, when the conditioning given by the celebrity
name is strong (e.g., football players), it even changes the background similarly to a football stadium.
In contrast, inpainting results in a consistent result as it uses masks to designate which area should
be modified. (Disclaimer: The results and examples presented in this paper are intended for
academic and research purposes only. The edited images are not meant to misrepresent or defame
any individuals, organizations, or professions depicted. The use of names and identities is strictly for
illustrative purposes and does not imply endorsement, association, or real-life events.)


                                                           37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I.2   E DITING A CELEBRITY IMAGE TO CHANGE THE BACKGROUND

Another way of generating an image with malicious intent would be to modify the background of
an image which depicts a specific identity. In this section, we use InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al.,
2023) and Stable Diffusion Inpainting (Rombach et al., 2023) to edit celebrity images by changing
their background. For InstructPix2Pix, we used instruction "Change the background to jail" and for
Stable Diffusion Inpainting, we used prompt "A photo of a person in jail", and a mask designating
the face for each image. The results are illustrated in Fig. 25. As shown in the figure, InstructPix2Pix
struggles with generating a successful edit, often changing the celebrity into a different person (Rows
1, 3, 4, 6). There area also cases where the model over-conditions on the source image such as the
postures or letters inside them (Rows 2, 5, 6). In contrast, the inpainting model successfully generates
accurate representations of celebrities in a jail setting in all cases.


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         Mask                                 Stable Diffusion
                   Source image    (inpainting only)        InstructPix2Pix      Inpainting


Figure 25: Edited results starting from celebrity images and changing the background using
InstructPix2Pix using the instruction "Change the background to jail", and Stable Diffusion
Inpainting using the prompt "A photo of a person in jail". InstructPix2Pix is less effective for
generating a successful edit, often altering the celebrity into a different person (Rows 1, 3, 4, 6)
or over-conditioning on the source image such as the postures or letters inside them (Rows 2, 5,
6), whereas Stable Diffusion Inpainting successfully generates accurate images of celebrities in a
jail in all images. (Disclaimer: The results and examples presented in this paper are intended for
academic and research purposes only. The edited images are not meant to misrepresent or defame
any individuals, organizations, or professions depicted. The use of names and identities is strictly for
illustrative purposes and does not imply endorsement, association, or real-life events.)


                                                       39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J     E DITING THE INSIDE OF THE MASK
In this section, we explore whether DiffusionGuard is also able to protect images when inpainting
the inside of the sensitive region, instead of inpainting the background behind the sensitive region
(e.g. face of a person), which is what we focus on in this work. For example, a malicious user could
aim to edit a specific sub-part inside the sensitive region, such as the eyes. To evaluate whether
DiffusionGuard is able to protect the images against these cases as well, we take the images protected
using DiffusionGuard using Mtr (Sec. 4) and edit them with a novel mask containing the eyes. We
outline the used source image, the mask, and the editing prompts in Fig. 26.
As shown in Fig. 26, DiffusionGuard is also able to protect the images from being edited inside the
sensitive region. While the unprotected images result in plausible images of a man, DiffusionGuard
protected images result in deformed and unrealistic eyes, making the image implausible. The reason
why DiffusionGuard is able to protect against these cases is likely due to the fact that most of the
noise added to the face still survives and is fed into the inpainting model, causing the edit to fail.

                                     Source image               Mask


        Edit prompt     A man with blue pupils   A man with blue eyes   A man with blue eyes   A man with green eyes


        Unprotected
          Edited


       DiffusionGuard
          Protected
           Edited



Figure 26: Editing the inside of the mask. We edit the source image using a mask containing only
the eyes. The protected images were protected using the face for the generation of the adversarial
perturbation. As shown in the third row, DiffusionGuard is also able to protect the images from being
edited inside the mask.

J.1   G ENERATING SUB - PERTURBATIONS

In this section, we explore the possibility of generating parts of the perturbation separately and then
unifying them to one to obtain a new perturbation. The motivation of this idea is the possibility of
a malicious user trying to edit the inside of the face, and the regions which they would try to edit
in this case would be based on human criteria (e.g., selecting facial features). For this section, we
consider a simple case of a single portrait image. The overall flow is illustrated in Fig. 27. Given a
sensitive region (e.g., face), we split the region into several parts (3 parts in the figure) based on an
arbitrary criteria. We will call refer this splitted part as "sub-mask". For this experiment, we splitted
the face into three sub-masks, as shown in the figure: 1) eyes and forehead, 2) rest of the face (cheeks,
nose, and mouth), and 3) neck. After splitting, we applied DiffusionGuard to obtain adversarial
perturbation for each sub-mask (obtaining sub-perturbation), and merged the perturbations into one
by taking the union of the three sub-perturbations.
Then, we evaluate this new merged perturbation compared to a normal perturbation obtained with
default DiffusionGuard. We evaluate under four scenarios: editing the eyes, editing the mouth, editing


                                                           40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Source image
                                         and mask


                         3 sub-masks


                     3 sub-perturbations


                                              Merged
                                            perturbation

Figure 27: Overview of obtaining sub-perturbations of a single perturbation and merging them
into one.


                 Masks


                                 A man with blue eyes         A man with a sad face   A man wearing pearl necklace
           Evaluation prompts    A man with green eyes           An angry man            A man wearing scarf


Figure 28: Test set masks and the evaluation prompts used for each mask for the sub-
perturbation experiments.

the neck, and editing the entire image. The masks used for the first three scenarios are visualized in
Fig. 28. For the entire image scenario, we use the same prompts as our main experiments (Sec. 4).
We sample 32 images for each prompt with different seeds and report the average values. For the
source image, we use only one image of Dwayne Johnson (same as Fig. 27). Same as our main
experiments, we measure PSNR, CLIP directional similarity, CLIP similarity, and ImageReward as
our quantitative metrics. The evaluation results are presented in Table 12. Interestingly, the merged
perturbation has similar protective effectiveness as the original DiffusionGuard for localized edits,
and is slightly better for full-image protection. Considering the inner workings of inpainting models,
this is likely due to the fact that protective noise over targeted areas is not inputted to the inpainting
model, the noise being omitted from the input.


                                                         41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 12: Evaluation result of DiffusionGuard with and without using sub-perturbation. CDS,
CS, IR represent CLIP directional similarity, CLIP similarity, and ImageReward respectively.

               Method                            PSNR ↓   CDS ↓   CS ↓    UR ↓
                                           Mask: Eyes
               Default DiffusionGuard             33.45   1.48    20.28   -1.503
               Sub-perturbation DiffusionGuard    34.45   0.67    20.31   -1.442
                                          Mask: Mouth
               Default DiffusionGuard             30.71   8.03    17.91   -1.363
               Sub-perturbation DiffusionGuard    31.73   7.95    17.82   -1.400
                                           Mask: Neck
               Default DiffusionGuard             30.63   14.12   20.01   -0.269
               Sub-perturbation DiffusionGuard    31.71   16.88   20.48   0.071
                                          Mask: Entire
               Default DiffusionGuard             37.47   2.34    19.51   -1.98
               Sub-perturbation DiffusionGuard    34.18   2.12    19.40   -1.99


                                                 42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K    C OMPARISON OF MASKS WITH DIFFERENT SIZES
In this section, we qualitatively compare editing results with varying sizes of masks and discuss
insights from the editing results. The results are visualized in Fig. 29. We use 7 masks, 4 smaller
than the head (Rows 2–5), 1 matching the head size (Row 1), and 2 larger than the head (Rows 6–7).
The editing prompt used is "A man in a hospital".
One insight shown in the result is that masks larger than the head, which include regions outside the
head (especially the background), restrict the editing flexibility. In the figure, for these larger masks,
the background remains fixed as an empty entrance to a dark hallway (Rows 6–7). This is likely to
align with the dark surroundings of the source image, forcing the model to generate a dark hallway
where the background remains in the mask region. Also, the shirt color is consistently dark blue due
to the original clothing. In contrast, the smaller masks (Rows 1–5) allow diverse backgrounds, such
as a wall, hallway, or hospital ward. This suggests that larger masks, as they include the background,
are less ideal for flexible editing and emphasize focusing on the head, especially the face.
Another observation is that for all 7 masks that are visualized, including the smoother backgrounds of
Rows 6–7, the boundary between the original face and the edited background is rather visibly distinct
in the protected images. This is likely due to the attack disrupting the inpainting model’s internal
processes, causing it to misinterpret colors and generate incorrect colors.


                                                   43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Mask             Source image              Edited            Edited
                                                           Protected        Unprotected
                                                       (DiffusionGuard)


Figure 29: Edited results using various shapes and sizes of masks, with prompt "A man in a
hospital". For rows 2, 3, 4, 5, the mask is smaller than the head, and for rows 6, 7, the mask is larger
than the head. For row 1, the mask matches the size of the head. As visualized, DiffusionGuard
successfully protects the image in all cases. Interestingly, larger mask causes the background around
the face to leak in, forcing the generated image to have certain colors (and objects) around the face.


                                                  44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L    L IMITATION
There are several limitations and interesting future directions in our work:

• Black-box setups: Although we demonstrate the effectiveness of DiffusionGuard in black-box
  settings in Sec. 4.6 and Appendix G, further investigations are required against more advanced
  closed models, such as DALL-E 3 (Betker et al., 2023).
• Extension to personalization: Text-to-image diffusion models have shown remarkable success in
  generating personalized subjects based on a few reference images (Ruiz et al., 2023). Because such
  personalized models can be misused to generate harmful content, developing defense methods
  against personalization methods would be an important direction for future research.


                                                 45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



       Mask      Unprotected   AdvDM       Mist      SDS(-)   PhotoGuard    DiffusionGuard


Figure 30: Edited results after using DiffusionGuard and the baseline protection methods (all
masks shown). Editing prompt is "A man walking in the street".

       Mask      Unprotected   AdvDM       Mist      SDS(-)    PhotoGuard   DiffusionGuard


Figure 31: Edited results after using DiffusionGuard and the baseline protection methods (all
masks shown). Editing prompt is "A woman in a hospital".


                                               46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Mask      Unprotected   AdvDM       Mist      SDS(-)   PhotoGuard   DiffusionGuard


Figure 32: Edited results after using DiffusionGuard and the baseline protection methods (all
masks shown). Editing prompt is "A man in a gym".



       Mask      Unprotected   AdvDM       Mist      SDS(-)   PhotoGuard   DiffusionGuard


Figure 33: Edited results after using DiffusionGuard and the baseline protection methods (all
masks shown). Editing prompt is "A man in a gaming convention".



                                               47
