Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONFORMAL L ANGUAGE M ODEL R EASONING
WITH C OHERENT FACTUALITY

        Maxon Rubin-Toles1∗ , Maya Gambhir1∗ , Keshav Ramji1,2 , Aaron Roth1 , Surbhi Goel1
                             1
                                 University of Pennsylvania, 2 IBM Research AI
                                         ∗
                                           Denotes equal contribution



                                                A BSTRACT

            Language models are increasingly being used in important decision pipelines, so
            ensuring the correctness of their outputs is crucial. Recent work has proposed
            evaluating the “factuality” of claims decomposed from a language model gener-
            ation and applying conformal prediction techniques to filter out those claims that
            are not factual. This can be effective for tasks such as information retrieval, where
            constituent claims may be evaluated in isolation for factuality, but is not appropri-
            ate for reasoning tasks, as steps of a logical argument can be evaluated for correct-
            ness only within the context of the claims that precede them. To capture this, we
            define “coherent factuality” and develop a conformal-prediction-based method to
            guarantee coherent factuality for language model outputs. Our approach applies
            split conformal prediction to subgraphs within a “deducibility” graph that repre-
            sents the steps of a reasoning problem. We evaluate our method on mathematical
            reasoning problems from the MATH and FELM datasets and find that our algo-
            rithm consistently produces correct and substantiated orderings of claims, achiev-
            ing coherent factuality across target coverage levels.1 Moreover, we achieve 90%
            factuality on our stricter definition while retaining 80% or more of the original
            claims, highlighting the utility of our deducibility-graph-guided approach.


1       I NTRODUCTION
As foundation models become ubiquitous, it is important to verify the correctness of their genera-
tions. Consequently, ensuring the factuality and reliability of the outputs of these models is an area
of active and growing research. One line of research (Guo et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2021; Lin et al.,
2022; Mielke et al., 2022; Detommaso et al., 2024; Ahdritz et al., 2024) attempts to catch errors
by quantifying model uncertainty; however, these methods are often difficult to apply in practical
settings where output spaces are intractably large and uncertainty signals, like logit weights, are not
accessible for many proprietary models.
Recently, conformal prediction has been explored as an uncertainty quantification technique to ad-
dress correctness in language model (LM) outputs. In particular, (Mohri & Hashimoto, 2024) apply
split conformal prediction to filter generations by removing weak claims according to some thresh-
old calibrated to a desired error rate α. Subsequent work (Cherian et al., 2024) issues weaker but
adaptive guarantees to ensure output completeness. However, both works implicitly assume the fac-
tuality of a claim can be independently evaluated, which limits their generalizability to reasoning
domains, where claims require substantiation. For example, in solving math problems, a given step
is often deduced as a result of preceding steps: generally, logical arguments require substantiation.
To tackle this challenge, we propose a new notion of factuality to account for the structure of rea-
soning problems, provide an algorithm which applies split conformal prediction to filter claims over
a graph representation, and give correctness guarantees over the filtered output:
A well-defined notion of coherent factuality. We present a notion of factuality which accounts for
inter-claim dependence to evaluate correctness in a more faithful manner. This definition requires
    1
        Code is available at https://github.com/maxrubintoles/Conformal_LM_Reasoning


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Here, the previous method (Output 1) removes the erroneous claims outlined in red, but
leaves the response incoherent by removing Step 2, which is referenced in Step 3. We (Output 2)
consider reasoning structure to filter out erroneous claims while maintaining coherence; even though
we remove a true claim, it is not essential for understanding the claims that remain (α = 0.1).

that language model generations are both factual and coherent by evaluating entire orderings of
claims as correct rather than evaluating individual claims.
An algorithm for coherent claim filtration. To apply this coherent definition of factuality, we
propose a graph representation for inter-claim dependence and an empirical method for obtaining
such a graph. Rather than filtering claims individually, we filter between “well-supported” subgraphs
via split conformal prediction to ensure coherence and factuality at any user-specified rate.
Empirical realization of conformal guarantees. We validate our algorithm on a variety of compe-
tition math problems from the MATH dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021) and from FELM (Chen et al.,
2023a), and experiment with different heuristic risk functions. We find that our graphical represen-
tation is often both sufficient (graph-based calibration satisfies conformal guarantees) and necessary
(calibration that ignores graph structure does not satisfy conformal guarantees) to ensure coherent
factuality. We achieve outputs as complete as the baseline with improved “legibility,” or third-party
verifiability, and we bootstrap filtered responses by reprompting to further improve factuality.

1.1   R ELATED W ORK

Conformal prediction is a statistical uncertainty quantification technique which yields marginal
coverage guarantees over a confidence set in a distribution-free manner, traditionally only assum-
ing exchangeability of the data (Gammerman et al., 1998; Shafer & Vovk, 2008; Angelopoulos &
Bates, 2022). Split conformal prediction (Papadopoulos et al., 2002; Lei et al., 2018; Romano et al.,
2019) is a batched algorithm which relies on a held out calibration set to yield tight guarantees in
expectation over the draw of the calibration set. While conformal prediction has been explored un-
der graph settings, this has largely been in the context of hierarchical labels (Tyagi & Guo, 2024;
Angelopoulos et al., 2023) or graph neural networks, rather than induced graphs for reasoning.
Recent work has sought to apply conformal prediction to language modeling, including multiple
choice question answering (Kumar et al., 2023), as well as open domain and domain-specific ques-
tion answering and long-form generations (Quach et al., 2024; Mohri & Hashimoto, 2024; Cherian
et al., 2024; Liu & Wu, 2024).
Mohri & Hashimoto 2024 applies nested conformal prediction (Gupta et al., 2022) with entailment
sets, splitting generations into disjoint claims, and obtaining confidence estimates for each such that
removing claims below a corresponding calibrated threshold score yields an α-conformal factual


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


response. Cherian et al. 2024 extends this framework by introducing level adaptivity by conditional
calibration (see also Detommaso et al. (2024) for a conditional calibration approach to scoring factu-
ality), lowering the correctness level while simultaneously ensuring completeness of the output. Liu
& Wu 2024 extend Mohri & Hashimoto 2024 to give context-conditional coverage guarantees using
the group conditional conformal prediction techniques developed by Jung et al. 2023. However,
while these works are effective in their application domains, where claims may be treated as inde-
pendent, they do not generalize to reasoning problems, where the correctness of each step cannot be
evaluated without the context of the steps that precede it.
LLM Reasoning. Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning induces LLMs to produce step-by-step ratio-
nales to support their generations, similar to the human System 2 reasoning process (Wei et al., 2024;
Nye et al., 2021; Kojima et al., 2022). Several approaches have been proposed to explore thought di-
versity to this effect by sampling more and marginalizing over reasoning chains (Wang et al., 2023b;
Chen et al., 2023b), incorporating different types of feedback (e.g. self-critique, external verifiers)
and revision (Yao et al., 2023; Besta et al., 2024).
(Radhakrishnan et al., 2023) introduced CoT decomposition and factored decomposition as proce-
dures that iteratively solve subquestions that make up the final generation, and showed that while
accuracy drops slightly, factored decomposition greatly improves faithfulness to the true reasoning
process of the model. Lastly, works on process supervision and intermediate verification (Lightman
et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023; Dhuliawala et al., 2023) help with mitigating hallucination, but are
costly at test-time and rely on the correctness of the feedback. We show how our filtered output can
be used as chain-of-thought to get more factual completions.

2    P RELIMINARIES
Setup and notation. As is standard in the language model (LM) generation setting, we assume that
the LM takes in input X ∈ X and generates an output Y ∈ Y. We further assume that an output Y
can be written as set of “claims,” and our goal is to filter the output to keep a set of “factual” and
“coherent” claims. Note that we do not attempt formal definitions for each of these difficult terms,
and we ultimately evaluate our method’s performance with human annotations.
Definition 1 (Claim). A claim is an atomic proposition. From this, we define C, the set of all claims.

For example, claims might assert things like “The sky is blue” or, more abstractly, provide the
definition of addition. The set of claims C can also contain assertions that are incorrect–for example
that “Barack Obama was president in 2020.” Note that we will not formalize where the boundaries
are for what makes a particular string an atomic “claim” or not; we assume access to a claim splitter
function, which takes LM outputs in Y and maps them to a set of discrete claims. We write this as
S : Y → 2C . In practice, we will use a language model to implement claim splitting (Figure 1).
Definition 2 (Ground truth). The ground truth Ctrue ⊆ C is the subset of all claims we assume to be
valid without any additional information or context. In particular, this set is some known body of
knowledge from which we base our evaluations of factuality.
Remark 1. In practice, we might choose some reference like Wikipedia or a math textbook as our
ground truth. It is important to note that the ground truth is not necessarily fixed over examples
                                                                                                 √
and can be context-sensitive–for instance, while it is generally reasonable to assume that 2 is
irrational, it is not reasonable to do so in a proof of that fact.

Background: Conformal prediction guarantees for LM generations. Mohri & Hashimoto
2024 improve the factuality of LM generations by splitting them into subclaims and filtering low-
confidence subclaims via conformal prediction. They obtain factuality calibrated to a user-specified
parameter α while maintaining a significant proportion of the original output. Each subclaim is
scored according to some heuristic confidence function2 σ : C → [0, 1] computed by comparing par-
ticular subclaims to alternate generations for the same prompt. For each output, the non-conformity
score r(X, Y, T ) is simply the minimum threshold in a set T such that all subclaims with confidence
scores above the threshold are “factual” (or entailed by the ground truth Ctrue , as verified by a human
annotator). Further mathematical details are in Appendix H.
    2
      To frame our filtering method as incurring risk by adding subclaims, we instead consider σ to be a heuristic
risk function–details follow.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then, for a calibration set of (X1 , Y1 ), ..., (Xn , Yn ), ordering r(X1 , Y1 , T ), ..., r(Xn , Yn , T ) and
taking q̂α as the ⌈(n+1)(1−α)⌉
                       n       quantile of the scores we obtain the split conformal guarantee:
                     1 − α ≤ P[r(Xn+1 , Yn+1 , T ) ≤ q̂α ] ≤ 1 − α + 1/(n + 1).

This result assumes data exchangeability and no ties in scores (which can be enforced by inserting
continuous noise). Mohri and Hashimoto further assume that (∀ y ∈ S(Y ), Ctrue =⇒ y) ⇐⇒
(Y is factual), i.e., the factuality of Y is simply the simultaneous factuality of each of its claims y.
Then, by omitting claims in S(Yn+1 ) with confidence scores below q̂α and recombining the remain-
                                                    q̂α
ing claims in a filtered Yn+1 which we denote Yn+1      , the above guarantee transfers to factuality.

3     A N EW N OTION OF FACTUALITY: C OHERENT FACTUALITY
While the approach of Mohri & Hashimoto 2024 calibrates to a useful notion of factuality, this notion
implicitly makes the strong assumption that subclaims are independent, so we call it independent
factuality. Specifically, the assertion that (∀ y ∈ S(Y ), Ctrue =⇒ y) ⇐⇒ (Y is factual) treats
each claim’s correctness independently of the other claims in the generation. While this may be
appropriate for pure recall tasks, like biography generation, we find that it is not sufficient to preserve
output quality for reasoning tasks. Our notion of coherent factuality further imposes coherence by
requiring both correctness and substantiation.
Definition 3 (Coherent factuality). Given an example X and ground truth Ctrue , an output
Yordered = (y1 , ..., yn ) ∈ C N of distinct claims is coherently factual if it satisfies
                            ∀ i ∈ [n], yi is deducible from (y1 , ..., yi−1 ), X, Ctrue .

We omit a formal definition for “deducible” because deducibility is both subjective and context-
sensitive (a claim may follow immediately for professional mathematicians but not for grade-
schoolers, unless they are very precocious). Note that we require a claim in the ordering to be
deducible from its prefix, the ground truth, and the example X, since information like variable def-
initions will be sensitive to the context. As noted before, the ground truth is determined in part by
the question (it is not appropriate to assume a fact in the proof of that fact).
Remark 2. According to this definition, coherence cannot come at the cost of factuality. Deducibil-
ity is only stricter than implication; in particular, any fact which is deducible from the ground truth
must be implied by the ground truth. At worst, we might expect that by calibrating for this more
stringent notion, we would simply output subsets of the claims output by the previous method. How-
ever, by making use of graphical structure in our scoring and filtering, our method produces outputs
of similar completeness to those of Mohri & Hashimoto (2024) and which, in some cases, contain
important reasoning steps the previous method had omitted (see Appendix L).
Like independent factuality, coherent factuality does not stipulate that the response is relevant or
responsive to query X (although it cannot contradict X), and would therefore consider logically
consistent non-sequiturs to be correct. In the setting we consider, we find that requiring relevance is
not necessary, since the LMs we study consistently attempt a relevant response.
Intuitively, coherent factuality ensures outputs contain sufficient reasoning between previous claims
and subsequent ones and considers orderings of claims rather simply sets. Steps must appear in
logical sequence. For instance, a variable must be defined before it is used. Given a set of claims
S(Y ), we write π(S(Y )) ∈ C N to denote a particular ordering of those claims.
Observation 1. If an ordering (y1 , ..., yn ) is coherently factual, any prefix (y1 , ..., yi ) for i < n is
also coherently factual.

3.1   G RAPHICAL R EPRESENTATIONS OF C OHERENT FACTUALITY

It will be helpful for us to capture coherence graphically. To do so, we will make the following
benign assumption: if a claim is deducible from some information, the claim remains deducible
after adding more “good” information.
Assumption 1 (Superstring deducibility). Fix some input X, ground truth Ctrue and claim yn . Say
that yn is deducible from some ordering of {y1 , ..., yn−1 }, and call the ordering Ysub . Then, if Ysuper
is a coherently factual ordering on a superset of {y1 , ..., yn−1 }, yn is also deducible from Ysuper .


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: The nodes above correspond to the subclaims enumerated in Figure 1. In blue is the
ideal deducibility graph for this output which gives perfect information and allows us to keep all
true claims. Even though our approximate deducibility graph lacks a ground truth node and has
additional edges (e.g., (6, 7)), it helps us preserve the integrity of an output while filtering. In
contrast, the baseline method leaves Claim 3 unsubstantiated by omitting Claim 2.

Ideal deducibility graphs. For a particular (X, Y ), Ctrue , an oracle with perfect understanding of
the ground truth could construct an ideal deducibility graph G = (V, E). Define vertex set V :=
{S(Y ), vtrue }, with vtrue to stand in for all claims in Ctrue and question X (as claims may be deducible
from either/both of these). Then, edges indicate that a claim is deducible from its ancestors. In
particular, the oracle could construct the edge set E by iteratively considering topological layers
beginning at the ground truth, asking, “Which claims are deducible from previous layers?” and
drawing corresponding edges (a more detailed algorithm for construction is in Appendix A).
Remark 3. There may be multiple ideal deducibility graphs. For example, if a claim c is deducible
from a or b, both deducible from vtrue , there is no way to represent this relationship uniquely without
a hypergraph; a graph with edge (a, c) or (b, c) could be obtained by the algorithm in Appendix A).

This idealized construction yields a directed acyclic graph (DAG) where substantiated claims de-
scend from vtrue , and erroneous or unsubstantiated claims do not. If we had such a graph, conformal
filtering would be unnecessary; we would simply output the descendants of vtrue in topological order.
However, this ideal is unattainable, as ground truth and deducibility are not easily defined. Instead,
we develop approximations of these graphs that suffice to achieve coherent factuality.
Approximate deducibility graphs. We define a weaker notion of an approximate deducibility
graph and find this notion is satisfied by GPT-generated proxies. This weaker notion is sufficient to
maintain coherence during filtering while ensuring calibrated guarantees on factuality. Unlike ideal
graphs, these proxies do not trace claims to a ground truth or represent the minimal set needed to
substantiate a claim; instead, they capture sufficient sets for substantiation (see Observation 2 for a
formal definition of minimality). While they don’t tell us which nodes are erroneous, they indicate
which claims are “required” for another and give a natural (topological) ordering on the claims.3
Definition 4 (Approximate deducibility graph). Let G = (V, E) be a DAG for (X, Y ), Ctrue . Each
node v ∈ V represents a claim y ∈ Y . The edge set E must satisfy the following: (1) Ancestor-
connected subgraphs: for any subgraph Gsub = (Vsub , Esub ) that includes all ancestors of its nodes,
if a coherently factual ordering exists for Vsub , then every topological ordering of Gsub must also be
coherent, and (2) Consistency: if an ancestor-connected subgraph Gsub does not allow a coherently
factual ordering, then any larger subgraph Gsuper ⊇ Gsub must not admit a coherent ordering.

In other words, we require that a particular claim is sufficiently substantiated by its ancestors (so
a topological sort on those nodes will be coherently factual if and only if the set does not contain
erroneous claims). Since we assume we can access one such graph for each example, we would like
to be assured that a graph satisfying this definition can always be constructed.
   3
     In practice, these will almost always correspond to the original numeric orderings of the claims as originally
generated.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Even though Claim 6 is technically true, it detracts from the coherent solution as it is de-
rived from a false claim (which suggests the solution is 0). Although we do not require dependency,
the edge (5, 6) prevents consideration of Claim 6 in the absence of Claim 5. This property improves
the quality of the subgraphs we consider.

Observation 2 (Approximate deducibility graph realizability). For any (X, Y ), Ctrue , there exists a
graph with vertex set S(Y ) satisfying Definition 4.

The subgraph of the ideal deducibility graph G = (V, E) induced on V \ vtrue (omitting the ground
truth node) is an approximate deducibility graph (proof deferred to Appendix A).
Remark 4. An ideal deducibility graph is minimal. Among all approximate graphs for a particular
(X, Y, Ctrue ), there exists an ideal graph (minus vtrue ) with the minimum number of edges.4 Ap-
proximate graphs result from removing the ground truth node of an ideal graph and adding edges
without introducing cycles (following Assumption 1). Approximate graphs enforce sufficient but not
necessary substantiation; even so, they show great empirical utility in Section 5, with quantitative
results in Appendix F and a qualitative example in Appendix L.

While an approximate deducibility graph must exist, we further assume that we can construct one
for each (X, Y ). In practice, we use GPT-4o to generate these graphs after splitting an output into
claims, so we cannot enforce graph validity rigorously. However, our GPT-proxies satisfy Definition
4 in practice, which is sufficient for both calibration bounds to hold. We introduce another property
of GPT-generated graphs which we call “dependency.” Dependency helps us discard “unreasonable”
subgraphs early in our filtering procedure. See Section 5 (end of paragraph “Approximate deducibil-
ity graph generation”) for more details and Figure 3 (Appendix L) for an example.

4    A P ROTOCOL FOR C OHERENT FACTUALITY
If we had ideal deducibility graphs for each (X, Y ), optimal filtering would be easy. Then, we could
simply output a topological sort of descendants from the ground truth node and omit the rest. Of
course, approximate deducibility graphs don’t allow this. They have two essential shortcomings: (1)
they may contain extraneous edges (which is preferred over failing to capture dependencies), and
(2) they do not identify which claims follow from the ground truth.
First approach: post-hoc filtering. We would like to apply conformal prediction to filter the
original output while maintaining calibration guarantees. As a first approach, which we call “post-
hoc filtering,” we take outputs filtered by the independent conformal baseline and apply our graphs
to further filter claims lacking their ancestors. This alternate method will achieve coherent factuality
by design if our graph proxies are good but may exceed the conformal upper bound as we remove
additional erroneous claims.
Second approach: subgraph filtering. To achieve calibrated coherent factuality, we compute risk
thresholds over a set of subgraphs of the approximate deducibility graph G to consider which sub-
graph (and corresponding topological ordering of claims) to output. We subsequently show that
thresholding based on this set suffices to obtain conformal coherent factuality.
To select subgraphs, we use a heuristic risk-scoring function σ : C → [0, 1], which differs from
Mohri & Hashimoto (2024) by measuring risk rather than confidence and using the graph G as input
(elided for simplicity) rather than a singular subclaim. Subgraphs are generated by thresholding
   4
     Since ideal graphs for the same (X, Y ), Ctrue may have different numbers of edges, it is not the case that
every ideal graph is minimal in this way.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: Subgraph Generator
Input: Graph G = (V, E), claim-wise risk function σ : V → R
Output: UT := set of subgraph, threshold pairs (Ui , τi )
UT ← ∅ , T ← sorted({−∞} ∪ {σ(v) | v ∈ V }) // Sort risk scores
foreach τi ∈ T do
    Vi ← {v ∈ V | σ(v) ≤ τi } // Select nodes below threshold
    foreach v ∈ Vi in topological order do
        if ∃ ancestor of v not in Vi then
            Vi ← Vi \ {v} // Remove claim with missing ancestors
    Ui ← G[Vi ] // Induced subgraph
    UT ← UT ∪ {(Ui , τi )}
return UT


nodes independently and filtering out vertices lacking ancestors, producing at most |S(Y )| + 1
induced subgraphs. The heuristic risk of each subgraph corresponds to its threshold, with at most
n + 1 relevant thresholds, one for each each node and one for the empty set (Algorithm 1).
Scoring functions. Claim retention depends on our choice of claim-scoring function σ. We apply
a context-independent claim-scoring function σind to score nodes individually. We refer to σind as
self-consistency scoring. In practice, we compute σind as in Mohri & Hashimoto (2024) by querying
GPT-4 to generate 5 alternate responses and counting the frequency with which each subclaim ap-
pears (prompt in K.1). We flip these confidence scores to obtain risk scores and use node risk scores
to compute σ in the following two5 ways (with the use of the graph G):
(1) Graph independent: σ(v) = σind (v), which does not consider the graph to score each node.
(2) Descendant weighting: For each v ∈ V , define σ(v) = (1 − β)σind (v) + βmedian{σind (v ′ ) :
v ′ is a descendant of v}, where β is a hyperparameter6 . The motivation for the descendant weight-
ing function is to boost (reduce) confidence if the claims derived from a particular claim are very
confident (uncertain).
Once we have a set of subgraphs U corresponding to an output Y , the non-conformity score of Y is
simply the risk threshold below which all subgraphs make “good” filtered outputs.
Definition 5 (Non-conformity scoring function). Given some (X, Y ) pair, deducibility graph G =
(V, E), candidate subgraphs and thresholds UT ⊆ U × T , we compute non-conformity score as
follows:
         r(X, Y, UT ) = sup{τr ∈ R | ∀ (U, τ ) ∈ UT with τ ≤ τr , U is coherently factual}

In other words, r(·) is the maximum tolerable risk: the risk of the first subgraph violating coher-
ent factuality if one exists, otherwise ∞. Also, “U is coherently factual” is shorthand for “each
topological sort of U is coherently factual according to X, Ctrue .”
Conformal correctness guarantees. Now, to apply split conformal prediction to control this risk,
                                  th
we take q̂α := ⌈(1−α)(n+1)⌉
                      n       quantile of {1 − r(Xi , Yi , UTi )}ni=1 . We then filter new outputs
(Xn+1 , Yn+1 ) with Gn+1 by generating UTn+1 , computing
                                 Ufiltered , τfiltered =          arg max             τ,
                                                           (U,τ )∈ UTn+1 | τ <1−q̂α

                                        q̂α        ′
and defining our final filtered output Yn+1 := Vfiltered , a topological sort on Vfiltered .7 With the
minimal assumption of exchangeability of the underlying distribution D = X × Y, we have the
following theorem (see Appendix C for full proof).
   5
      Note that there are several other ways to use graph structure for scoring (including modifications of the
ones below). We leave further exploration to future work.
    6
      We explored several similar graph-sensitive scoring mechanisms, each motivated by weighting the risk
score of a node according to the risk scores of its ancestors and/or descendants. The median version was most
robust in performance to small changes in beta (we speculate this is because the median is not sensitive to
outlier scores). We swept beta values in [0, 1] and chose 0.5 for its good performance.
    7
      If there are no back edges (yj ⇝ yi when j > i) in the “original” ordering of claims, removing the filtered
                                                  ′
claims without altering ordering yields a valid Vfiltered .


                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 1 (Calibrated Factuality). Fix some calibration set {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1 , test point
(Xn+1 , Yn+1 ) ∼ D, ground truth Ctrue , and desired error rate α. Then the following holds:
                                            q̂α
                                 1 − α ≤ P[Yn+1 is coherently factual].
If, additionally, each Gi is an approximate deducibility graph (see Definition 4) and r(X, Y, ·) <
∞ ∀(X, Y )8 , we have:
                              q̂α                                        1
                           P[Yn+1 is coherently factual] ≤ 1 − α +          .
                                                                        n+1

5    E MPIRICAL F INDINGS
Datasets. Our experiments make use of the MATH dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021), which spans
various branches of mathematics. This dataset is among the standard benchmarks reported in recent
model releases, on which even frontier models hallucinate. We also use the FELM dataset Chen
et al., 2023a which consists of a variety of verbal reasoning problems with results in Appendix D.
We replicate our main experiments with an open-source model (Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct for output
and graph generation) and discuss the costs associated with GPT prompts in J.
Approximate deducibility graph generation. For proprietary models, we used examples and out-
puts from Mohri & Hashimoto (2024), where subclaims were generated by GPT-4. We then queried
GPT-4o via few-shot prompting (Appendix K) to produce adjacency lists, as graph generation proved
more challenging than claim-splitting. Open-source experiments followed a similar setup (Appendix
K.1). Dependency is an empirically useful heuristic suggesting the consideration or use of one claim
in producing the other, whether or not the use was correct. In this way, a claim might depend on
another even if it results from a logical misstep. Dependency structure is quite common among the
subgraphs we generate: in fact, 50% of graphs that contain any erroneous nodes have edges between
erroneous nodes. For evidence of dependency’s empirical utility, see Appendix F for quantitative
data and L for qualitative data.
Annotation. Individual claim (silver standard) and subset-level (gold standard) annotations were
used to evaluate output factuality. For individual claims, annotators assessed whether a claim c
would be true if all its graph ancestors were true, or, for a priori claims, whether it was supported
by the ground truth. Subset factuality was measured by checking (1) ancestor connectedness and (2)
whether any claim in the subset had an individual annotation of “No,” assuming the graph proxies
are reliable—an assumption that may falter with sparse representations. Gold standard annotations
directly assessed subsets for human notions of coherent factuality, independent of the graph. Silver
annotations demonstrate the utility and accuracy of deducibility graphs through relative calibration.
The MATH dataset includes both annotation types, while FELM includes only silver annotations.
Results. We directly compare the results of our coherent calibration algorithm with the conformal
factuality algorithm of (Mohri & Hashimoto, 2024), which we call the baseline, on both independent
and coherent definitions of factuality, considering the samples from the MATH dataset as well as the
FELM dataset. We validate all of our methods on manual (gold standard) annotations on each output.
We also test our methods on the FELM Dataset 9 with results in D and demonstrate utility for vary-
ing types of reasoning problems. We attempted to generate deducibility graphs for the FActScore
biography-generation dataset; however, we found these graphs to be nonsensical and to contain cy-
cles as responses to such prompts do not carry any inherent, directed structure. Our prompts can be
found in Appendix K.1, and results of these experiments with Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct can be found
in Appendix J.
[R1] Graph proxies are sufficient to obtain coherent factuality. The quality of the graph proxies is
affirmed by the empirical satisfaction of theoretical guarantees in Figure 4a. Both bounds hold across
factuality levels when we calibrate on silver annotations that assume proxies are good and validate on
gold annotations. Empirical measurements of graph quality are in F. . We note some miscalibration
   8
     This means each output contains a hallucination. This assumption is implicit in Mohri & Hashimoto
(2024) and describes the setting in which this technique is most useful. The lower bound holds without this
assumption, and the upper bound approximately holds if the underlying hallucination rate > α (we are working
on a generalization of this upper bound).
   9
     This dataset contains reasoning word problems.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                        (c)
                (a)
                                                    (b)
Figure 4: We evaluate our post-hoc (green) and subgraph filtering algorithms (using descendant
weighting with β = 1/2 (red) and graph-independent scoring (blue)) on MATH dataset. Post-hoc
filtering is applied using the graph after initial filtering without a graph. We consider the baseline
to be the method of Mohri & Hashimoto (2024) (yellow). In (a), we show calibration to desired
factuality levels for Subgraph Filtering within theoretical bounds (shown in grey). In (b), we assess
claim retention rates by varying α values, plotting both realized factuality and the fraction of retained
claims across calibration methods and graph generation techniques. In (c) we plot claim retention
with respect to user-desired calibration level.



for the FELM dataset (see Appendix 5a), which could be due to the lack of gold standard annotations
for validation or incorrect graphs. The more efficient annotation method contingent on good LM-
generated graphs gives a practical empirical instantiation of our algorithm.
[R2] Graphical proxies are necessary to obtain coherent factuality. The baseline method fails
to achieve both calibration (Figure 4a) and competitive claim retention likely because independent
factuality does not often imply factual coherence. However, we must still validate against a simple
deducibility graph 1 → 2 → · · · → N following the (linear) order in which claims occur in the
generation, which also fails to achieve competitive levels of claim retention for the majority of α
values when compared to subgraph filtering. The linear method performs better on the FELM dataset
(Figure 5b), which suggests the underlying graphs are closer to linear than they are in MATH.
[R3] Post-hoc filtering is not calibrated. While post-hoc filtering achieves similar claim retention
as subgraph filtering for a realized factuality level, it is not calibrated to user input. For a fixed user-
specified factuality rate (which post-hoc filtering will often overshoot), subgraph filtering achieves
better claim retention than post-hoc filtering although post-hoc filtering shows potential to correct
independently-calibrated outputs. We note similar lack of calibration in post-hoc filtering for the
FELM dataset (Figure 5a).
[R4] Conformally-filtered results achieve high levels of factuality while retaining most claims.
We empirically achieve high coverage levels while retaining a majority of claims, thus preserving
the utility of the generation (Figure 4b). This is important as conformal guarantees can trivially
achieved by removing all claims with some calibrated probability. For example, the subgraph filter-
ing algorithm obtains 90% factuality while retaining close to 80% of the claims, and obtains 85%
factuality while retaining nearly 90% of the claims. The descendant weighting scoring function
shows superior performance at low α, achieving arbitrarily high factuality while retaining at least
40% of claims.
[R5] Coherent outputs are more “legible” than the baseline while equally complete. (Kirchner
et al., 2024) define legible reasoning as “reasoning that is clear and easy to check.” We defer human
studies of output legibility to future works, but as a proxy, we asked GPT-4o and Llama-3.1-70B-
Instruct to grade filtered outputs as either correct or erroneous (more details in Appendix N). For
each combination of output generation model (GPT-4, Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct) and output grading
model (aforementioned judges), our method was more legible than the baseline (lower false positive
and false negative rates for fixed levels of factuality). This improved output utility does not come at
the cost of completeness: at α = 0.1, 64% of error-free outputs contain a correct final answer, the
same rate as the baseline outputs, which have diminished legibility and coherence.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 1: Change in error rate on questions with reprompting using claims retained via coherent and
independent methods. We record the error rate of GPT outputs on the prompt before conformal
prediction is applied (zero-shot) and the error rate of GPT outputs when prompted to complete an
incomplete (filtered) output. We compare error reduction between coherent incomplete outputs and
incoherent incomplete outputs.

                   Coherent Factuality Error                 Independent Factuality Error
     α       Zero-shot      Post-filter   Reduction      Zero-shot      Post-filter   Reduction
    0.05        28%           10%           ↓18%            28%           26%            ↓2%
    0.10        28%          10.88%        ↓17.12%          28%          16.56%        ↓11.44%
    0.15        28%           14%           ↓14%            28%          18.84%        ↓9.16%

[R6] Bootstrapping coherently factual inputs improves factuality of regenerations. We boot-
strap coherent factuality by running the filtered output back through the model with the original
prompt and requesting the model to fill in the blanks of our filtered output. See I for more details.
For α = 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, reprompting on coherent outputs provides consistently better reductions
in error rate, as compared to independently filtered outputs (Table 1). We posit this methodology is
more effective for coherent outputs because they are easier to parse and build upon, demonstrating
the utility of our method.

6   D ISCUSSION
We show how to achieve coherent factuality using the underlying graph structure of deducibility in
reasoning problems. We show both theoretical bounds on the calibration guarantees of our method,
and practical utility of our approach to improve factuality of language models. Here we discuss
limitations and potential future directions.
Graph proxies. While our graph proxies satisfy the definition of deducibility graphs empirically,
relying on a proprietary model like GPT-4o for accurate graph generation is not ideal. We note that
GPT-4o struggled with longer reasoning outputs containing many claims, raising concerns about
practicality for multi-step problems.
Subjective ground truth and deduction. Whether a claim is valid depends on the annotator’s
perspective and context. In a complex theorem, arithmetic may be implicit, while for simple algebra,
it could be central. Assumptions and axioms also vary by context. It is important to note that
correctness of outputs is only consistent with the annotator’s subjective notion of truth.
Improved scoring functions. Our method works with any subgraph scoring function and increases
claim retention by working to converge on the “true” underlying risk function with our scoring
function. Improvements may include scoring subsets beyond those considered by our algorithm
based and accounting for additional graph structure in node heuristic measures.
Expanding evaluation to further domains. This work is primed to extend to any reasoning con-
text, where a graphical representation is not insignificantly sparse. For example, code generation
is a natural domain, as compilation is both an easy and well defined notion of coherent substanti-
ation, and correct final outputs clearly indicate correctness. Furthermore, dependency graphs are a
common notion in software systems at large, which pairs well with our framework.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
SG acknowledges funding from OpenAI SuperAlignment Fast Grant as well as Microsoft Research
grant which generously supported the compute resources required in this work.
MG acknowledges funding from Penn Engineering’s Rachleff Scholars Program.

R EFERENCES
Gustaf Ahdritz, Tian Qin, Nikhil Vyas, Boaz Barak, and Benjamin L. Edelman. Distinguishing the
  knowable from the unknowable with language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  abs/2402.03563.
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A gentle introduction to conformal prediction and
  distribution-free uncertainty quantification, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.
  07511.
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Adam Fisch, Lihua Lei, and Tal Schuster. Conformal
  risk control, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.02814.
Neil Band, Xuechen Li, Tengyu Ma, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Linguistic calibration of long-form
  generations, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.00474.
Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas Gi-
 aninazzi, Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, and Torsten
 Hoefler. Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. Pro-
 ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(16):17682–17690, March 2024.
 ISSN 2159-5399. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v38i16.29720. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1609/
 aaai.v38i16.29720.
Jiuhai Chen and Jonas Mueller. Quantifying uncertainty in answers from any language model and
   enhancing their trustworthiness, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.16175.
Shiqi Chen, Yiran Zhao, Jinghan Zhang, I-Chun Chern, Siyang Gao, Pengfei Liu, and Junxian
  He. Felm: Benchmarking factuality evaluation of large language models. In Thirty-seventh
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023a.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.00741.
Xinyun Chen, Renat Aksitov, Uri Alon, Jie Ren, Kefan Xiao, Pengcheng Yin, Sushant Prakash,
  Charles Sutton, Xuezhi Wang, and Denny Zhou. Universal self-consistency for large language
  model generation, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17311.
John J. Cherian, Isaac Gibbs, and Emmanuel J. Candès. Large language model validity via enhanced
  conformal prediction methods, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09714.
Gianluca Detommaso, Martin Bertran, Riccardo Fogliato, and Aaron Roth. Multicalibration for
  confidence scoring in llms, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.04689.
Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Mojtaba Komeili, Jing Xu, Roberta Raileanu, Xian Li, Asli Celikyilmaz, and
  Jason Weston. Chain-of-verification reduces hallucination in large language models, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.11495.
A. Gammerman, V. Vovk, and V. Vapnik. Learning by transduction. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth
  Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI’98, pp. 148–155, San Francisco, CA,
  USA, 1998. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. ISBN 155860555X.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume
  70, ICML’17, pp. 1321–1330. JMLR.org, 2017.
Chirag Gupta, Arun K. Kuchibhotla, and Aaditya Ramdas. Nested conformal prediction and quantile
  out-of-bag ensemble methods. Pattern Recognition, 127:108496, July 2022. ISSN 0031-3203.
  doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2021.108496. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.
  2021.108496.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset, 2021.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.03874.
Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong
  Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. A survey on hallucination in large
  language models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2311.05232.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhengbao Jiang, Jun Araki, Haibo Ding, and Graham Neubig. How can we know when language
  models know? on the calibration of language models for question answering, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2012.00955.
Christopher Jung, Georgy Noarov, Ramya Ramalingam, and Aaron Roth. Batch multivalid confor-
  mal prediction, 2023. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR).
Adam Tauman Kalai and Santosh S. Vempala. Calibrated language models must hallucinate. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2024, pp. 160–171,
  New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400703836. doi:
  10.1145/3618260.3649777. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3618260.3649777.
Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Yining Chen, Harri Edwards, Jan Leike, Nat McAleese, and Yuri Burda.
  Prover-verifier games improve legibility of llm outputs, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2407.13692.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang (Shane) Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwa-
  sawa.     Large language models are zero-shot reasoners.  In S. Koyejo, S. Mo-
  hamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 22199–22213. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/8bb0d291acd4acf06ef112099c16f326-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for
  uncertainty estimation in natural language generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2302.09664.
Bhawesh Kumar, Charlie Lu, Gauri Gupta, Anil Palepu, David Bellamy, Ramesh Raskar, and An-
  drew Beam. Conformal prediction with large language models for multi-choice question answer-
  ing, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18404.
Jing Lei, Max G’Sell, Alessandro Rinaldo, Ryan J. Tibshirani, and Larry Wasserman. Distribution-
   free predictive inference for regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113
   (523):1094–1111, 2018. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2017.1307116.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.20050.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Teaching models to express their uncertainty in
  words, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14334.
Terrance Liu and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Multi-group uncertainty quantification for long-form text
  generation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21057.
Qianli Ma, Haotian Zhou, Tingkai Liu, Jianbo Yuan, Pengfei Liu, Yang You, and Hongxia Yang.
  Let’s reward step by step: Step-level reward model as the navigators for reasoning, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10080.
Sabrina J. Mielke, Arthur Szlam, Emily Dinan, and Y-Lan Boureau. Reducing conversational
  agents’ overconfidence through linguistic calibration. Transactions of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 10:857–872, 2022. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00494. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.50.
Christopher Mohri and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Language models with conformal factuality guaran-
  tees, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10978.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and Au-
 gustus Odena. Show your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models,
 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.00114.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Harris Papadopoulos, Kostas Proedrou, Volodya Vovk, and Alex Gammerman. Inductive confidence
  machines for regression. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Machine Learning,
  ECML’02, pp. 345–356, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2002. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 3540440364. doi:
  10.1007/3-540-36755-1 29. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-36755-1_29.

Victor Quach, Adam Fisch, Tal Schuster, Adam Yala, Jae Ho Sohn, Tommi S. Jaakkola, and Regina
  Barzilay. Conformal language modeling, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.
  10193.

Ansh Radhakrishnan, Karina Nguyen, Anna Chen, Carol Chen, Carson Denison, Danny Hernandez,
  Esin Durmus, Evan Hubinger, Jackson Kernion, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Newton Cheng, Nicholas
  Joseph, Nicholas Schiefer, Oliver Rausch, Sam McCandlish, Sheer El Showk, Tamera Lan-
  ham, Tim Maxwell, Venkatesa Chandrasekaran, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Jared Kaplan, Jan Brauner,
  Samuel R. Bowman, and Ethan Perez. Question decomposition improves the faithfulness of
  model-generated reasoning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.11768.

Yaniv Romano, Evan Patterson, and Emmanuel J. Candès. Conformalized quantile regression, 2019.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.03222.

Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. A tutorial on conformal prediction. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 9:
  371–421, jun 2008. ISSN 1532-4435.

Vaishnavi Shrivastava, Percy Liang, and Ananya Kumar. Llamas know what gpts don’t show: Sur-
  rogate models for confidence estimation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.
  08877.

Katherine Tian, Eric Mitchell, Allan Zhou, Archit Sharma, Rafael Rafailov, Huaxiu Yao, Chelsea
  Finn, and Christopher Manning. Just ask for calibration: Strategies for eliciting calibrated con-
  fidence scores from language models fine-tuned with human feedback. In Houda Bouamor,
  Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-
  ods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 5433–5442, Singapore, December 2023. Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.330. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.330.

Chhavi Tyagi and Wenge Guo. Multi-label classification under uncertainty: A tree-based conformal
  prediction approach, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.19472.

Cunxiang Wang, Xiaoze Liu, Yuanhao Yue, Xiangru Tang, Tianhang Zhang, Cheng Jiayang, Yunzhi
  Yao, Wenyang Gao, Xuming Hu, Zehan Qi, Yidong Wang, Linyi Yang, Jindong Wang, Xing
  Xie, Zheng Zhang, and Yue Zhang. Survey on factuality in large language models: Knowledge,
  retrieval and domain-specificity, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07521.

Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models,
  2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11171.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2024. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713871088.

Miao Xiong, Zhiyuan Hu, Xinyang Lu, Yifei Li, Jie Fu, Junxian He, and Bryan Hooi. Can llms
 express their uncertainty? an empirical evaluation of confidence elicitation in llms, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.13063.

Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In
  A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 11809–11822. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/271db9922b8d1f4dd7aaef84ed5ac703-Paper-Conference.pdf.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Muru Zhang, Ofir Press, William Merrill, Alisa Liu, and Noah A. Smith. How language model
 hallucinations can snowball, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13534.
Kaitlyn Zhou, Dan Jurafsky, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Navigating the grey area: How expressions
  of uncertainty and overconfidence affect language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Ka-
  lika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 5506–5524, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.335. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  emnlp-main.335.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    G RAPH D ETAILS

Algorithm 2: Ideal Graph Assembly
Input: example (X, Y ), ground truth Ctrue , claim splitter S : Y → 2C
Vstart = S(Y )
V, E = {}
L0 = {vtrue }
V = V ∪ L0
t=0
while ∃ v ∈ Vstart that is deducible from some ordering of nodes in V do
     t←t+1
     Lt = {}
     for each such v do
         ancestors = {A ⊆ V | ∃ π with π(A), v is coherently factual}
         A = arg minA′ ∈ancestors |A′ ∩ Lt−1 |
         Lt = Lt ∪ v
         Vstart = Vstart \ {v}
         for each v ′ ∈ A ∩ Lt−1 do
              E = E ∪ {(v ′ , v)}
     V = V ∪ Lt
return G = (V, E)


Proof of approximate deducibility graph existence. To prove this, we first make note of an important
property of the ideal graph construction.

Lemma 1. In an ancestor-connected subgraph of the ideal graph, a claim v is a descendant of vtrue
iff. it is an element of a coherently factual ordering.

Assume a node v is in the vertex set Vsub of ancestor-connected subgraph Gsub = (Vsub , Esub ) of
Gideal .
To prove the forward direction, assume v is a descendant of vtrue in Gsub . Then, by construction, there
is some ordering π(a(v)) = (vtrue , v1 , ..., vk ) such that (vtrue , v1 , ..., vk , v) is coherently factual.
For the backward direction, assume that v is part of a coherently factual ordering (v1 , ..., vk , v).
Then, by the definition of coherent factuality, v1 is deducible from vtrue , and so on inductively, so
each node preceding v will have a path from vtrue in the ideal graph. Thus, v will also be a descendant
of vtrue in Gideal ; since Gsub is ancestor connected, this holds in Gsub .
Now, we proceed with the proof of approximate deducibility graph existence.                       Fix some
(X, Y ), Ctrue , S : Y → 2C .
Generate the ideal graph Gideal = (Videal , Eideal )with Algorithm 2. Then, consider its subgraph on
V := Videal \ L0 = L1 ∪ ... ∪ Ln . Call this G = (V, E).
G is a DAG by construction, so to prove the approximate deducibility property, we fix some Gsub
satisfying ancestor connectedness.
To show (1), assume that a coherently factual ordering exists for Vsub . By Lemma 1, this implies that
each v ∈ Vsub is a descendant of vtrue in Gideal . Then, by construction, each v ∈ Vsub is deducible
from a(v). In a topological sort, v is preceded by each v ′ ∈ a(v), and so any topological sort gives
a coherently factual ordering.
To show (2), consider the case that Gsub does not allow a coherently factual ordering. Since vtrue is in
a coherently factual ordering and Gsub ∪ {vtrue } is an ancestor-connected subgraph in Gideal , Lemma
1 says that at least one element vbad is not contained in any coherently factual ordering (otherwise,
each v would be a descendant of vtrue ; by the previous argument, a topological sort of Vsub is then
a coherently factual ordering). In particular, a superset of Vsub contains vbad and therefore has no
coherently factual ordering.
Both properties hold, so the proof is concluded.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    C ONFORMAL F ILTERING A LGORITHM

In the algorithm below, we refer to Algorithm 1, “Subgraph Generator,” simply as “subG.”
Algorithm 3: Coherent Calibration
Input: Confidence α, calibration data {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1 , output graphs {Gi = (Vi , Ei )}ni=1
τ = {}
for i in [n] do
    UTi = subG(Gi )
    τ = τ ∪ {r(Xi , Yi , UTi )}
q̂α = ⌈(n+1)(1−α)⌉
             n     th quantile of {1 − τi |τi ∈ τ }
return q̂α


C    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Proof. To show the following, we refer to the notion of ancestor connectedness introduced in Defi-
nition 4. Recall that to obtain the upper bound, we assume that r(X, Y ·) < ∞ ∀(X, Y ).
Note that, if we apply Algorithm 1 to Gn+1 , each subgraph in output UTn+1 satisfies ancestor con-
nectedness.
As we proceed, for ease of notation, we simply write r(Xn+1 ) for r(Xn+1 , Yn+1 , UTn+1 ).
Now, since (1 − r(Xn+1 ) ≤ q̂α ) ⇐⇒ (r(Xn+1 ) ≥ 1 − q̂α ), we have
                                                                          1
                          1 − α ≤ P[r(Xn+1 ) ≥ 1 − q̂α ] ≤ 1 − α +
                                                                         n+1
as a standard split conformal result (where the probability is taken over the draw of the calibration
set and (Xn+1 , Yn+1 )).
                                                               q̂α
To prove the claim, it suffices to show r(Xn+1 ) ≥ 1 − q̂α ⇐⇒ Yn+1 is coherently factual.
For both directions, we will consider Ufiltered as in Section 4.
                                                                                                 q̂α
For the forward direction, assume r(Xn+1 ) ≥ 1− q̂α . Then, by definition, conformally filtered Yn+1
is coherently factual (since r(Xn+1 ) is defined such that each subgraph with less risk is coherently
factual, and Ufiltered satisfies this since τfiltered < 1 − q̂α ≤ r(Xn+1 )). Note that we make no
assumptions on the quality of deducibility graphs to obtain this result.
For the reverse direction, we will show the contrapositive. Assume r(Xn+1 ) < 1 − q̂α . Since
r(X, Y, ·) < ∞, there exists a subgraph, threshold (Ubad , τbad ) with Ubad = (Vbad , Ebad ) ∈ Un+1 ,
τbad < 1 − q̂α ; otherwise, the first bad graph would have risk at least 1 − q̂α , so the supremum of
safe scores r(Xn+1 ) would be at least 1 − q̂α .
       q̂α
Say Yn+1   is the vertex set from Ufiltered . Note that τfiltered ≥ τbad (since τfiltered is the maximum of
risks below 1 − q̂α ).
                                           q̂α
If Ufiltered = Ubad , the desired result (Yn+1 is not coherently factual) follows.
Otherwise, Ubad is a subgraph of Ufiltered , and both are ancestor-connected, properties obtained by
Algorithm 1. In particular, this means Vfiltered is a superset of Vbad .
Note that Gn+1 is an approximate deducibility graph and Ubad is an ancestor-connected subgraph
                                                      ′
with no coherently factual ordering (if it had one, Vbad in particular would be coherently factual by
Definition 4). Additionally, any superset of Vbad has no coherently factual ordering, also by Defini-
                   q̂α
tion 4. However, Yn+1  is one such ordering on superset Vfiltered , which concludes the contrapositive
of the backward direction.
                                                   q̂α
We have thus shown that (r(Xn+1 ) ≥ 1 − q̂α ) ⇐⇒ (Yn+1 is factual), which proves the claim.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    R ESULTS FOR FELM DATASET

We present the results of our algorithms on the FELM Dataset, as discussed in the results section.
The lines graphed correspond to the same evaluation settings as with the MATH dataset. We note that
the Post-Hoc Filtering algorithm remains un-calibrated (even more so) in these results as compared
to subgraph filtering which is (almost perfectly) calibrated (see 5a). The slight discrepancy may be
due to erroneous graphs as we lack manual annotations. The no dependency baseline performs better
in this case, but still fails to meet the lower bound for any value of α. The validation results (see 5b
also appear to be similar to that of the MATH dataset. However, we now note better performance
of linear graphs, implying that reasoning paths may be closer to perfectly linear in this dataset.
Post-Hoc and subgraph filtering remain relatively the same, and are still competitive relative to one
another in claim retention.


            (a) Calibration plot (FELM)                (b) Percent of claims kept vs. factuality (FELM)
    Figure 5: Results on the FELM dataset using GPT-4 for responses and GPT-4o for graphs.


E    R ESULTS WITH L LAMA -3.1-70B-I NSTRUCT (O PEN -S OURCE )

We ran the same experiment on the MATH dataset for outputs, subclaim splits, and graphs produced
by Llama. While Llama-generated graphs were further from ideal and less often satisfied Definition
4 (discussion of our altered approach in Appendix K.1), our empirical results suggest they are still
useful. The plots below are for silver-annotated calibration and validation.


           (a) Calibration plot (Llama)                 (b) Percent of claims kept vs. factuality (Llama)
           Figure 6: Results on the MATH dataset solely using Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    M ODEL -G ENERATED VS . I DEAL G RAPHS
Surprisingly, graphs generated by GPT-4o seemed to have more empirical utility than ideal, human-
generated graphs. As discussed in Section 5, this additional structure, although not strictly necessary
to obtain theoretical guarantees, tends to improve the set of subgraphs we search over by deferring
admittance of faulty claims that rely on faulty claims. GPT includes edges between such claims
while the ideal construction does not require this.
In Figure 7, we compare the claim retention of GPT-graph vs. ideal-graph calibration on 10 examples
from the MATH dataset.
To validate our graphs, for the first 10 GPT proxies, we measure their edit-distance to (manually-
constructed) ideal graphs (1.8 on average) and check whether they are approximate deducibility
graphs (100% are). The second result means each graph we checked satisfied Definition 4, which
is sufficient to obtain both conformal bounds. For the first 10 LLaMa-generated graphs, the edit
distance is 10.7, and 40% are approximate deducibility graphs.


    Figure 7: Performance of GPT-generated vs. human-constructed graphs for α = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3.


G     F URTHER R ELATED W ORK
Factuality and Hallucination in Language Models.
Ensuring the factuality of language model outputs is an important objective towards their reliable
real-world deployment across diverse settings. Hallucinations can arise in several ways, including
lack of knowledge or recall problems from pre-training data, fine-tuning data, or a vector datastore
with RAG, as well as issues with decoding strategy (Huang et al., 2023), (Wang et al., 2023a)).
Works such as (Kalai & Vempala, 2024) suggest that LMs will always hallucinate while there exists
unknown knowledge, while others such as (Ahdritz et al., 2024) seek to identify uncertainty due
to lack of knowledge via linear probes. At the same time, (Zhang et al., 2023) demonstrate LLMs
can independently identify hallucinations, but often continue with incorrect lines of reasoning even
when a mistake is made early on. Our work directly addresses such a setting through dependence-
based factuality within a reasoning chain, avoiding cascading hallucinations by design with high
probability.
Uncertainty Estimation. The problem of insufficient (or incorrect) knowledge can be treated as
epistemic uncertainty, while inference-time decoding randomness in sampling can be addressed as
aleatoric (Ahdritz et al., 2024). Thus, the study of uncertainty estimation in language models is
complementary to our goal of mitigating hallucinations. Prior works have explored expressions
of uncertainty including logit weights (Guo et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2021), surrogate estimates
(Shrivastava et al., 2023), sampling variance (Kuhn et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2024), and natural
language generations indicating uncertainty (Lin et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023).
There is also a line of work which leverages confidence scores which, when calibrated, should be
proportional to the correctness of the generation (Mielke et al., 2022)). Chen & Mueller 2023 use
self-reflection and consistency over generations sampled with a fixed temperature, and select the


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


generation with the highest confidence score (which is also output to the user). Tian et al. 2023
demonstrates that verbalized confidence scores, akin to (Lin et al., 2022), are better calibrated than
using the log probabilities, which are generally overconfident relative to the true level of correct-
ness. Band et al. 2024 introduces a pipeline for linguistic calibration with supervised fine-tuning to
enable elicitation of faithful confidence scores, and decision-based reinforcement learning through
a forecasting formulation. Detommaso et al. 2024 uses multicalibration to several groups of promp-
t/completion pairs as a means to elicit reliable confidence scores. Our work makes use of a risk
function based on our coherent approach on factuality, calibrating with respect to annotated claim
and subset labels.

H    M ORE D ETAILS ON C ONFORMAL FACTUALITY
We expand on the details of Mohri & Hashimoto (2024) application of conformal prediction to
language model outputs.
More formally, Mohri & Hashimoto (2024) frame factuality in terms of entailment by the ground
truth.
Definition 6 (Entailment operator). The function E : C → {Csupport ⊆ 2C } takes in a claim c ∈ C
and outputs each set Csupport ⊆ 2C of claims whose conjunction implies c.
If C ∈ E(c), we abuse notation and simply write C =⇒ c. Mohri and Hashimoto seek to retain
claims c such that Ctrue =⇒ c for each c, and consider this sufficient for realizing factuality of an
output.

There is some difference in notation between this definition and the original since Mohri and
Hashimoto frame the ground truth Ctrue as simply an element of Y, while we frame it as a set of
claims.
Definition 7 (Independent non-conformity scoring function). For a particular output Y with claims
C = S(Y ) and some set T of candidate thresholds, the non-conformity score r is defined as follows:
           r(X, Y, T ) = inf{τ ∈ T : ∀j ≥ τ, ∀y ∈ C, (σ(y) ≥ j) =⇒ (Ctrue =⇒ y)}

Then, since increasing the threshold can only remove claims, the traditional conformal guarantee
                                                                         1
                      1 − α ≤ P[r(Xn+1 , Yn+1 , T ) ≤ q̂α ] ≤ 1 − α +       .
                                                                        n+1
can be written as
                                      q̂α                                  1
                    1 − α ≤ P[∀y ∈ S(Yn+1 ), Ctrue =⇒ y] ≤ 1 − α +            .
                                                                          n+1

Then, they assume that (∀ y ∈ S(Y ), Ctrue =⇒ y) ⇐⇒ (Y is factual), so we obtain
                                      q̂α                           1
                           1 − α ≤ P[Yn+1 is factual] ≤ 1 − α +        .
                                                                   n+1

I   M ORE DETAILS ON B OOTSTRAPPING C ONFORMAL FACTUALITY
We may use the outputs of both the baseline independent factuality conformal prediction algorithm
and our new coherent factuality conformal prediction algorithm to reprompt the model, see K.3 for
the exact prompt. We give the model both the original question and the remaining filtered output
and ask it to complete the solution using the context given.
For α = 0.05, 0.1, 0.15 we observe the change in factuality from prompting with no context to
prompting with the added context of the filtered set of claims. After reprompting, we observe the
correctness of the new output and record the new error rate. The new output is considered correct
only if all the new claims and reasoning used are correct. The table 1 demonstrates how the error
rate has a greater reduction when reprompting with a coherent subset of the original claims rather
than an incoherent subset.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J     C OSTS ASSOCIATED WITH GPT QUERIES AND RUNNING ON
      L LAMA -3.1-70B-I NSTRUCT
Cost and reproducibility. We replicated our main experiments with Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct (for
output and graph generation) with slight changes to the prompting required to elicit useful graphs
(see Appendix K.1). We find that the utility of the approach holds for less powerful open-source
models: we present our results in Appendix .
The algorithm is also inexpensive to implement. For each example in the calibration and test set, the
algorithm requires 8 queries comprising at most 16k tokens; for our calibration set of 50 examples,
this cost less than $5.00 using GPT and less than $0.70 using Llama. The same queries are made for
the test set, so each test example cost less than $0.10 for GPT and $0.01 for Llama. These estimates
are conservative, assuming full utilization of 2000-token total context and output to accommodate
longer form responses (although our responses were much shorter). Perhaps more prohibitive than
monetary cost is the number of annotations necessary (at worst exponential in n, the number of
subclaims for an example). However, this is a one-time cost for calibration, and our results suggest
that silver annotations, of which there are n, suffice.

K      API U SAGE FOR M ODEL Q UERIES
We report a few important notes on the API calls made to OpenAI models for empirical evaluation
of our algorithm:
       1. A temperature of 1.0 was used to generate alternate responses for frequency scoring; a
          temperature of 0.0 was used for all other API calls.
       2. GPT-4 was used for the generation of outputs for the MATH questions.
       3. GPT-4 was used for self-consistency scoring, described in Section 4.
       4. GPT-4o was used for graph generation.

K.1     D EPENDENCY G RAPH G ENERATION P ROMPT (MATH/FELM)

GPT-4o Our prompt for graph generation includes in-context exemplars annotated with rationales
(“commentary”) for guided decomposition of the model-generated output into claims and their rela-
tion to one another.

    I’m going to give you a question and a series of claims in response to the question. I want you
    to create a dependency graph to represent the relationships between claims. The set of vertices
    should be the set of claims. Then, if a claim ”a” relies on another claim ”b” to be considered
    true, include edge (b, a) in the graph (so a node’s ancestors should contain all of its necessary
    assumptions). Vertices that are ”a priori” (e.g., assumptions given in the question, definitions,
    etc.), should not have ancestors. Your final output will be an adjacency list.
    Next, I’ll give you some examples to make this clear.
    Question: How many vertical asymptotes does the graph of y = x2x+1 have?
    claim 1: A function has vertical asymptotes exactly where its denominator equals zero. claim
    2: To solve for the vertical asymptotes of the function y = x2x+1 , we therefore must solve
    x2 + 1 = 0. claim 3: For all real values of x, x2 + 1 > 0 claim 4: Thus, we conclude that the
    function y = x2x+1 has no vertical asymptotes.
    Desired Output: [[0, 0, 0, 0], [1, 0, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 1, 0]]
    Commentary:
    You should output an object like the one above without any other reasoning or formatting. In
    particular, you should output an array of n arrays, each of length n, where n is the number of
    claims. If claim j relies on the information from claim i, the jth array should have the ith entry
    = 1; otherwise this entry should be zero. In this case, note that claim 1 does not have ancestors,



                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  because it does not require other steps to be justified (we assume common mathematical the-
  orems, like the presence of vertical asymptotes when the denominator is zero, to be a priori).
  However, claim 2 relies on the conclusion of claim 1 since it sets the denominator equal to zero.
  claim 3 implicitly relies on claim 2, since we derive this check from claim 2. Also, the final
  answer, claim 4, relies on combining information from both claims 2 and 3 (which describe the
  significance of the equation x2 + 1 = 0 and its answer, respectively). Also note that in generat-
  ing this graph, we represent implicit relationships between claims: claim 4, for instance, does
  not cite claims 2 and 3 explicitly, but it certainly relies on their contents. For this reason, we
  put those edges in its adjacency list. It is very important to represent all relationships in this
  way. In general, it is unlikely that a claim should be completely ”floating” (not relied upon by
  or reliant upon another claim); in this case, it would not be contributing to the complete output.
  By convention, we never include a claim in its own adjacency list (we do not consider a claim
  to rely on itself).
  Here, we’re interested in the dependency between claims, not just the correctness. For this
  reason, it’s also important to represent these dependencies even in the case that an answer is
  wrong.
  I’ll give you another example below.
  Question: Consider the function y = x2 + 2x + 15. What is the sum of the zeroes of this
  function?
  claim 1: The zeroes of a function are the x-values of its x-intercepts. claim 2: To find the zeroes
  of y = x2 + 2x + 15, we set the right hand side equal to 0, writing 0 = x2 + 2x + 15. claim 3:
  To solve 0 = x2 + 2x + 15, we factor it as 0 = (x + 3)(x − 5). claim 4: This means that the
  zeroes of y = x2 + 2x + 15 are x = −3, 5. claim 5: We conclude that the sum of the zeroes of
  this function is −3 + 5 = 2.
  Desired Output: [[0, 0, 0, 0, 0], [1, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 1, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0, 1, 0]]
  Commentary:
  Here, each claim simply relies on the previous claim. Importantly, claim 3 makes an algebraic
  error, incorrectly factoring as 0 = (x + 3)(x − 5) instead of 0 = (x − 3)(x + 5), which means
  the final answer is wrong. Even so, this claim relies on information from claim 2, and claim 4
  relies on the conclusion from claim 3, so we represent these edges in our final output. We are
  agnostic to correctness, and focus solely on the reliance between claims. If claim i makes use
  of claim j, even incorrectly, claim j should be an ancestor of claim i in our adjacency list.
  Now, I’m going to give you another question and list of claims, as before. With all of this
  explanation in mind, I want you to output an adjacency list with no other reasoning.


Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct Llama had more difficulty with this task, especially replicating the di-
mensions of the adjacency list, so we reworked the few-shot prompt and gave more explicit in-
struction. Despite our best efforts, it occasionally output cyclic graphs, in which case we simply
considered the trivial “linear” graph (1 ⇝ 2 ⇝ ... ⇝ n); our empirical results suggest that, while
imperfect, its graphs were still useful.

  You are a system designed to create dependency graphs for subclaims in response to a given
  question. Your output must strictly adhere to the following instructions:
  1. Graph Description:
  - Represent the dependency relationships between subclaims as a directed graph.
  - Each subclaim is a vertex in the graph.
  - An edge (b → a) exists if subclaim “a” depends on subclaim “b.”
  - Subclaims that are “a priori” (e.g., assumptions or definitions) should not have any ancestors.
  2. Output Format:
  - Provide your graph as an adjacency list of size NUM × NUM, where NUM is the number of
  subclaims (this will be given at the beginning of the prompt).



                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  - Each entry in the adjacency list is a list of n integers:
  - A value of 1 at position i in row j indicates that subclaim j depends on subclaim i. - A value
  of 0 indicates no dependency. - Ensure no claim depends on itself (diagonal entries must be 0).
  3. Rules: - The adjacency list must be square, with n rows and n columns, where n is the
  exact number of subclaims provided. - Each row and column must be exactly n integers. Do
  not include extra rows, columns, or misaligned entries. - The output must consist solely of the
  adjacency list (e.g., [[0, 1, 0], [0, 0, 1], [0, 0, 0]]); do not include explanations, commentary, or
  any other formatting.
  4. Dependencies:
  - Consider explicit and implicit dependencies between subclaims. For example, if subclaim
  j implicitly relies on subclaim i (even if not stated directly), include the edge (i → j) in the
  graph.
  - Always represent dependencies, even if the subclaims are incorrect or contain logical errors.
  Examples:
  - Input:
  Question: How many vertical asymptotes does the graph of y = x/(x2 + 1) have?
  NUM = 4 Subclaims:
  1. A function has vertical asymptotes exactly where its denominator equals zero.
  2. To solve for the vertical asymptotes of the function y = x/(x2 + 1), we therefore must solve
  x2 + 1 = 0.3. For all real values of x, x2 + 1 > 0.
  4. Thus, we conclude that the function y = x/(x2 + 1) has no vertical asymptotes.
  Desired Output: [[0,0,0,0],[1,0,0,0],[0,1,0,0],[0,1,1,0]]
  - Input:
  Question: Consider the function y = x2 + 2x + 15. What is the sum of the zeroes of this
  function?
  NUM = 5
  Subclaims:
  1. The zeroes of a function are the x-values of its x-intercepts.
  2. To find the zeroes of y = x2 + 2x + 15, we set the right-hand side equal to 0, writing
  0 = x2 + 2x + 15.
  3. To solve 0 = x2 + 2x + 15, we factor it as 0 = (x + 3)(x − 5).
  4. This means that the zeroes of y = x2 + 2x + 15arex = −3, 5.
  5. We conclude that the sum of the zeroes of this function is −3 + 5 = 2.
  Desired Output: [[0,0,0,0,0],[1,0,0,0,0],[0,1,0,0,0],[0,0,1,0,0],[0,0,0,1,0]]
  Now provide your adjacency list for the following question and subclaims:



K.2   S ELF - CONSISTENCY ( FREQUENCY ) SCORING PROMPT

  You will get a list of claims and piece of text. For each claim, score whether the text sup-
  ports, contradicts, or is unrelated to the claim. Directly return a jsonl, where each line is
  {”id”:[CLAIM ID], ”score”:[SCORE]}. Directly return the jsonl with no explanation or other
  formatting. For the [SCORE], return 1 for supports, −1 for contradicts, and 0 for unrelated.
  The claims are: {CLAIMS}



K.3   R E - PROMPTING WITH F ILTERED O UTPUT P ROMPT

  I am going to give you a question some starter work. Please fill in the starter work to provide a
  complete answer to the question. Question: [QUESTION], Starter Work: [STARTER WORK]



                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L      C OMPARING O UTPUTS G ENERATED F ROM I NDEPENDENT FACTUALITY
       AND C OHERENT FACTUALITY

L.1     MATH DATASET O UTPUTS

      Example 1
                                                                 1
      Question: Solve for w and express as a common fraction: 1 6w = 42
                                                                      3

      Independent Factuality:                         Coherent Factuality:
       1. Multiplying both sides by w gives 1 61 =        1. Multiplying both sides by w gives 1 61 =
          w · 42                                             w · 42
                                                                  3 .
               3 .
                                                          2. Simplifying the right side gives 1 16 =
       2. Converting 1 16 to an improper fraction            14w.
          gives 67 = 14w.                                 3. Converting 1 16 to an improper fraction
                                                             gives 67 = 14w.


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Example 2

   Question: Mr. Madoff invests 1000 dollars in a fund that compounds annually at a constant
   interest rate. After three years, his investment has grown to 1225 dollars. What is the annual
   interest rate, as a percentage? (Round your answer to the nearest integer.)

   Independent Factuality:                          Coherent Factuality:
    1. In the formula, A is the amount of               1. The formula for compound interest is
       money accumulated after n years, in-                A = P (1 + r/n)nt .
       cluding interest.                                2. In the formula, A is the amount of
                                                           money accumulated after n years, in-
    2. In the formula, P is the principal amount           cluding interest.
       (the initial amount of money).
                                                        3. In the formula, P is the principal amount
    3. In the formula, r is the annual interest            (the initial amount of money).
       rate (in decimal).                               4. In the formula, r is the annual interest
    4. In this case, A = 1225, P = 1000,                   rate (in decimal).
       n = 1, and t = 3 years.                          5. In the formula, n is the number of times
                                                           that interest is compounded per year.
    5. Substituting the given values into the
       formula, we get: 1225 = 1000(1 +                 6. In this case, A = 1225, P = 1000,
       r/1)1∗3 .                                           n = 1, and t = 3 years.
                                                        7. Substituting the given values into the
    6. Simplifying the equation,       we get:             formula, we get: 1225 = 1000(1 +
       1225 = 1000(1 + r)3                                 r/1)1∗3 .
    7. Dividing both sides by 1000, we get:             8. Simplifying the equation,      we get:
       1.225 = (1 + r)3                                    1225 = 1000(1 + r)3 .
                                                        9. Dividing both sides by 1000, we get:
    8. Taking the cube root of both sides, we              1.225 = (1 + r)3 .
       get: 1.07 = 1 + r.
                                                    10. Taking the cube root of both sides, we
    9. Subtracting 1 from both sides, we get:           get: 1.07 = 1 + r.
       r = 0.07.                                    11. Subtracting 1 from both sides, we get:
   10. The annual interest rate is 0.07, or 7%          r = 0.07.
       when expressed as a percentage.              12. The annual interest rate is 0.07, or 7%
                                                        when expressed as a percentage.
   11. Rounded to the nearest integer, the an-
       nual interest rate is 7%.                    13. Rounded to the nearest integer, the an-
                                                        nual interest rate is 7%.



   Example 3

   Question: What is the smallest real number x in the domain of the function
                                        p
                               g(x) = (x − 3)2 − (x − 8)2 ?

   Independent Factuality:                    Coherent Factuality:
    1. The expression under the square root    1. The expression under the square root
       must be nonnegative.                       must be nonnegative.
    2. We must have (x − 3)2 − (x − 8)2 ≥ 0.   2. We must have (x − 3)2 − (x − 8)2 ≥ 0.
    3. This simplifies to (x − 3 + x − 8)(x −  3. This simplifies to (x − 3 + x − 8)(x −
       3 − (x − 8)) ≥ 0.                          3 − (x − 8)) ≥ 0.
                               11              4. This further simplifies to (2x−11)(5) ≥
    4. The smallest such x is     .
                                2                 0.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Example 4

      Question: If (2x + 5)(x − 3) = 14, find the sum of the possible values of x.

      Independent Factuality:                             Coherent Factuality:
       1. The expanded equation simplifies to                 1. The left side of the equation is expanded
          2x2 − x − 29 = 0                                       to 2x2 − 6x + 5x − 15 = 14
                                                              2. The expanded equation simplifies to
       2. Vieta’s formulas are used to find the sum              2x2 − x − 29 = 0
          of the roots of the equation
                                                              3. Vieta’s formulas are used to find the sum
       3.   The sum of the roots of the equation is 12           of the roots of the equation
                                                              4. The sum of the roots of the equation is 21

      Example 5

      Question: The points (x, y) represented in this table lie on a straight line. The point (13, q)
      lies on the same line. What is the value of p + q? Express your answer as a decimal to the
      nearest tenth.
                                                x       y
                                                2      −5
                                                p     −14
                                              p + 2 −17
      .

      Independent Factuality:                             Coherent Factuality:
       1. The slope of the line is calculated as
          −17−(−14)                                           1. The slope of the line is calculated as
                    = −32 .                                      −17−(−14)
            p+2−p
                                                                   p+2−p   = −32 .
       2. The slope of the line is also calculated as
          q−(−5)     q+5
           13−2 = 11 .
                                                              2. Setting these two slope equations equal
       3. The slope of the line is also calculated as            gives −3     −9
                                                                        2 = p−2 .
          −14−(−5)      −9
            p−2     = p−2   .                                 3. The slope of the line is also calculated as
       4. Setting this slope equation equal to −3
                                                2
                                                                 q−(−5)     q+5
                                                                  13−2 = 11 .
                       q+5
          gives −3
                 2 = 11 .
       5. Setting these two slope equations equal             4. Setting this slope equation equal to −3
                                                                                                      2
                                                                              q+5
          gives −3      −9
                 2 = p−2 .                                       gives −3
                                                                        2 = 11 .



L.2     FELM DATASET O UTPUTS

      Example 1

      Question: Jessica makes $2,000.00 a month. She sets 25% of her paycheck aside to put
      towards fancy shoes. Each pair of shoes she buys costs $1,000.00. How many shoes can she
      buy in a year?

      Independent Factuality:                             Coherent Factuality:
       1. Jessica sets aside 25% of her paycheck,             1. Jessica sets aside 25% of her paycheck,
          which is: $2,000.00 x 0.25 = $500.00                   which is: $2,000.00 x 0.25 = $500.00
                                                              2. To figure out how many pairs of shoes
       2. So Jessica can buy 6 pairs of shoes in a               she can buy in a year, we need to multi-
          year with the money she sets aside from                ply the number of pairs she can buy in a
          her paycheck.                                          month by 12 (the number of months in a
                                                                 year):$500.00 x 12 = $6,000.00.


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Example 2

   Question: The ratio of men to women on a bus is 5:9. If the total number of passengers on
   the bus is 84, and 20 women alight from the bus at the next stop, how many women have
   remained on the bus?

   Independent Factuality:                           Coherent Factuality:
    1. If the total number of passengers on the          1. The total ratio of men and women on the
       bus is 84, then each ratio unit represents           bus is 5 + 9 = 14.
       84
       14 = 6 passengers.                                2. If the total number of passengers on the
                                                            bus is 84, then each ratio unit represents
    2. The number of women on the bus                       84
                                                            14 = 6 passengers.
       is 9 units × 6 passengers/unit =
                                                         3. The number of women on the bus
       54 passengers.
                                                            is 9 units × 6 passengers/unit =
    3. If 20 women alight from the bus, then                54 passengers.
       the number of women remaining on the              4. If 20 women alight from the bus, then
       bus is 54 − 20 = 34 women. Answer:                   the number of women remaining on the
        34 .                                                bus is 54 − 20 = 34 women. Answer:
                                                             34 .

   Example 3

   Question: John injured his back and needs to go to physical therapy. He went to physical
   therapy for 6 weeks. Each week he went twice for 2 hours at a time. If the sessions cost
   $125 per hour how much did the physical therapy cost?

   Independent Factuality:                           Coherent Factuality:
    1. He went to therapy 6 × 2 =≪ 6 × 2 =               1. He went to therapy 6 × 2 =≪ 6 × 2 =
       12 ≫ 12 times.                                       12 ≫ 12 times.
                                                         2. Each session cost 2 × 125 = $ ≪
    2. So he paid 250 × 12 = $ ≪ 250 × 12 =                 2 × 125 = 250 ≫ 250.
       3000 ≫ 3000.
                                                         3. So he paid 250 × 12 = $ ≪ 250 × 12 =
    3. Answer: 3000 .                                       3000 ≫ 3000.
                                                         4. Answer: 3000 .


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M     I NDEPENDENT FACTUALITY BASELINES
We also report the baseline results of independent factuality as in (Mohri & Hashimoto, 2024) for
the problems we analyze; these plots are analogous to those we report in Section 6.


                 (a) Calibration plot                    (b) Percent of claims kept vs. independent factuality
Figure 8: These figures depict the performance of independent factuality calibration validated
against independent factuality. We can see that the calibration guarantees still hold and useful pro-
portions of claim retention, however, as claims may still be retained despite claims that preceding it
being deemed as incorrect, this does not reflect our coherent definition of factuality.

N    L EGIBILITY R ESULTS
To measure legibility, we asked GPT-4o and Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct to grade outputs as erroneous
or factual.
All queries were at temperature = 0. We considered all outputs across α = 0.1, 0.15, 0.2 for which
(1) our method and the baseline produced different, non-empty outputs and (2) both outputs had
the same independent factuality (both contained a hallucination or both didn’t). The task was error
detection, so “false positive” means GPT graded an output as containing an error when it didn’t.

      1. GPT-4 outputs, GPT-4o as judge

         Table 2: Results of legibility experiment with LLM-as-a-judge with our method.

                                        Outcome                  Proportion
                                    True Positive                    0.22
                                   True Negative                     0.59
                                   False Positive                    0.17
                                   False Negative                    0.02


Table 3: Results of legibility experiment with LLM-as-a-judge with the baseline, independent fac-
tuality method.

                                        Outcome                  Proportion
                                    True Positive                    0.17
                                   True Negative                     0.46
                                   False Positive                    0.32
                                   False Negative                    0.05


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     2. GPT-4 outputs, Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct as judge

         Table 4: Results of legibility experiment with LLM-as-a-judge with our method.

                                   Outcome               Proportion
                                 True Positive               0.15
                                True Negative                0.61
                                False Positive               0.15
                                False Negative               0.10



Table 5: Results of legibility experiment with LLM-as-a-judge with the baseline, independent fac-
tuality method.

                                   Outcome               Proportion
                                 True Positive               0.10
                                True Negative                0.54
                                False Positive               0.24
                                False Negative               0.12



     3. Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct outputs, GPT-4o as judge

         Table 6: Results of legibility experiment with LLM-as-a-judge with our method.

                                   Outcome               Proportion
                                 True Positive               0.08
                                True Negative                0.64
                                False Positive               0.26
                                False Negative               0.03



Table 7: Results of legibility experiment with LLM-as-a-judge with the baseline, independent fac-
tuality method.

                                   Outcome               Proportion
                                 True Positive               0.06
                                True Negative                0.53
                                False Positive               0.36
                                False Negative               0.05



     4. Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct outputs, Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct as judge

         Table 8: Results of legibility experiment with LLM-as-a-judge with our method.

                                   Outcome               Proportion
                                 True Positive               0.03
                                True Negative                0.83
                                False Positive               0.08
                                False Negative               0.08


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 9: Results of legibility experiment with LLM-as-a-judge with the baseline, independent fac-
tuality method.

                                    Outcome                 Proportion
                                  True Positive                 0.03
                                 True Negative                  0.78
                                 False Positive                 0.11
                                 False Negative                 0.09


Grading Prompt:
  Given the prompt: [prompt]
  Do the following subclaims contain any errors?
  [Subclaims separated by newlines]
  Respond with exactly one character: either ‘Y’ for ‘there’s an error’ or ‘N’ for ‘no error.’


                                                  29
