Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ROBUST F EATURE L EARNING FOR M ULTI -I NDEX
M ODELS IN H IGH D IMENSIONS
 Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini1,2 , Adel Javanmard3 , Murat A. Erdogdu1,2
 1
   University of Toronto, 2 Vector Insitute, 3 University of Southern California
 {mousavi,erdogdu}@cs.toronto,edu, ajavanma@usc.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
         Recently, there have been numerous studies on feature learning with neural net-
         works, specifically on learning single- and multi-index models where the target is a
         function of a low-dimensional projection of the input. Prior works have shown that
         in high dimensions, the majority of the compute and data resources are spent on
         recovering the low-dimensional projection; once this subspace is recovered, the
         remainder of the target can be learned independently of the ambient dimension.
         However, implications of feature learning in adversarial settings remain unexplored.
         In this work, we take the first steps towards understanding adversarially robust
         feature learning with neural networks. Specifically, we prove that the hidden di-
         rections of a multi-index model offer a Bayes optimal low-dimensional projection
         for robustness against ℓ2 -bounded adversarial perturbations under the squared loss,
         assuming that the multi-index coordinates are statistically independent from the rest
         of the coordinates. Therefore, robust learning can be achieved by first performing
         standard feature learning, then robustly tuning a linear readout layer on top of the
         standard representations. In particular, we show that adversarially robust learning
         is just as easy as standard learning. Specifically, the additional number of samples
         needed to robustly learn multi-index models when compared to standard learning,
         does not depend on dimensionality.


1    I NTRODUCTION
A crucial capability of neural networks is their ability to hierarchically learn useful features, and to
avoid the curse of dimensionality by adapting to potential low-dimensional structures in data through
empirical risk minimization (ERM) (Bach, 2017; Schmidt-Hieber, 2020). Recently, a theoretical line
of work has demonstrated that gradient-based training, which is not a priori guaranteed to implement
ERM due to non-convexity, also demonstrates similar behavior and efficiently learns functions
of low-dimensional projections (Wei et al., 2019; Damian et al., 2022; Bietti et al., 2022; Barak
et al., 2022; Ba et al., 2022; Mousavi-Hosseini et al., 2023a) or functions with certain hierarchical
properties (Abbe et al., 2022; 2023; Dandi et al., 2023). These theoretical insights provided a useful
avenue for explaining standard feature learning mechanisms in neural networks.
On the other hand, it has been empirically observed that deep neural networks trained with respect
to standard losses are susceptible to adversarial attacks; small perturbations in the input may not be
detectable by humans, yet they can significantly alter the prediction performed by the model (Szegedy
et al., 2014). To overcome this issue, a popular approach is to instead minimize the adversarially robust
empirical risk (Madry et al., 2018). However, unlike its standard counterpart, achieving successful
generalization of deep neural networks on robust test risk has been particularly challenging, and even
the standard performance of the model can degrade once adversarial training is performed (Tsipras
et al., 2018). Therefore, one may wonder if robust neural networks are still adaptive to certain
problem structures that improve generalization. By focusing on hidden low-dimensionality as a
well-known example of such structure, we aim at answering the following fundamental question:

            Can neural networks maintain their statistical adaptivity to low dimensions
                 when trained for robustness against adversarial perturbations?

We answer this question positively by providing the following contributions.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 • When considering ℓ2 -constrained perturbations, Bayes optimal predictors can be constructed by
   projecting the input data onto the low-dimensional subspace defined by the target function. In this
   sense, the optimal low-dimensional projection remains unchanged compared to standard learning.
 • Consequently, provided that they have access to an oracle that is able to recover the low-
   dimensional target subspace, neural networks can achieve a sample complexity that is independent
   of the ambient dimension when robustly learning multi-index models. This is achieved by mini-
   mizing the empirical adversarial risk with respect to the second layer. While the basic definition
   of empirical adversarial risk implies computational complexity dependent on input dimension,
   by simply projecting the inputs onto the low-dimensional target subspace, the computational
   complexity can also be made independent of the input dimension.
 • An oracle for recovering the low-dimensional target subspace can be constructed by training
   the first layer of a two-layer neural network with a standard loss function, as demonstrated by
   many prior works. By combining our results with two particular choices of oracle implemen-
   tation (Damian et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2024), we provide end-to-end guarantees for robustly
   learning multi-index models with gradient-based algorithms.

1.1   R ELATED W ORKS

Feature Learning for Single/Multi-Index Models. Many recent works have focused on proving
benefits of feature learning, allowing the neural network weights to travel far from initialization,
as opposed to freezing weights around initialization in lazy training (Chizat et al., 2019) which is
equivalent to using the Neural Tangent Kernel (Jacot et al., 2018). When using online SGD on the
squared loss, Ben Arous et al. (2021) showed that the complexity of learning single-index models with
known link function depends on a quantity called information exponent. Gradient-based learning of
single-index models with information exponent 1 was studied in Ba et al. (2022); Mousavi-Hosseini
et al. (2023a), and Damian et al. (2022) considered multi-index polynomials where the equivalent of
information exponent is at most 2. For general information exponent, Bietti et al. (2022) provided an
algorithm for gradient-based learning using two-layer neural networks. A feature learning analysis
faithful to SGD without modifications was presented in Glasgow (2024) for learning the XOR.
The counterpart of information exponent for multi-index models, the leap exponent, was introduced
in Abbe et al. (2023). Considering SGD on the squared loss as an example of a Correlational Statistical
Query (CSQ) algorithm, Damian et al. (2023) provided CSQ-optimal algorithms for learning single-
index models. Further improvements to the isotropic sample complexity were achieved by either
considering structured anisotropic Gaussian data (Ba et al., 2023; Mousavi-Hosseini et al., 2023b), or
the sparsity of the hidden direction (Vural & Erdogdu, 2024). The benefits of feature learning have
also been considered for multitask learning (Collins et al., 2024) and in networks with depth larger
than 2 (Nichani et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b). More recently, it was observed that gradient-based
learning can go beyond CSQ algorithms by reusing batches (Dandi et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2024;
Arnaboldi et al., 2024), or by changing the loss function (Joshi et al., 2024). In such cases, the
algorithm becomes an instance of a Statistical Query (SQ) learner, and the sample complexity is
characterized by the generative exponent of the link function (Damian et al., 2024).
While the above works mostly exist in a narrow-width setting where the interaction between neurons is
largely ignored, another line of research focused on the mean-field or wide limits of two-layer neural
networks (Chizat & Bach, 2018; Rotskoff & Vanden-Eijnden, 2018; Mei et al., 2018) for providing
learnability guarantees (Wei et al., 2019; Chizat & Bach, 2020; Abbe et al., 2022; Telgarsky, 2023;
Mahankali et al., 2023; Chen & Ge, 2024). In particular, the mean-field Langevin algorithm provides
global convergence guarantees for two-layer neural networks (Chizat, 2022; Nitanda et al., 2022),
leading to sample complexity linear in an effective dimension for learning sparse parities (Suzuki
et al., 2023; Nitanda et al., 2024) and multi-index models (Mousavi-Hosseini et al., 2024).
Adversarially Robust Learning. The existence of small worst-case or adversarial perturbations that
can significantly change the prediction of deep neural networks was first demonstrated in Szegedy et al.
(2014). Among many defences proposed, one effective approach is adversarial training introduced
by Madry et al. (2018), which is based on solving a min-max problem to perform robust optimization.
One observation regarding this algorithm is that it tends to decrease the standard performance of
the model (Tsipras et al., 2018). Therefore, the following works studied the hardness of robust
learning and established a statistical separation in a simple mixture of Gaussians setting (Schmidt
et al., 2018), or computational separation by proving statistical query lower bounds (Bubeck et al.,


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2019). Further studies focused on exact characterizations of the robust and standard error, as well
as the fundamental and the algorithmic tradeoffs between robustness and accuracy in the context
of linear regression (Javanmard et al., 2020), mixture of Gaussians classification (Javanmard &
Soltanolkotabi, 2022), and in the random features model (Hassani & Javanmard, 2024). Closer to our
work, Javanmard & Mehrabi (2024) show that this tradeoff is mitigated when the data enjoy a low-
dimensional structure. However, they focus on the population adversarial risk in binary classification
and generalized linear models, where the features live on a low-dimensional manifold with known
structure. Here, we consider a multi-index model wherein the response depends on a low-dimensional
projection of inputs, and derive finite-sample bounds for adversarial risk.
In this work, we provide an alternative narrative compared to the line of work above by showing
that in a high-dimensional regression setting, learning multi-index models that are robust against ℓ2
perturbations can be as easy as standard learning. We achieve this result by focusing on the feature
learning capability of neural networks, i.e. their ability to capture low-dimensional projections.
Notation. For Euclidean vectors, ⟨·, ·⟩ and ∥·∥ denote the Euclidean inner product and norm respec-
tively. For tensors, ∥·∥F and ∥·∥ denote the Frobenius and operator norms respectively. We use Sk−1
for the unit sphere in Rk , and τk denotes the uniform probability measure on Sk−1 . For quantities a
and b, a = O(b) means there is an absolute constant C such that a ≤ Cb, and Ω is similarly defined.
Õ and Ω̃ allow C to grow polylogarithmically with problem parameters.

2    P ROBLEM S ETUP : F EATURE L EARNING AND A DVERSARIAL ROBUSTNESS
Statistical Model. Consider a regression setting where the input x ∈ Rd and the target y ∈ R are
generated from a distribution (x, y) ∼ P. For a prediction function f : Rd → R, its population
adversarial risk, where we assume the adversary can perform a worst-case perturbation on the input
with a budget of ε measured in ℓ2 -norm, before passing it to the model, is defined as

                                                                   2
                              AR(f ) := E max (f (x + δ) − y) ,                               (2.1)
                                              ∥δ∥≤ε
where the expectation is over all random variables inside the brackets. Given a (non-parametric)
family of prediction functions F, our goal is to learn a predictor that achieves the optimal adversarial
risk given by
                                        AR∗ := min AR(f ),                                         (2.2)
                                                  f ∈F
We focus on learners of the form of two-layer neural networks with width N , given as
                                   f (x; a, W , b) = a⊤ σ(W x + b),                                 (2.3)
              N                                              N ×d             N
where a ∈ R is the second layer weights and W ∈ R                  and b ∈ R are the first layer weights
and biases. To avoid overloading the notation we use AR(f (·; a, W , b)) = AR(a, W , b). Given
access to n i.i.d. samples {x(i) , y (i) }ni=1 from P, the goal is to learn the network parameters a, W ,
and b in such a way that the quantity AR(a, W , b) is close to the optimal adversarial risk AR∗ .
A long line of recent works has shown that neural networks are particularly efficient in regression
tasks when the target is a function of a low-dimensional projection of the input, see e.g. Bach (2017).
Throughout the paper, we also make the same assumption that the data follows a multi-index model,
                                  E[y | x] = g(⟨u1 , x⟩, . . . , ⟨uk , x⟩),                       (2.4)
              d              k
for all x ∈ R , where g : R → R is the link function, and we assume u1 , . . . , uk are orthonormal
without loss of generality. Let U ∈ Rk×d be an orthonormal matrix whose rows are given by (ui );
we use the shorthand notation g(⟨u1 , x⟩, . . . , ⟨uk , x⟩) := g(U x). In the special case where k = 1,
this model reduces to a single-index model. In this paper, we consider the setting where k ≪ d, and
in particular k = O(1).
Feature Learning. In the context of training two-layer neural networks when learning multi-index
models, feature learning refers to recovering the target directions U via the first layer weights W .
Successful feature learning reduces the effective dimension of the problem from the input dimension
d to the number of target directions k, and circumvents the curse of dimensionality when k ≪ d.
The complexity of recovering U depends on multiple factors such as the choice of algorithm as
well as the properties of the link function. We will provide an overview of some existing results for
recovering U with neural networks in Section 4.2, along with several concrete examples.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3    O PTIMAL R EPRESENTATIONS FOR ROBUST L EARNING

In this section, we demonstrate that under ℓ2 -constrained perturbations, the optimal low-dimensional
representations for robust learning coincides with those in standard setting, both of which are given by
the target directions U . Crucially, our result relies on the following assumption on input distribution.
Assumption 1. Suppose Ũ ∈ R(d−k)×d is any orthonormal matrix whose rows complete the rows of
U into a basis of Rd . Then, y and U x are jointly independent from Ũ x.

The above assumption is quite general. For example, with the notation x∥ := U x and x⊥ := Ũ x, it
holds when y = g(x∥ ) + ς where ς is independent zero-mean noise, and x = U ⊤ U z1 + Ũ ⊤ Ũ z2
for independent vectors z1 , z2 ∈ Rd . We now present a central result below along with its proof. We
discuss the necessity of Assumption 1 and ℓ2 constrained attacks to obtain this result in Appendix B.1.
Theorem 1. Suppose Assumption 1 holds and (2.2) admits a minimizer. Then, there exists a function
f ∗ : Rd → R of the form f ∗ (x) = h(U x) with h : Rk → R given by h(z) = E[f (x) | U x = z] for
some f ∈ F, such that
                                        .AR(f ∗ ) ≤ AR∗ ,                                   (3.1)
with equality when f ∗ ∈ F.

Consequently, to achieve AR∗ , one only needs to (i) learn the target directions U , and (ii) approxi-
mate functions in a k-dimensional subspace rather than d. For two-layer neural networks, the first
layer W recovers U , and the remaining parameters a and b are used to approximate the optimal h.
While this recipe is general, we provide specific implications in the next section.
Proof. We will show that for every f ∈ F, h(z) = E[f (x) | U x = z] gives AR(h(U ·)) ≤ AR(f ).
Then, choosing f to be some minimizer of AR yields the desired result.
Define the residuals ry (x∥ , δ∥ ) := y − h(x∥ + δ∥ ), and rf (x, δ) := f (x + δ) − h(x∥ + δ∥ ). Then,
by a decomposition of the squared loss and the tower property of conditional expectation,

AR(f ) = E(x∥ ,y) Ex⊥ max ry (x∥ , δ∥ )2 + rf (x, δ)2 − 2ry (x∥ , δ∥ )rf (x, δ) x∥ , y
                          ∥δ∥≤ε

        ≥ E(x∥ ,y) max ry (x∥ , δ∥ )2 + Ex⊥ rf (x, δ)2 x∥ , y − 2ry (x∥ , δ∥ ) Ex⊥ rf (x, δ) x∥ , y

                    ∥δ∥≤ε

                                    ry (x∥ , δ∥ )2 + Ex⊥ rf (x, δ)2 x∥ , y − 2ry (x∥ , δ∥ ) Ex⊥ rf (x, δ) x∥ , y .

        ≥ E(x∥ ,y)       max
                    {∥δ∥≤ε,δ⊥ =0}

Since y|x∥ is independent from x⊥ , for any fixed δ, we have E rf (x, δ) | x∥ , y = E rf (x, δ) | x∥ .
Thus, using the notation f (x) = f (x∥ , x⊥ ), provided that δ⊥ = 0, Assumption 1 yields

    h(z + δ∥ ) = E f (x) | x∥ = z + δ∥ = E f (z + δ∥ , x⊥ + δ⊥ ) = E f (x + δ) | x∥ = z ,

for all z ∈ Rk . Plugging in z = x∥ gives E rf (x, δ) | x∥ = 0. Therefore,

                                                ry (x∥ , δ∥ )2 + Ex⊥ rf (x, δ)2 | x∥ , y

              AR(f ) ≥ E(x∥ ,y)       max
                                  {∥δ∥≤ε,δ⊥ =0}

                      ≥ E(x∥ ,y)      max       (y − h(U (x + δ)))2 = AR(h(U ·)),
                                    {∥δ∥≤ε,δ⊥ =0}

where we dropped the constraint δ⊥ = 0 as it does not contribute, which concludes the proof.


A discussion on robust/non-robust feature decomposition. Many prior works in classification
assume that features can be divided into robust and non-robust groups (see e.g. Tsipras et al. (2018);
Ilyas et al. (2019); Kim et al. (2021); Li & Li (2024).) We do not rely on this robust/non-robust
decomposition. Instead, the k relevant features for predicting y can be either robust or non-robust.
The robust training of the second layer ensures the model utilizes the robust subset of these k features,
if such a subset exists, while the first layer performs dimensionality reduction.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Before moving to the√next section, we provide the following remark on proper scaling of ε. Since
E[∥x∥] grows with d, it may seem natural to scale the adversary budget ε with dimension as
well. However, we provide a simple argument on the contrary. Consider the single-index case
y = g(⟨u, x⟩), and let h be the optimal function constructed in Theorem 1, providing the prediction
function x 7→ h(⟨u, x⟩). One can then observe that even a constant order ε is sufficient to incur a
large change in the input of h, e.g., choosing δ = εu perturbs the input of the predictor by ε. Thus,
this justifies the regime where ε is of constant order compared to the input dimension, which is the
focus in the rest of the paper.

4    L EARNING P ROCEDURE AND G UARANTEES
As outlined in the previous section, to robustly learn the target model, standard representations U
suffice. In this section, we consider concrete examples of how a standard feature learning oracle
combined with an adversarially robust second layer training leads to robust learning. We assume
access to the following feature learning oracle to recover U . We will provide instances of practical
implementations of this oracle using standard gradient-based algorithms in Section 4.2.
Definition 2 (DFL). An α-Deterministic Feature Learner (DFL) is an oracle that for every ζ > 0,
given nDFL (ζ) samples from P, returns a weight matrix W = (w1 , . . . , wN )⊤ ∈ RN ×d with
unit-norm rows, such that for all u ∈ span(u1 , . . . , uk ) with ∥u∥ = 1, for some α > 0 we have
                               |{i : ⟨wi , u⟩ ≥ 1 − ζ}|
                                                           ≥ αζ (k−1)/2 .
                                           N
An α-DFL oracle returns weights such that roughly an α-proportion of them align with (and suffi-
ciently cover) the target subspace. By a packing argument, we can show that the best achievable ratio
is α ≤ c(k) for some constant c(k) > 0 depending only on k, which is why we use the normalizing
factor ζ (k−1)/2 above. We show in Section 4.2 that the definition above with a constant order α is
attainable by standard gradient-based algorithms. That said, in the multi-index setting, it is possible
to improve our learning guarantees by considering the following stochastic oracle.
Definition 3 (SFL). An (α,β)-Stochastic Feature Learner (SFL) is an oracle that for every ζ > 0,
given nSFL (ζ) samples from P, returns a random weight matrix W = (w1 , . . . , wN )⊤ ∈ RN ×d with
                                                                                                 2
unit-norm rows, such that there exists S ⊆ [N ] with |S|/N ≥ α satisfying wi − U ⊤ U wi ≤ ζ
                       U wi
                                 i.i.d.     dµ
for i ∈ S . Further, ∥U   wi ∥ i∈S ∼ µ, and dτk ≥ β for some β > 0, where µ is some measure and τk
is uniform, both supported on Sk−1 .
The above oracle essentially defines a random features model in the smaller target subspace, where a
subset of the weights are sampled independently from a distribution that supports all target directions
                            dµ
U . The lower bound on dτ     k
                                ensures sufficient coverage of the low-dimensional space of target
directions. We note that an (α, β)-SFL oracle can be used to directly implement an α-DFL oracle; by
a standard union bound argument, one can show N = Θ̃(1/(αβζ (k−1)/2 )) guarantees the output of
(α, β)-SFL satisfies Definition 2 with high probability. Therefore, while its definition is slightly more
involved, (α, β)-SFL is a more specialized oracle compared to α-DFL.
Once the first layer representation is provided by above oracles, we can fix the biases at some random
initialization, and train the second layer weights a by minimizing the empirical adversarial risk
                                         nFA
                 d W , b) = 1
                                         X
                 AR(a,                        max (f (x(i) + δ (i) ; a, W , b) − y (i) )2 .        (4.1)
                                   nFA i=1 ∥δ(i) ∥≤ε
We formalize the training procedure with two-layer neural networks in Algorithm 1. We highlight that
keeping biases at random initialization while only training the second layer a performs non-linear
function approximation, and has been used in many prior works on feature learning (Damian et al.,
2022; Mousavi-Hosseini et al., 2023b; Oko et al., 2024). Further, while a 7→ AR(a,
                                                                               d W , b) is convex
for fixed W and b since it is a maximum over convex functions, exact training of a in practice may
not be straightforward since the inner maximization is not concave and does not admit a closed-form
solution. In practice, some form of gradient descent ascent algorithm is typically used when training
a (Madry et al., 2018). We leave the study of the computational aspect of that part to future work.
We will make the following standard tail assumptions on the data distribution.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Adversarially robust learning with two-layer NNs.
                                  n   (ζ)+n
Input: ζ, ra , rb , {x(i) , y (i) }i=1
                                    FL       FA
                                                , FL ∈ {α -DFL, (α,β)-SFL}.
 1: Phase 1: Feature
                          Learning
                                       nFA +nFL (ζ)
 2:   W = FL ζ, {x(i) , y (i) }i=n         FA +1
                                                      .
 3: Phase 2: Robust Function Approximation
         iid
 4:   bj ∼ Unif(−rb , rb ) for 1 ≤ j ≤ N .
 5:   â = arg min∥a∥≤ √ra AR(a,    d W , b).
                              N
 6: return (a, W , b)


Assumption 2. Suppose x has zero mean and O(1) subGaussian norm. Furthermore, for all r ≥ 1,
                   r 1/r
it holds that E[|y| ]    ≤ O(rp/2 ) for some constant p ≥ 1.
Note that the condition on y above is mild; for example, it holds for a noisy multi-index model
y = g(U x) + ς, where ς has O(1) subGaussian norm and g grows at most polynomially, i.e.,
|g(·)| ≲ 1 + | · |p . Similarly, we also keep the function class F quite general and provide our first set
of results for a class of pseudo-Lipschitz functions which is introduced below.
Assumption 3. We assume F is a class of functions that are pseudo-Lipschitz along the target
coordinates. Specifically, using the notation f (x) = f (x∥ , x⊥ ) and defining ε1 := 1 ∨ ε, we have
                                                           p−1               p−1
         |f (z1 , x⊥ ) − f (z2 , x⊥ )| ≤ L(x⊥ ) ε1−p            + ε1−p

                                                  1   ∥z1 ∥        1   ∥z2 ∥     + 1 ∥z1 − z2 ∥
for all f ∈ F, all z1 , z2 ∈ Rk , and some constants L and p ≥ 1 such that E[L(x⊥ )] ≤ L.

Remark. The prefactor ε1−p 1    is justified                               function of the form h(z) =
                                             intuitively since the optimal
E[f (x) | U x = z] should satisfy E max∥δ∥≤ε (y − h(U (x + δ)))2 = AR∗ , which is bounded,

and does not grow with ε beyond a certain point. This implies that h must be sufficiently smooth
while its input is perturbed, and in particular, its (local) Lipschitz constant should remain bounded
while ε grows, hence the introduction of the prefactor.
The first result of this section assumes access to α -DFL oracle.
Theorem 4. Suppose Assumptions 1,2,3 hold and the ReLU activation is used. For a tolerance ϵ > 0
define ϵ̃ := ϵ ∧ (ϵ2 /AR∗ ), and for the adversary
                                            √       budget ε  recall ε1 := 1 ∨ ε. Consider
                                                                                   √        Algorithm
                                                                                                       1
with FL = α -DFL oracle, ra = Õ (ε1 / ϵ̃)k+1+1/k /α and rb = Õ ε1 (ε1 / ϵ̃)1+1/k . Then, if
the number of second phase samples nFA , the number of neurons N , and α -DFL error ζ satisfy
                         O(k) !                              O(k) !                           O(k) !
                 ε41

                        ε1                           1        ε1                         ϵ̃
  nFA ≥ Ω̃             √            , N ≥ Ω̃                 √            , ζ ≤ Õ     √             ,
               α 4 ϵ2     ϵ̃                   αζ (k−1)/2       ϵ̃                        ε1
we have AR(â, W , b) ≤ AR∗ + ϵ with probability at least 1 − n−c
                                                               FA where c > 0 is an absolute
constant.
Remark. The total sample complexity of Algorithm 1 is given by the sum of complexities of the
two phases, i.e., ntotal = nFA + nDFL (ζ). We will provide bounds on nDFL (ζ) in Propositions 8
and 10 to ultimately characterize ntotal in Corollaries 9 and 11.
The above theorem states that once the feature learning oracle has recovered the target subspace, the
number of samples and neurons needed for robust learning is independent of the ambient dimension
d. Thus, in a high-dimensional setting, statistical complexity is dominated by the feature learning
oracle, implying that adversarially robust learning is statistically as easy as standard learning.
Arguing about computational complexity is more involved. While the number of neurons required
is independent of d, in its naive implementation, Phase 2 of Algorithm 1 needs to solve inner
maximization problems over Rd , which may be costly. However, once U ∈ Rk×d is estimated in
Phase 1, we can reduce the dimension from d to k by projecting onto span(u1 , . . . , uk ), i.e.,
                        N
                        X                              N
                                                       X
                              aj σ(⟨wj , x⟩ + bj ) ≈         aj σ(⟨U wj , U x⟩ + bj ).
                        j=1                            j=1


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


With this modification, we only need to consider worst-case perturbations over Rk , thus the computa-
tional complexity of Phase 2 will also be independent of the ambient dimension d.
It is possible to remove the dependence on ζ in the number of neurons by instead assuming access to
an (α,β)-SFL oracle, as outlined below.
Theorem 5. Consider the same√setting as Theorem      4, except that we use the (α,β)-SFL oracle in
Algorithm 1 with ra = Õ (ε1 / ϵ̃)k+1+1/k /(αβ) . Then, the sufficient number of second phase
samples nFA , neurons N , and oracle error ζ are given as
                           O(k) !                       O(k) !                            O(k) !
                ε41

                         ε1                       1     ε1                       2   ϵ̃
  nFA ≥ Ω̃               √        , N ≥ Ω̃             √           , ζ ≤ Õ β √                 .
             α 4 β 4 ϵ2    ϵ̃                   αβ 2      ϵ̃                          ε1

Under a Gaussian input assumption, there exist α -DFL and (α,β)-SFL oracles that rely only on
standard gradient-based training such that for a small constant ζ, nDFL (ζ) and nSFL (ζ) both scale
with some polynomial of d, where the exponent depends on certain properties of the link function,
termed as the information or generative exponent (Ben Arous et al., 2021; Damian et al., 2024). We
will provide explicit examples of such algorithms in Section 4.2 to characterize the total sample
complexity ntotal = nFA + nDFL/SFL . For the interested reader, we restate Theorems 4 and 5 in
Appendix B.2 with explicit exponents.

4.1   C OMPETING AGAINST THE O PTIMAL P OLYNOMIAL P REDICTOR

In this section, we restrict F to only polynomials, which allows us to derive more refined bounds on
the number of samples and neurons. Specifically, we make the following assumption.
Assumption 4. Suppose F is the class of d-variate polynomials of degree p for some constant
p > 0. Further, σ is either a polynomial of degree q ≥ p, or the ReLU activation for which we define
q = (p − 1) ∨ 1.

While the ReLU activation is sufficient for function approximation, we also consider polynomial
activations in Assumption 4 since using those, recent works have been able to achieve sharper
theoretical guarantees of recovering the target directions (Lee et al., 2024); we provide a more
detailed discussion in Section 4.2. Note that a priori we do not require a growth constraint on the
coefficients of the polynomials in F. The optimal function h in Theorem 1 automatically chooses a
polynomial with suitably bounded coefficients in order to avoid incurring a large robust risk.
The following result establishes the sample and computational complexity for competing against
polynomial predictors when having access to α -DFL oracle.
Theorem 6. Suppose Assumptions 1,2,4 hold. For a tolerance ϵ > 0 define ϵ̃ := ϵ ∧ (ϵ2 /AR∗ ), and
for the adversary budget ε recall ε1 := 1 ∨ ε. Consider Algorithm 1 with α -DFL oracle, ra = Õ(1),
rb = Õ(ε1 ). If the number of second phase samples nFA , neurons N , and α -DFL error ζ satisfy
                            4(q+1)                          !                    !
                           ε1                        εq+1
                                                       1                     ϵ̃
                 nFA ≥ Ω̃             , N ≥ Ω̃        k−1 √   , ζ ≤ Õ 2(q+1) ,
                            α4 ϵ2                 αζ 2 ϵ̃                 ε1

we have AR(â, W , b) ≤ AR∗ + ϵ with probability at least 1 − n−c
                                                               FA where c > 0 is an absolute
constant.

Consequently, when restricting F to the class of fixed degree polynomials, there is no curse of
dimensionality for sample complexity, even in the latent dimension k. This is consistent with the
standard learning setting, see e.g. Chen & Meka (2020). Further, similar to the general case above,
it is possible to remove the ζ dependence from N when having access to an SFL oracle, thus also
achieving computational complexity as a fixed polynomial independent of the latent dimension.
Theorem 7. In the setting of Theorem 6, consider using Algorithm 1 with an (α,β)-SFL oracle.
Then, the sufficient number of second phase samples, neurons, and oracle error are given as
                                       !                   !                     !
                             4(q+1)                2(q+1)
                            ε1                    ε1                      β 2 ϵ̃
                 nFA ≥ Ω̃                , N ≥ Ω̃           , ζ ≤ Õ 2(q+1) .
                            α 4 β 4 ϵ2             αβ 2 ϵ̃              ε  1


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We remark that the guarantees provided in Theorem 7 are generally better than those in Theorem 6
for large k; yet, they are strictly worse for k = 1. That said, both Theorems 7 and 6 respectively
achieve better sample complexity guarantees compared to their counterparts in the previous section,
namely Theorems 4 and 5, simply by restricting the function class F to polynomials.

4.2   O RACLE I MPLEMENTATIONS FOR F EATURE L EARNING

The task of recovering the target directions U is classical in statistics, and is known as sufficient
dimension reduction (Li & Duan, 1989; Li, 1991), with many dedicated algorithms, see e.g. Kakade
et al. (2011); Dudeja & Hsu (2018); Chen & Meka (2020); Yuan et al. (2023) to name a few. Here,
we focus on algorithms based on neural networks and iterative gradient-based optimization.
While we only consider the case where x is an isotropic Gaussian random vector, recovering the
hidden direction has also been considered for non-isotropic Gaussians (Ba et al., 2023; Mousavi-
Hosseini et al., 2023b) where the additional anisotropic structure in the inputs can provide further
statistical benefits, or non-Gaussian spherically symmetric distributions (Zweig et al., 2023). Our
results readily extend to these settings as well. First, we present the case of single-index polynomials.
Proposition 8 (Lee et al. (2024)). Suppose x ∼ N (0, Id ), k = 1, and g is a polynomial of degree p
where p is constant. Then, there exists an iterative first-order algorithm on two-layer neural networks
(see Algorithm 2) that implements an (α,β)-SFL oracle and an α -DFL oracle, where α = Θ̃(1)
and β = 1. Furthermore, we have nSFL (ζ) = nDFL (ζ) = Õ(d/ζ 2 ).

Combined with Theorems 4-7, we obtain the following total sample complexity guarantee for robustly
learning Gaussian single-index models.
Corollary 9. Consider the data model of Proposition 8, and assume that the adversary budget is
ε = O(1). Then, the total sample complexity of Algorithm 1 to achieve optimal adversarial risk AR∗
with a tolerance ϵ using either α -DFL or (α,β)-SFL oracle in Proposition 8 is given as

 • ntotal = Õ(d/ϵ̃2 ) when choosing F to be polynomials of fixed degree as in Assumption 4, and
   the polynomial activation according to Lee et al. (2024),
 • ntotal = Õ(d/ϵ̃O(1) ) when choosing F to be pseudo-Lipschitz functions as in Assumption 3,

where we recall ϵ̃ := ϵ ∧ (ϵ2 /AR∗ ).

When considering Gaussian single-index models beyond polynomials, we must introduce the concepts
of information and generative exponent to characterize the sample complexityP of recovering the
target direction. Let γ = N (0, 1), and for any g : R → R in L2 (γ), let g = j≥0 αj Hej denote its
Hermite expansion, where Hej is the normalized Hermite polynomial of degree j. The information
exponent of g is defined as s(g) := min{j > 0 : αj ̸= 0}. The generative exponent on the other
hand, is defined as the minimum information exponent attainable by any transformation of g, i.e.
s∗ (g) := minT s(T (g)), where the minimum is over all T ∈ L2 (g#γ). Thus, s∗ (g) ≤ s(g), and in
particular, s∗ = 1 for all polynomials. See Ben Arous et al. (2021); Damian et al. (2024) for details.
There exists an algorithm based on estimating partial traces that implements a 1-DFL (or a (1, 1)-SFL)
                              ∗
oracle with nDFL (ζ) = O(ds /2 + d/ζ 2 ) (Damian et al., 2024). While it may be possible to achieve
a similar sample complexity when training neural networks with a ReLU activation, the state of the
art results for ReLU neural networks so far are only able to control the sample complexity with the
information exponent s, e.g. Bietti et al. (2022) provides a gradient-based algorithm for optimizing a
variant of a two-layer ReLU network that implements 1-DFL with nDFL = O(ds poly(ζ −1 )).
Recovering U with k > 1 is more challenging, and the general picture is that the directions in U are
recovered hierarhically based on each direction’s corresponding complexity, such as in Abbe et al.
(2023). For simplicity, we look at a case that is sufficiently simple for all directions to be learned
simultaneously, while emphasizing that in principle any guarantee for learning the subspace U can
be turned into an implementation of the oracles introduced in the previous section.
Proposition 10 (Damian et al. (2022)). Suppose x ∼ N (0, Id ), g is a polynomial of degree p, and
                                        (∇2 g)
p,k are constant. Further assume σσmax    2
                                    min (∇ g)
                                               ≥ κ for some κ > 0, where σmin and σmax denote the
minimum and maximum singular values, respectively. Then, there exists a first-order algorithm on


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Teacher: ReLU (Known Direction)                 Teacher: Tanh (Known Direction)               Teacher: He2 (Known Direction)
                                                   Full AD training
                                                                                                                    1.05
                    0.48                           W fixed at target u
                                                   W init from u         0.44
Robust Test Risk



                                                                                                                    1.00
                    0.40
                                                                         0.40
                                                                                                                    0.95
                    0.32
                                                                         0.36
                                                                                                                    0.90
                    0.24
                                                                         0.32
                                                                                                                    0.85
                                0       1500          3000      4500            0       1500          3000   4500          0         1500          3000    4500
                                               Iterations                                      Iterations                                   Iterations


                                Teacher: ReLU (Unknown Direction)               Teacher: Tanh (Unknown Direction)          Teacher: He2 (Unknown Direction)
                                               Full AD training
                                               W fixed at SD training    0.45
                          0.5                  W init from SD training                                              1.04
       Robust Test Risk


                                                                         0.40
                                                                                                                    1.00
                          0.4

                                                                         0.35                                       0.96
                          0.3

                                                                         0.30                                       0.92
                                0       1500          3000      4500            0       1500          3000   4500          0         2000         4000    6000
                                               Iterations                                      Iterations                                   Iterations


Figure 1: The adversarial test error of a two-layer ReLU network as a function of the number of
adversarial training iterations, where each iteration is performed on a batch of independent 300
samples, except 500 samples for He2 with unknown direction to reduce variance. Full AD training
performs adversarial training on all layers from random initialization. SD training is standard training,
which provides a better initialization for W before performing adversarial training. We use the
adversary budget ε = 1 for all experiments, each of which are averaged over three runs.


two-layer ReLU neural networks (see Algorithm 3) that implements an (α,β)-SFL and an α -DFL
oracle, where α = 1 and β ≥ cκ for some constant cκ > 0 depending only κ. Further, we have
nSFL (ζ) = nDFL (ζ) = Õ(d2 + d/ζ 2 ).

Combining the above proposition with Theorems 4-7, we obtain the following total sample complexity
for robustly learning Gaussian multi-index models.
Corollary 11. Under the data model of Proposition 10, assume that the adversary budget is ε = O(1).
Then, the total sample complexity of Algorithm 1 to achieve optimal adversarial risk AR∗ with a
tolerance ϵ using either α -DFL or (α,β)-SFL oracle in Proposition 10 is given as

                   • ntotal = Õ(d2 + d/ϵ̃2 ) when choosing F to be polynomials of fixed degree as in Assumption 4,
                     and the polynomial activation according to Lee et al. (2024),
                   • ntotal = Õ(d2 + d/ϵ̃O(k) ) when choosing F to be pseudo-Lipschitz functions as in Assumption 3,

where we recall ϵ̃ := ϵ ∧ (ϵ2 /AR∗ ).

Remark. We highlight that the gap in the total sample complexity of Corollary 9 and Corollary 11 is
due to more efficient guarantees for recovering the hidden direction for single-index polynomials. It
is an open question whether such efficient recovery is also possible for multi-index polynomials.


 5                              N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS
As a proof of concept, we also provide small-scale numerical studies on Gaussian data to support
intuitions derived from our theory. Additional experiments on real datasets are provided in Appendix E.


                                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We consider a single-index
                      √       setting, where the teacher non-linearity is given by either ReLU, tanh, or
               2
He2(z) = (z − 1)/ 2 which is the normalized second Hermite polynomial. The student network
has N = 100 neurons, and the input is sampled from x ∼ N (0, Id ) with d = 100. We implement
adversarial training in the following manner. At each iteration, we sample a new batch of i.i.d. training
examples. We estimate the adversarial perturbations on this batch by performing 5 steps of signed
projected gradient ascent, with a stepsize of 0.1. We then perform a gradient descent step on the
perturbed batch. To estimate the robust test risk, we fix a test set of 10,000 i.i.d. samples, and use 20
iterations to estimate the adversarial perturbation. Because of the online nature of the algorithm, the
total number of samples used is the batch size times the number of iterations taken.
The first row of Figure 1 compares the performance of three different approaches. Full AD training
refers to adversarially training all layers from random initialization, where first layer weights are
initialized uniformly on the sphere Sd−1, second layer weights are initialized i.i.d. from N (0, 1/N 2 ),
and biases are initialized i.i.d. from N (0, 1). In the two other approaches, we initialize all first layer
weights to the target direction u. In one approach we fix this direction and do not train it, while in
the other, we allow the training of first layer weights from this initialization. As can be seen from
Figure 1, there is a considerable improvement in initializing from u, which is consistent with our
theory that this direction provides a Bayes optimal projection for robust learning.
In the practical setting where we do not have the knowledge of u, we consider the following
alternative. We first perform standard training on the network, i.e. assume ε = 0 (denoted in Figure 1
by SD training). We can then either fix the first layer weights to these directions, or further train
them adversarially from this initialization. Note that for a fair comparison with the full AD method,
we provide the same random bias and second layer weight initializations across all methods at the
beginning of the adversarial training stage. Even though this approach is not perfect at estimating the
unknown direction, it still provides a considerable benefit over adversarially training all layers from
random initialization, as demonstrated in the second row of Figure 1.


6      C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we initiated a theoretical study of the role of feature learning in adversarial robustness
of neural networks. Under ℓ2 -constrained perturbations, we proved that projecting onto the latent
subspace of a multi-index model is sufficient for achieving Bayes optimal adversarial risk with respect
to the squared loss, provided that the index directions are statistically independent from the rest
of the directions in the input space. Remarkably, this subspace can be estimated through standard
feature learning with neural networks, thus turning a high-dimensional robust learning problem into a
low-dimensional one. As a result, under the assumption of having access to a feature learning oracle
which returns an estimate of this subspace, and can be implemented e.g. by training the first-layer of
a two-layer neural network, we proved that robust learning of multi-index models is possible with a
number of (additional) samples and neurons independent from the ambient dimension.
We conclude by mentioning several open questions that arise from this work.

    • Stronger notions of adversarial attacks such as ℓ∞ -norm constraints have been widely considered
      in empirical works. It remains open to understand optimal low-dimensional representations under
      such perturbations as well as their implications on sample complexity.
    • While our work demonstrates that standard training is sufficient for the first layer, it is unclear
      what kind of representation is learned when all layers are trained adversarially. In particular,
      Figure 1 suggests that adversarial training of the first layer may be suboptimal in this setting, even
      when infinitely many samples are available during training.
    • Since our main motivation was to show independence from input dimension, the dependence
      of our bounds on the final robust test risk suboptimality ϵ are potentially improvable by a more
      careful analysis. It is an interesting direction to obtain a sharper dependency and investigate the
      optimality of such dependence on the tolerance ϵ.

Finally, it is worth emphasizing that our theorems can be easily adapted to other standard feature
learning oracles. As such, based on the training procedure used and its complexity in feature learning,
our results are amenable to further improvements in their total sample complexity.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
AJ was partially supported by the Sloan fellowship in mathematics, the NSF CAREER Award
DMS-1844481, the NSF Award DMS-2311024, an Amazon Faculty Research Award, an Adobe
Faculty Research Award and an iORB grant form USC Marshall School of Business. MAE was
partially supported by the NSERC Grant [2019-06167], the CIFAR AI Chairs program, and the
CIFAR Catalyst grant.

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. The merged-staircase property: a
 necessary and nearly sufficient condition for sgd learning of sparse functions on two-layer neural
 networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2022.
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix-Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. Sgd learning on neural networks:
 leap complexity and saddle-to-saddle dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11055, 2023.
Luca Arnaboldi, Yatin Dandi, Florent Krzakala, Luca Pesce, and Ludovic Stephan. Repetita iu-
  vant: Data repetition allows sgd to learn high-dimensional multi-index functions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.15459, 2024.
Jimmy Ba, Murat A Erdogdu, Taiji Suzuki, Zhichao Wang, Denny Wu, and Greg Yang. High-
  dimensional Asymptotics of Feature Learning: How One Gradient Step Improves the Representa-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01445, 2022.
Jimmy Ba, Murat A Erdogdu, Taiji Suzuki, Zhichao Wang, and Denny Wu. Learning in the presence
  of low-dimensional structure: a spiked random matrix perspective. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Francis Bach. Breaking the curse of dimensionality with convex neural networks. The Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 18(1):629–681, 2017.
Boaz Barak, Benjamin L Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham Kakade, Eran Malach, and Cyril Zhang.
  Hidden Progress in Deep Learning: SGD Learns Parities Near the Computational Limit. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2207.08799, 2022.
Peter L Bartlett, Dylan J Foster, and Matus J Telgarsky. Spectrally-normalized margin bounds for
  neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Gerard Ben Arous, Reza Gheissari, and Aukosh Jagannath. Online stochastic gradient descent on
  non-convex losses from high-dimensional inference. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 22:106–1, 2021.
Alberto Bietti, Joan Bruna, Clayton Sanford, and Min Jae Song. Learning single-index models with
  shallow neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Sébastien Bubeck, Yin Tat Lee, Eric Price, and Ilya Razenshteyn. Adversarial examples from
   computational constraints. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 831–840.
   PMLR, 2019.
Sitan Chen and Raghu Meka. Learning polynomials in few relevant dimensions. In Conference on
  Learning Theory, 2020.
Ziang Chen and Rong Ge. Mean-field analysis for learning subspace-sparse polynomials with
  gaussian input. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08948, 2024.
Lénaı̈c Chizat. Convergence rates of gradient methods for convex optimization in the space of
   measures. Open Journal of Mathematical Optimization, 3:1–19, 2022.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. On the Global Convergence of Gradient Descent for Over-
  parameterized Models using Optimal Transport. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2018.
Lénaı̈c Chizat and Francis Bach. Implicit Bias of Gradient Descent for Wide Two-layer Neural
   Networks Trained with the Logistic Loss. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lenaic Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. On Lazy Training in Differentiable Programming.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Liam Collins, Hamed Hassani, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, Aryan Mokhtari, and Sanjay Shakkottai.
  Provable multi-task representation learning by two-layer relu neural networks. Proceedings of
  machine learning research, 235:9292, 2024.
Alex Damian, Eshaan Nichani, Rong Ge, and Jason D Lee. Smoothing the landscape boosts the
  signal for sgd: Optimal sample complexity for learning single index models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Alex Damian, Loucas Pillaud-Vivien, Jason D Lee, and Joan Bruna. The computational complexity
  of learning gaussian single-index models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05529, 2024.
Alexandru Damian, Jason Lee, and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi. Neural Networks can Learn Representa-
  tions with Gradient Descent. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2022.
Yatin Dandi, Florent Krzakala, Bruno Loureiro, Luca Pesce, and Ludovic Stephan. Learning two-layer
  neural networks, one (giant) step at a time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18270, 2023.
Yatin Dandi, Emanuele Troiani, Luca Arnaboldi, Luca Pesce, Lenka Zdeborová, and Florent Krzakala.
  The benefits of reusing batches for gradient descent in two-layer networks: Breaking the curse of
  information and leap exponents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03220, 2024.
Rishabh Dudeja and Daniel Hsu. Learning single-index models in gaussian space. In Conference On
  Learning Theory, pp. 1887–1930. PMLR, 2018.
Margalit Glasgow. SGD finds then tunes features in two-layer neural networks with near-optimal
 sample complexity: A case study in the XOR problem. In The Twelfth International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2024.
Hamed Hassani and Adel Javanmard. The curse of overparametrization in adversarial training:
  Precise analysis of robust generalization for random features regression. The Annals of Statistics,
  52(2):441–465, 2024.
Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander
  Madry. Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are features. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clement Hongler. Neural Tangent Kernel: Convergence and
  Generalization in Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Adel Javanmard and Mohammad Mehrabi. Adversarial robustness for latent models: Revisiting the
  robust-standard accuracies tradeoff. Operations Research, 72(3):1016–1030, 2024.
Adel Javanmard and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi. Precise statistical analysis of classification accuracies for
  adversarial training. The Annals of Statistics, 50(4):2127–2156, 2022.
Adel Javanmard, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, and Hamed Hassani. Precise tradeoffs in adversarial training
  for linear regression. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2034–2078. PMLR, 2020.
Nirmit Joshi, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Nathan Srebro. On the complexity of learning sparse
  functions with statistical and gradient queries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05622, 2024.
Sham M Kakade, Varun Kanade, Ohad Shamir, and Adam Kalai. Efficient learning of generalized
  linear and single index models with isotonic regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 24, 2011.
Junho Kim, Byung-Kwan Lee, and Yong Man Ro. Distilling robust and non-robust features in
  adversarial examples by information bottleneck. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34, 2021.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11), 1998.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jason D. Lee, Kazusato Oko, Taiji Suzuki, and Denny Wu. Neural network learns low-dimensional
  polynomials with sgd near the information-theoretic limit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01581, 2024.

Binghui Li and Yuanzhi Li. Adversarial Training Can Provably Improve Robustness: Theoretical
  Analysis of Feature Learning Process Under Structured Data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08503,
  2024.

Ker-Chau Li. Sliced inverse regression for dimension reduction. Journal of the American Statistical
  Association, 1991.

Ker-Chau Li and Naihua Duan. Regression Analysis Under Link Violation. The Annals of Statistics,
  1989.

Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2018.

Arvind Mahankali, Haochen Zhang, Kefan Dong, Margalit Glasgow, and Tengyu Ma. Beyond ntk
  with vanilla gradient descent: A mean-field analysis of neural networks with polynomial width,
  samples, and time. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.

Song Mei, Andrea Montanari, and Phan-Minh Nguyen. A mean field view of the landscape of two-
  layer neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(33):E7665–E7671,
  2018.

Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini, Sejun Park, Manuela Girotti, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Murat A Erdogdu.
  Neural networks efficiently learn low-dimensional representations with SGD. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a.

Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini, Denny Wu, Taiji Suzuki, and Murat A Erdogdu. Gradient-based feature
  learning under structured data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023b.

Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini, Denny Wu, and Murat A Erdogdu. Learning multi-index models with
  neural networks via mean-field langevin dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07254, 2024.

Eshaan Nichani, Alex Damian, and Jason D Lee. Provable guarantees for nonlinear feature learning
  in three-layer neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.

Atsushi Nitanda, Denny Wu, and Taiji Suzuki. Convex analysis of the mean field langevin dynamics.
  In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 9741–9757. PMLR, 2022.

Atsushi Nitanda, Kazusato Oko, Taiji Suzuki, and Denny Wu. Improved statistical and computational
  complexity of the mean-field langevin dynamics under structured data. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Kazusato Oko, Yujin Song, Taiji Suzuki, and Denny Wu. Learning sum of diverse features: compu-
  tational hardness and efficient gradient-based training for ridge combinations. In Conference on
  Learning Theory. PMLR, 2024.

Gilles Pisier. Remarques sur un résultat non publié de b. maurey. Séminaire d’Analyse fonctionnelle
  (dit” Maurey-Schwartz”), pp. 1–12, 1981.

Grant M Rotskoff and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Neural networks as Interacting Particle Systems:
  Asymptotic convexity of the Loss Landscape and Universal Scaling of the Approximation Error.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00915, 2018.

Ludwig Schmidt, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Kunal Talwar, and Aleksander Madry. Ad-
  versarially robust generalization requires more data. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 31, 2018.

Johannes Schmidt-Hieber. Nonparametric regression using deep neural networks with ReLU activa-
  tion function. The Annals of Statistics, 48(4):1875 – 1897, 2020.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Taiji Suzuki, Denny Wu, Kazusato Oko, and Atsushi Nitanda. Feature learning via mean-field
  langevin dynamics: classifying sparse parities and beyond. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In The International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2014.
Matus Telgarsky. Feature selection and low test error in shallow low-rotation relu networks. In The
 Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Dimitris Tsipras, Shibani Santurkar, Logan Engstrom, Alexander Turner, and Aleksander Madry.
  Robustness may be at odds with accuracy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12152, 2018.
Nuri Mert Vural and Murat A. Erdogdu. Pruning is optimal for learning sparse features in high-
  dimensions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08658, 2024.
Guillaume Wang, Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini, and Lénaı̈c Chizat. Mean-field langevin dynamics
  for signed measures via a bilevel approach. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2024a.
Zihao Wang, Eshaan Nichani, and Jason D. Lee. Learning hierarchical polynomials with three-layer
  neural networks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024b.
Colin Wei, Jason D Lee, Qiang Liu, and Tengyu Ma. Regularization matters: Generalization and
  optimization of neural nets vs their induced kernel. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019.
Jiancong Xiao, Qi Long, Weijie Su, et al. Bridging the gap: Rademacher complexity in robust
   and standard generalization. In The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
   5074–5075. PMLR, 2024.
Gan Yuan, Mingyue Xu, Samory Kpotufe, and Daniel Hsu. Efficient estimation of the central mean
  subspace via smoothed gradient outer products. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15469, 2023.
Tong Zhang. Covering number bounds of certain regularized linear function classes. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 2(Mar):527–550, 2002.
Aaron Zweig, Loucas Pillaud-Vivien, and Joan Bruna. On single-index models beyond gaussian data.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     G RADIENT-BASED N EURAL F EATURE L EARNING A LGORITHMS
In this section, we will provide examples of implementations of the feature learner oracles introduced
in Section 4 using gradient-based training of two-layer neural networks. First, we look at the
algorithm provided by Oko et al. (2024), which we restate here as Algorithm 2, for the case where g
is a polynomial of degree p. Consider the following two-layer neural network with zero bias
                                                              N
                                                              X
                                         f (x; a, W ) =                aj σj (⟨wj , x⟩).
                                                              j=1
                                                                                                Pq
Note that we allow the activation to vary based on neuron. Specifically, we let σj =              l=1 βj,l Hel ,
                                                                             i.i.d.
where Hej is the jth normalized Hermite polynomial, βj,l ∼ Unif({±rl }) for appropriately chosen
rl , and q ≥ Cp , see Oko et al. (2024, Lemma 3) for details. Now, we consider the following algorithm.

Algorithm 2 Gradient-Based Feature Learner for Single-Index Polynomials (Oko et al., 2024,
Algorithm 1, Phase I).
                             −1
Input: T , step size (η t )Tt=0 , momentum parameters (ζjt ), ra .
         i.i.d.                        i.i.d.
 1: wj0 ∼ Unif(Sd−1 ),               aj ∼ Unif({±ra /N }),                  ∀j ∈ [N ].
 2: (x(0) , y (0) ) ∼ P
 3: for t = 0, . . . , T − 1 do
 4:   if t > 0 and t is even then
 5:      Draw (x(t/2) , y (t/2) ) ∼ P
 6:      wjt ← wjt − ζjt (wjt − wjt−2 ),              ∀ j ∈ [N ]
                wt
 7:       wjt ← wjt          ∀ j ∈ [N ]
               ∥ ∥    j
 8:   end if
 9:   wjt+1 ← wjt − ηt ∇Swj (f (x(⌊t/2⌋) ; a, W t ) − y (⌊t/2⌋) )2
10: end for
                           T ⊤
11: return (w0T , . . . , wN )

Note that ∇S f (w) = (I − ww⊤ )∇f (w) denotes the spherical gradient. Essentially, Algorithm 2
takes two gradient steps on each new sample, and in the even iterations performs a certain interpolation.
Proper choice of hyperparameters in the above algorithm leads to Proposition 8.
Next, we consider the algorithm of Damian et al. (2022), which we restate here as Algorithm 3, for
the case where g is a multi-index polynomial.

Algorithm 3 Gradient-Based Feature Learner for Multi-Index Polynomials (Damian et al., 2022,
Algorithm 1, Adapted)
Input: {x(i) , y (i) }ni=1
                        FL
                           , ra
        i.i.d.                         i.i.d.
 1: aj ∼ Unif({±ra }), wj0 ∼ Unif(Sd−1 ), aN −j = −aj , wN −j = wj0 ,                      ∀ j ∈ [N/2].
             1
                  PnFL     (i)                  1
                                                    PnFL     (i)   (i)
 2: α ← nFL        i=1 y         ,   β ← nFL         i=1 y         x
 3: y (i) ← y (i) − α − β, x(i) , ∀ i ∈ [nFL ].
                     PnFL
 4: W ← −∇W n1                  (i)    0
                       i=1 (f (x ; a, W ) − y)
                                                2
            wi
 5: wi ← ∥wi ∥ , ∀ i ∈ [N ]
 6: return (w0 , . . . , wN )⊤


After performing a preprocessing on data, Algorithm 3 essentially performs one gradient descent
step with weight decay, when the regularizer of the weight decay is the inverse of step size, thus
cancelling out initialization and leaving only gradient as the estimate. Damian et al. (2022) prove
that, with a sample complexity of nFL = Õ(d2 + d/ζ 2 ), the output of Algorithm 3 satisfies
                                    U ⊤ HU wi0

                              wi ,                 ≥ 1 − ζ, ∀i ∈ [N ],
                                   ∥U ⊤ HU wi0 ∥

                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


witi high probability, where H = E ∇2 g(U x) . Thus, for a full-rank H, the output of Algorithm 3
satisfies the definition of a (1, β)SFL oracle for a constant β > 0 depending only on the conditioning
of H and the number of indices k.

B     A DDITIONAL N OTATIONS AND D ETAILS OF S ECTION 4
Throughout the appendix, we will assume the activation satisfies σ(0) = 0 for simplicity of presenta-
tion, without loss of generality. We will also assume that
                                                      q̄−1         q̄−1
                      |σ(z1 ) − σ(z2 )| ≤ Lσ (|z1 |          + |z2 |      + 1)|z1 − z2 |,       (B.1)
for all z1 , z2 ∈ R and some absolute constant Lσ . In the case of ReLU, we have q̄ = 1 and Lσ = 1.
For polynomial activations, q̄ is the same as the degree of the polynomial. For a set of parameters ψ
(e.g. ψ = q, k), we will use Cψ to denote a generic constant whose value depends only on ψ and may
change from line to line.

B.1   N ECESSITY OF ℓ2 NORM AND A SSUMPTION 1 FOR T HEOREM 1

In this section, we demonstrate that both restricting the attack norm and Assumption 1 are necessary
for the statement of Theorem 1 to hold.
First, we focus on violating Assumption 1. Suppose x ∼ N (0, Σ). Suppose k = 1, y = ⟨u1 , x⟩,
and let F be the class of linear predictors. Then, the adversarial risk associated to the predictor
x 7→ ⟨w, x⟩ is given by
                                                           r
                             1/2
                                            2
                                                2     2       2
           AR(⟨w, ·⟩) = Σ (w − u1 ) + ε ∥w∥ + 2                  Σ1/2 (w − u1 ) ∥w∥.
                                                              π
From here, one can verify that the optimal weight w∗ satisfies w∗ = (Σ + aεId )−1 Σu1 for some
a > 0. Note that w∗ is only in the direction of u1 if u1 is an eigenvector of Σ, which would imply
⟨u1 , x⟩ is statistically independent from ⟨v, x⟩ for every v ∈ Rd orthogonal to u1 .
Next, we replace the ℓ2 constraint for the adversary with an ℓ∞ constraint, i.e. we define

                           AR∞ (f ) = E max (f (x + δ) − y)2 .
                                             ∥δ∥∞ ≤ε∞

Suppose x ∼ N (0, Id ), and let y = ⟨u1 , x⟩ and F be linear as above. Then, we have
                                                            r
                                           2           2        2
               AR(⟨w, ·⟩) = ∥w − u1 ∥ + ε∞ ∥w∥1 + 2               ∥w − u1 ∥∥w∥1 .
                                                                π
Then, assuming all the coordinates of u1 are bounded away from zero and for sufficiently small ε∞ ,
one can show w∗ = u1 − cε∞ sign(u1 ) for some c > 0, which will no longer necessary be in the
direction of u1 .

B.2   C OMPLETE V ERSIONS OF T HEOREMS IN S ECTION 4

We first restate Theorem 4 with explicit exponents.
Theorem 12. Suppose Assumptions 1,2, and 3 hold. For any ϵ > 0, define ϵ̃ :=  √ϵ ∧  (ϵ2 /AR∗  ), and
recall ε1 := 1 ∨ ε. Consider Algorithm 1 with the α -DFL oracle, ra = Õ (ε1 / ϵ̃)k+1+1/k /α , and
                 √
rb = Õ ε1 (ε1 / ϵ̃)1+1/k . Then, if the number of second phase samples nFA , number of neurons N ,
and α -DFL error ζ satisfy
             ε4 ε2                                 1      ε1  k+3+2/k               ϵ̃
                      2k+4+4/k                                                           k+2+1/k
 nFA ≥ Ω̃ 41 2 1                 , N ≥ Ω̃                √              , ζ  ≤ Õ                   ,
             α ϵ ϵ̃                           αζ (k−1)/2    ϵ̃                      ε21
we have AR(â, W , b) ≤ AR∗ + ϵ with probability at least 1 − n−c   FA where c > 0 is an absolute
constant. The total sample complexity of Algorithm 1 is given by ntotal = nFA + nDFL (ζ).

Similarly, we can restate Theorem 5 with explicit exponents.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 13. Consider the same√setting as Theorem
                                     k+1+1/k
                                                    12, except that we use the (α,β)-SFL oracle
in Algorithm 1 with ra = Õ (ε1 / ϵ̃)        /(αβ) . Then, if the number of second phase samples
nFA , number of neurons N , and α -DFL error ζ satisfy
             ε4      ε2  2k+4+4/k               1 ε2
                                                                                 2 ϵ̃ k+2+1/k

                                                       1 k+3+2/k
 nFA ≥ Ω̃ 4 14 2 1

                                    , N ≥ Ω̃                        , ζ ≤ Õ   β                .
            α β ϵ ϵ̃                           αβ 2 ϵ̃                             ε21
The total sample complexity in this case is given by ntotal = nFA + nSFL (ζ).

The proof of both theorems follows from combining the results of the following sections. Since both
proofs are similar, we only present the proof of Theorem 12. The proof of Theorems 6 and 7 can be
obtained in a similar manner.
Proof. [Proof of Theorem 12] The proof is based on decomposing the suboptimality into generaliza-
tion and approximation terms, namely
        AR(â, W , b) − AR∗ = AR(â, W , b) − AR(a∗ , W , b) + AR(a∗ , W , b) − AR∗ ,
where a∗ := min∥a∥≤ra /√N AR(a, W , b), thus we can see the first term above as generalization
error, and the second term as approximation error.
From Proposition 22, we have AR(â, W , b) − AR(a∗ , W , b) ≤ ϵ/2 as soon as n ≥ Ω̃(ra4 (ε41 +
rb4 )/ϵ2 ) (recall that q = 1 here, since we are considering the ReLU activation). For the approximation
                                                                                           √
error, we can use Proposition 36, which guarantees    √   there exists a∗ with ∥a∗ ∥ ≤ ra / N such that
AR(a∗ , W , b) − AR∗ ≤ ϵ/2 with ra ≤ Õ((ε1 / ϵ̃)k+1+1/k /α), as soon as
                      ϵ̃                                                  1      ε1  k+3+2/k
                           k+2+1/k
            ζ ≤ Õ      2            ,        and           N ≥ Ω̃ (k−1)/2 √                   ,
                      ε1                                             ζ        α    ϵ̃
                                            √
provided that we choose rb = Θ̃(ε1 (ε1 / ϵ̃)1+1/k ). Plugging the value of ra and rb in the bound for
n completes the proof.


C     G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS
We will first focus on proving a generalization bound for bounded and Lipschitz losses, and then
extend the results to cover the squared loss. In this section, we will typically use n to refer to nFA ,
the number of Phase 2 samples.

C.1   G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS FOR B OUNDED L IPSCHITZ L OSSES

Let us focus on a general Cℓ Lipschitz loss ℓ(f (·; a, W , b) − y) for now. Later, we will argue how
to extend the results of this section to the squared error loss. Our uniform convergence argument
depends on the covering number of the family of adversarial loss functions. Let Θ ⊆ RN be the set
of second layer weights, to be determined later. This family is given by
                 L(W , b) = {(x, y) 7→ max ℓ(f (x + δ; a, W , b) − y) : a ∈ Θ}.
                                            ∥δ∥≤ε

For brevity, we will also use L to denote L(W , b), but we highlight that W and b are fixed at this
stage. We define the following metric over this family
                                                        n
                                                     1X
               ∀˜l, l˜′ ∈ L(W , b),       ˜  ˜′ 2
                                      dL (l, l )  :=       (ℓ̃(x(i) , y (i) ) − ℓ̃′ (x(i) , y (i) ))2 .
                                                     n i=1

We say S ⊆ L is an ϵ-cover of L if for every ˜l ∈ L, there exists ˜l′ ∈ S such that dL (˜l, ˜l′ ) ≤ ϵ.
The ϵ-covering number of L is the least cardinality among all ϵ-covers of L, which we denote
by C(L, dL , ϵ). Note that since L is paramterized by a, constructing such a covering reduces to
constructing a finite set over Θ.
Therefore, we define the following metric over Θ,
                                     n
                                  1X                                                                     2
∀ a, a′ ∈ Θ,    dΘ (a, a′ )2 :=          max f (x(i) + δ (i) ; a, W , b) − f (x(i) + δ (i) ; a′ , W , b) .
                                  n i=1 ∥δ(i) ∥≤ϵ


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We can similarly define the ϵ-covering number of Θ with respect to the metric dΘ as C(Θ, dΘ , ϵ).
The following lemma relates the covering numbers of L and Θ.
Lemma 14. We have C(L, dL , ϵ) ≤ C(Θ, dΘ , ϵ/Cℓ ) for all ϵ > 0.

Proof. We will use the following fact in the proof. For any F1 , F2 : S → R, we have

                             max F1 (δ1 ) − max F2 (δ2 ) ≤ max|F1 (δ) − F2 (δ)|.                      (C.1)
                             δ1 ∈S            δ2 ∈S             δ∈S

This is true because

                           max F1 (δ1 ) − max F2 (δ2 ) ≤ max F1 (δ1 ) − F2 (δ1 ) ,
                           δ1 ∈S            δ2 ∈S            δ1 ∈S

and the other direction holds by symmetry. This trick is used to relate the adversarial loss to its
non-adversarial counterpart, e.g. in Xiao et al. (2024, Lemma 5).
Now, we will show that an ϵ/Cℓ cover for Θ implies an ϵ cover for L. We will supress dependence
on the fixed W and b in the notation. Let SΘ be an ϵ/Cℓ cover of Θ with respect to the dΘ metric.
Then, we define S via
                            S = {(x, y) 7→ max ℓ(f (x + δ; a) − y) : a ∈ SΘ }.
                                              ∥δ∥≤ε

To show S is an ϵ cover of L, consider an arbitrary ℓ̃(x, y) = max∥δ∥≤ε ℓ(f (x + δ; a) − y). Suppose
a′ is the closest element to a in SΘ , and let ℓ̃′ (x, y) = max∥δ∥≤ε ℓ(f (x + δ; a′ ) − y). Then,
                         n
                      1 X                   (i)                              (i)
                                                                                                2
   dL (ℓ̃, ℓ̃′ )2 =           max ℓ(f (x + δ1 ; a) − y (i) ) − max ℓ(f (x + δ2 ; a′ ) − y (i) )
                      n i=1 ∥δ1(i) ∥≤ε                          (i)
                                                              ∥δ2 ∥≤ε
                         n
                      1X                                                                          2
                ≤             max ℓ(f (x + δ (i) ; a) − y (i) ) − ℓ(f (x + δ (i) ; a′ ) − y (i) )
                      n i=1 ∥δ(i) ∥≤ε
                          n
                      Cℓ2 X                                               2
                ≤             max f (x + δ (i) ; a) − f (x + δ (i) ; a′ )
                      n i=1 ∥δ(i) ∥≤ε
                ≤ Cℓ2 dΘ (a, a′ )2 ≤ ϵ2 ,
where we used (C.1) for the first inequality.

To construct an ϵ-cover of Θ, we depend on the Maurey sparsification lemma (Pisier, 1981), which
has been used in the literature for providing covering numbers for linear classes (Zhang, 2002) and
neural networks via matrix covering, see e.g. Bartlett et al. (2017).
Lemma 15 (Maurey Sparsification Lemma, (Zhang,Pm2002, Lemma 1)). Let H be a Hilbert space
with norm ∥·∥, let u ∈ H be represented by u = j=1 αj vj , where αj ≥ 0 and ∥vj ∥ ≤ b for all
                  Pm
j ∈ [m], and α = j=1 αj ≤ 1. Then, for every k ≥ 1, there exist non-negative integers k1 , . . . , km ,
          Pm
such that j=1 kj ≤ k and
                                                m                           2
                                             1X         2  αb2 − ∥u∥
                                       u−          kj vj ≤           .
                                             k j=1              k

Then, we have the following upper bound on the the covering number of Θ.
Lemma 16. Suppose σ satisfies (B.1), Θ = {∥a∥1 ≤ ra }, and additionally ∥wi ∥ ≤ rw and |bi | ≤ rb
for all 1 ≤ i ≤ N . Then we have
                                             n                                           o
                                               (q̄)                    (2)
                            Cq̄ L2σ ra2 log N TW ,X + rw  ε + rb2q̄ + TW ,X + rw
                                                       2q̄ 2q̄                 2 2
                                                                                 ε + rb2
         log C(Θ, dΘ , ϵ) ≤                                                                ,
                                                           ϵ2
          (q̄)                    Pn             2q̄
where TW ,X := max1≤j≤N n1 i=1 ⟨wj , xi ⟩ .


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Given some positive integer k > 0, let SΘ be given by the following
            nr                                                                          N            N            o
                a
                                                                                        X            X
     SΘ =           (k1 − k1′ , k2 − k2′ , . . . , kN − kN
                                                         ′ ⊤
                                                           ) : ∀i, ki , ki′ ≥ 0,              ki +         ki′ = k .
               k                                                                        i=1          i=1

                   n×d
Let X, ∆ ∈ R      be the matrices with (xi ) and (δi ) as rows respectively. Let A = σ((X +
∆)W ⊤ + 1n b⊤ ) ∈ Rn×N . Then,
   n                                                                              N                                         2
1X                                                            2 1           2  1 X
      f (x(i) +δ (i) ; a, W , b)−f (x(i) +δ (i) ; a′ , W , b) = ∥A(a − a′ )∥ =       Ai (ai − a′i )                             ,
n i=1                                                           n              n i=1

where Ai = σ((X + ∆)wi + 1n bi ) is the ith column of A. We are going to choose a′ from SΘ . To
that end, define

                                                   Ãi = sign(ai )Ai .
                                                                                                              Pn
By Maurey’s sparsification lemma (Xiao et al., 2024, Lemma 13), there exist k̃i ≥ 0 with                        i=1 k̃i =
k such that
                                N                N          2
                               X              ra X            r 2 b2
                                   |ai |Ãi −        k̃i Ãi ≤ a ,
                               i=1
                                              k i=1             k

where ∥Ai ∥ ≤ b for all i. We will then choose

                            k̃i , sign(ai ) ≥ 0,                            0, sign(ai ) ≥ 0,
                  ki =                           ,              ki′ =                           .
                            0, sign(ai ) < 0                                k̃i , sign(ai ) < 0
                       PN                                                         ′
Therefore, we have         i=1 k̃i = k. Finally, with the constructed (ki ) and (ki ), let
                                             ra
                                     a′ =       (k1 − k1′ , . . . , kN − kN
                                                                          ′ ⊤
                                                                            ) ,
                                             k
                     PN                   PN                                                        ′
and also note that       i=1 |ai |Ãi =     i=1 ai Ai . Consequently, given a, we have constructed a ∈ SΘ
such that
                                               N                  2
                                          1 X                               ra2 b2
                                                Ai (ai − a′i )        ≤            .
                                          n i=1                              nk
Next, we provide a bound on b. By the assumptions on σ, we have

                2                  2q̄         2q̄                 2       2
          ∥Ai ∥ ≲Cq̄ L2σ ∥Xwi ∥2q̄ + ∥∆wi ∥2q̄ + nb2q̄ i + ∥Xwi ∥ + ∥∆∥ + nbi
                                                                             2


                              (q̄)                     (2)
                  ≲nCq̄ L2σ TW ,X + rw    ε + rb2q̄ + TW ,X + rw
                                       2q̄ 2q̄                 2 2
                                                                 ε + rb2 .

Consequently, we can choose
                                                                             
                                   (q̄)                    (2)
                      Cq̄ L2σ ra2 TW ,X + rw  ε + rb2q̄ + TW ,X + rw
                                           2q̄ 2q̄                 2 2
                                                                     ε + rb2
               k=                                                            .
                    
                                                  ϵ2                         
                                                                              

Finally, we need to count |SΘ |. Note that
                                                              k
                              2N + k − 1       e(2N + k − 1)
                    |SΘ | =                 ≤                   ≤ (3eN )k ,
                                   k                k
which concludes the proof.

We can now turn the above covering number into Rademacher complexity via a chaining argument,
as follows.


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 17. Let R(L(W , b)) denote the Rademacher complexity of the class of adversarial loss
functions L(W , b), defined via
                              "        n
                                                                              #
                                    1X                 (i) (i)            (i)
           R(L(W , b)) := E sup           ξi max ℓ(f (x + δ ; a, W , b), y ) ,
                                a∈Θ n i=1   ∥δ(i) ∥≤ε
where ξi are i.i.d. Rademacher random variables and Θ = {a : ∥a∥1 ≤ ra }. For simplicity, assume
Cℓ , ra ≳ 1. Then we have
                                             q                           q
                                                (q̄)                       (2)
                  Cℓ Cq̄ Lσ ra log n log N E   TW ,X + rw   ε + rbq̄ + E
                                                          q̄ q̄
                                                                          TW ,X + rw ε + rb
R(L(W , b)) ≲                                          √                                        .
                                                         n

Proof. Let Rn (L(W , b)) denote the empirical Rademacher complexity by
                             "         n
                                                                                       #
                                     1X
         Rn (L(W , b)) := Eξ sup          ξi max ℓ(f (x(i) + δ (i) ; a, W , b), y (i) ) ,
                               a∈Θ n i=1    ∥δ(i) ∥≤ε
where the expectation is only taken w.r.t. the randomness of ξ and is conditional on the training set.
For simplicity, define
                               q                          q
                                   (q̄)                      (2)
                  B := Cq̄ Lσ     TW ,X + rw    ε + rbq̄ + TW ,X + rw ε2 + rb .
                                              q̄ q̄


Then, by a standard chaining argument, we have for all α > 0,
                                                 Z ∞ r
                                                          log C(L, dL , ϵ)
                         Rn (L(W , b)) ≲ α +                               dϵ
                                                   ϵ=α            n
                                                 Cℓ ra B log N         1
                                         ≲α+           √         log       .
                                                         n             α
                    √
By choosing α = 1/ n, we obtain
                                                  Cℓ ra B log n log N
                              Rn (L(W , b)) ≲             √            .
                                                            n
Taking expectations with respect to the input distribution completes the proof.

                                                        (q̄)
Note that it remains to provide an upper bound for TW ,x introduced in Lemma 16. This is achieved
by the following lemma.
Lemma 18. Suppose ∥wi ∥ ≤ rw . Then, for all q̄ > 0 and N > e, we have
                           "           n
                                                          #
                                    1 XD         (i)
                                                     E2q̄
                                                                   2q̄
                         E max             wj , x           ≤ Cq̄ rw   (log N )q̄ ,
                            1≤j≤N n
                                      i=1
where Cq̄ is a constant depending only on q̄.
                                    Pn            2q̄
Proof. For conciseness, let Zj := n1 i=1 wj , x(i) . By non-negativity of Zj and Jensen’s
inequality, for all t ≥ 1 we have
                                           N
                                     1/t   X
                                                     1/t                     1/t
        E max Zj ≤ E max Zjt            ≤      E Zjt     ≤ N 1/t max E Zjt       .
           1≤j≤N             1≤j≤N                                        1≤j≤N
                                                  j=1

Further, by Jensens’s inequality
                                                                !
                                 t        1 Xn D            E2q̄ t
                              E Zj = E         wj , x(i)          
                                          n i=1
                                      " n                       #
                                        1 XD          (i)
                                                          E2q̄t
                                    ≤E         wj , x
                                        n i=1
                                      ≤ (Crw )2q̄t (2q̄t)q̄t ,


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where C > 0 is a absolute constant, and we used the moment bound of subGaussian random variables
along with the fact that ⟨wj , x⟩ is a centered subGaussian random variable with subGaussian norm
O(rw ). As a result,

                                                 2q̄ 1/t q̄     2q̄
                          E max Zj ≤ Cq̄ rw         N t ≲ Cq̄ rw    (log N )q̄ ,
                            1≤j≤N

where the last inequality follows by choosing t = log N .

As a consequence, if the loss is also bounded, we get the following high-probability concentration
bound.
Corollary 19. Suppose |ℓ̃| ≤ Bℓ for all ℓ̃ ∈ L(W , b). Then, with probability at least 1 − δ we have
                                   n                                            p
                  h        i 1X
                                           (i) (i)
                                                       Cℓ ra R log n log N + Bℓ log(1/δ)
          sup E ℓ̃(x, y) −            ℓ̃ x , y       ≲                  √                    ,
       ℓ̃∈L(W ,b)              n i=1                                      n

where
                               q̄
                 R := Cq̄ Lσ (rw  (logq/2 N + εq̄ ) + rbq̄ + rw (log1/2 N + ε) + rb ).

C.2     A PPLYING THE G ENERALIZATION B OUND TO S QUARED L OSS

To apply the generalization argument above to the squared loss, we bound it with a threshold τ , and
define the loss family
             Lτ (W , b) := {(x, y) 7→ max (f (x + δ; a, W , b) − y)2 ∧ τ : a ∈ Θ .

                                        ∥δ∥≤ε


We similarly define ARτ and AR
                            dτ . Recall that our goal is to show

                           AR(â, W , b) ≤ AR(â,
                                           d W , b) + ϵ1 (n, N, d).

We readily have AR
                dτ (â, W , b) ≤ AR(â,
                                 d W , b). Further, Corollary 19 yields
                                               √                        r
                                                 τ r a R log n log N      log(1/δ)
            ARτ (â, W , b) − AR
                              dτ (â, W , b) ≲           √           +τ            ,
                                                           n                 n

with probability at least 1 − δ. Thus, the remaining step is to bound AR(â, W , b) and AR(â,
                                                                                          d W , b)
with their clipped versions. To do so, we first provide the following tail probability estimate.
Lemma 20. Suppose (zj )N   j=1 are non-negative random variables with subGaussian norm r. Then,
for any q̄ > 0 and τ ≥ Cq̄ rq̄ where Cq̄ is a constant depending only on q̄, we have
                                                 
                                      N
                                                               cτ 2/q̄

                                   1  X     q̄
                               P          z ≥ τ ≤ exp − 2
                                                                       ,
                                   N j=1 j                       r

where c > 0 is an absolute constant.

Proof. For any t ≥ 1, we have the following Markov bound,

                                                          1
                                                            PN q̄  t      h P           i
                                                      E N j=1 zj
                                                                          N     q̄t
                                                                           1
       1 XN                     1 XN         t                           E N  j=1 zj
  P         z q̄ ≥ τ  = P           z q̄ ≥ τ t  ≤                  ≤                  ,
      N j=1 j                  N j=1 j                       τt              τt

    the last inequality follows from Jensen’s inequality. Further, by subGaussianity of zj , we have
where
E zjq̄t ≤ (Cr2 q̄t)q̄t/2 , where C > 0 is an absolute constant. As a result,
                                                    
                                         N
                                     1  X                (Cr2 q̄t)q̄t/2
                                 P         zjq̄ ≥ τ  ≤                .
                                    N j=1                     τt


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             2/q̄
                                         τ                                            q̄
The above bound is minimized at t = Cr      2 q̄e . Note that t ≥ 1 requires τ ≥ Cq̄ r . Plugging this

choice of t in the above bound yields
                                                   
                                      N
                                                                 τ 2/q̄

                                  1 X
                             P         zjq̄ ≥ τ  ≤ exp −                ,
                                 N j=1                          2Cr2 e

which completes the proof.
                                                                     √
Lemma 21. Suppose Assumption 2 holds. Let Θ = {a : ∥a∥ ≤ ra / N }, ∥wi ∥ ≤ rw , and |bi | ≤ rb
for all i ∈ [N ]. Assume σ satisfes (B.1). Define ε1 := 1 ∨ ε, and let
                                              2q̄ 2q̄
                           κ := Cq̄ ra2 L2σ (rw  ε1 + rb2q̄ + rw
                                                               2 2
                                                                 ε1 + rb2 ) + Cp ,
where Cq̄ and Cp are constants depending only on q̄ and p respectively. Then, for all
                                   n                  n        no
                             τ ≥ C κ ∨ L2σ rw2q̄
                                                 logq̄ ∨ logp      ,
                                                      δ        δ
we have
        AR(a, W , b) − AR(a,
                       d W , b) ≤ ARτ (a, W , b) − AR
                                                   dτ (a, W , b)
                                                                                                       !
                                                                      τ 1/q̄
                                                                                                1/p
                                            + Cκ exp − Ω                2/q̄
                                                                                   + exp(−Ω(τ         )) ,
                                                                          2
                                                                      Lσ rw
with probability at least 1 − δ uniformly over all a ∈ Θ.

Proof. Since W and b are fixed, we use the shorthand notation f (x; a) = f (x; a, W , b).
In the first section of the proof, we will upper and lower bound AR(a, W , b) with ARτ (a, W , b).
Note that the lower bound is trivial as ARτ (a, W , b) ≤ AR(a, W , b), thus we move on to the upper
bound. Let
                                  ℓ̃(x, y) = max (f (x + δ; a) − y)2 .
                                             ∥δ∥≤ε

Then,
                             h         h            ii     h       h             ii
             AR(a, W , b) = E ℓ̃(x, y)I ℓ̃(x, y) ≤ τ + E ℓ̃(x, y)I ℓ̃(x, y) > τ
                                                 h       i1/2                1/2
                          ≤ ARτ (a, W , b) + E ℓ̃(x, y)2     P ℓ̃(x, y) ≥ τ      .


Further, we have the following upper bound for the adversarial loss,
  ℓ̃(x, y) = max (f (x + δ; a) − y)2
             ∥δ∥≤ε

           ≲ max f (x + δ; a)2 + y 2
             ∥δ∥≤ε
                       2                            2
           ≲ max ∥a∥ ∥σ(W (x + δ) + b)∥ + y 2
             ∥δ∥≤ε
                                                                                       
                              N                                N
                           1 X           2q̄                1 X           2
           ≲ ra2 Cq̄ L2σ        ⟨wj , x⟩ + rw  ε + rb2q̄ +
                                             2q̄ 2q̄                          2 2
                                                                  ⟨wj , x⟩ + rw ε + rb2  + y 2
                           N j=1                            N j=1

Moreover, by Jensen’s inequality,
                                            2                     
                               N                        N
                        1    X           2q̄        1 X           4q̄
                                  ⟨wj , x⟩   ≤ E        ⟨wj , x⟩ 
                                                 
                     E
                          N j=1                      N j=1

                                                         ≤ (Crw )4q̄ (4q̄)2q̄ ≤ Cq̄ rw
                                                                                     4q̄


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for all q̄ > 0, where C is an absolute constant and we used the subGaussianity of ⟨wj , x⟩ to bound
its moment. As a result,
             h         i1/2                                                                      1/2
           E ℓ̃(x, y)2      ≲ ra2 Cq̄ L2σ (rw
                                            2q̄
                                                (1 + ε2q̄ ) + rb2q̄ + rw
                                                                       2
                                                                         (1 + ε2 ) + rb2 ) + E y 4   .
                             1/2
By assumption 2, we have E y 4   ≤ Cp .
To estimate the tail probability of ℓ̃(x, y). Using the assumption on τ and the upper bound on ℓ̃(x, y)
developed above, via a union bound we have
                                                                              
                             2 X N                  2 XN
                           L                 2q̄  L                2         τ
  P ℓ̃(x, y) ≥ τ ≤ P σ             ⟨wj , x⟩ + σ           ⟨wj , x⟩ + y 2 ≥ 
                           N j=1                   N j=1                     2
                                                                                
                             2 X N                               2 XN
                           L                 2q̄  τ           L               2  τ               τ
                     ≤ P σ         ⟨wj , x⟩ ≥  + P σ               ⟨wj , x⟩ ≥  + P y 2 ≥
                           N j=1                  6            N j=1             6               6
                                         !
                                −cτ 1/q̄
                                            + P y2 ≥ τ ,

                     ≤ 2 exp      2/q̄ 2
                                Lσ rw
where we used Lemma 20, the fact that |⟨wj , x⟩| is subGaussian with norm O(rw ), and that q̄ ≥ 1.
Furthermore, using the moment estimate on y in Assumption 2 along with the technique developed in
Lemma 20, we have                          τ
                                  P y2 ≥       ≤ exp −cτ 1/p ,
                                           6
for τ ≥ Cp , where c > 0 is an absolute constant.
As a result, we obtain
                                                                                             !
                                                               cτ 1/q̄                 1/p
           AR(a, W , b) − ARτ (a, W , b) ≲ κ exp −              2/q̄
                                                                           + exp(−cτ         ) ,
                                                                   2
                                                               Lσ rw
for all a ∈ Θ.
In the next part of the proof, we will show that with probability at least 1−δ, we have AR(a,
                                                                                        d W , b) =
                                                                                     (i) (i)
ARτ (a, W , b) uniformly over all a. Note that this is equivalent to asking ℓ̃(x , y ) ≤ τ for all
d
1 ≤ i ≤ n. For any fixed i, using the upper bound on ℓ̃(x(i) , y (i) ), we have
                                                                                            
                                           2 X N                  2 X N
                                          L               2q̄   L                2        τ
           P ℓ̃(x(i) , y (i) ) ≥ τ ≤ P σ         ⟨wj , x⟩ + σ           ⟨wj , x⟩ + y 2 ≥ 
                                          N j=1                 N j=1                     2
                                                     !
                                            −cτ 1/q̄
                                                                     1/p

                                    ≲ exp     2/q̄ 2
                                                        + exp   −cτ        .
                                            Lσ rw
Consequently, by a union bound we have
                                                   !                 !
                                          −cτ 1/q̄

                          (i) (i)                              1/p
             P max ℓ̃(x , y ) ≥ τ ≤ n exp  2/q̄ 2
                                                     + exp −cτ        .
                1≤i≤n                     Lσ rw
Choosing
                                         n              n       no
                                   τ ≥ C L2σ rw2q̄
                                                   logq̄ ∨ logp
                                                        δ       δ
with a sufficiently large constant C ensures the above probability is at most δ, finishing the proof.



We are now ready to present the main result of this section.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                     √
Proposition 22. Suppose Assumption 2 holds and σ satisfies (B.1), Θ = {a : ∥a∥ ≤ ra / N },
∥wi ∥ ≤ 1, and |bi | ≤ rb for all 1 ≤ i ≤ N . Let
                                κ := Cq̄ ra2 L2σ (1 + ε2q̄ + rb2q̄ ) + Cp ,
where Cq̄ and Cp are constants depending only on q̄ and p respectively. Then we have

                                                                            κ
                          AR(â, W , b) − min AR(a, W , b) ≤ Õ √ ,
                                            a∈Θ                              n
                                 −c
with probability at least 1 − O(n ) for some constant c > 0.
Proof. We can summarize the generalization bound of Corollary 19 as
                                                           r             r
                                                                τ κ        log(1/δ)
                   ARτ (â, W , b) − AR
                                     dτ (â, W , b) ≲               +τ                ,
                                                                  n            n
where
                              κ := Cq̄ ra2 L2σ (1 + ε2q̄ + rb2q̄ ) + Cp ,
is obtained from Lemma 21 by letting rw = 1. Thanks to Lemma 21, we arrive at
                                       r            r                          1/q̄
                                                                                                     !
                                            τ κ         log(1/δ)          −Ω τ 2/q̄        −Ω τ 1/p
   AR(â, W , b) − AR(â,
                   d W , b) ≤ Õ                 +τ                 + κe      Lσ      + κe            .
                                             n              n
Note that κ ≳ L2σ . Choosing τ = Cκ logp∨q̄ (κn/δ) with a sufficiently large absolute constant
C > 0 satisfies the assumption of Lemma 21. By letting δ = n−c for some constant c > 0, we obtain

                                                                 κ
                           AR(â, W , b) − AR(â, W , b) ≤ Õ √ ,
                                            d
                                                                  n
                                           −c
which holds with probability at least 1 − n over the randomness of the training set.
Recall a∗ = arg mina∈Θ AR(a, W , b). Similarly, Lemma 21 guarantees

                                ∗              ∗             κ
                         AR(a , W , b) − AR(a , W , b) ≤ Õ √ ,
                         d
                                                              n
on the same event as above. Finally, we have AR(â,        d ∗ , W , b) by definition of â,
                                              d W , b) ≤ AR(a
which concludes the proof of the proposition.


D    A PPROXIMATION A NALYSIS
                ⊤
Let ΠU w = U∥UU       w
                    w∥ denote the projection of w ∈ S
                                                     d−1
                                                          onto span(u1 , . . . , uk ) ∩ Sd−1 (if ∥U w∥ =
0 we can simply let ΠU w = u1 ). Suppose ⟨w, u⟩ ≥ 1 − ζ for some ζ ∈ (0, 1) and u ∈
span(u1 , . . . , uk ) with ∥u∥ = 1. Then, we have the following properties for this projection:
       • ⟨ΠU w, u⟩ ≥ 1 − ζ,
                        √
       • ∥w − ΠU w∥ ≤ 2ζ.
Let h : Rk → R be the function constructed in the proof of Theorem 1. Then,

                                ∗                                2
                            AR = E max (h(U (x + δ)) − y) .
                                           ∥δ∥≤ε
                               ∗
Let us denote f (x) = f (x; a , W , b) for conciseness. Then,

AR(a∗ , W , b) − AR∗ = E max (f (x + δ) − y)2 − max (h(U (x + δ)) − y)2
                             ∥δ∥≤ε                     ∥δ∥≤ε

                       ≤ E max (f (x + δ) − y)2 − (h(U (x + δ)) − y)2

                             ∥δ∥≤ε
                                                                                       
                                                                                        
                       = E max (f (x + δ) − h(U (x + δ))(f (x + δ) + h(U (x + δ)) − 2y ) 
                              ∥δ∥≤ε                          |         {z            }
                                                                                    =:Z


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let ΠU W = (ΠU w1 , . . . , ΠU wN )⊤ . Then, we have the decompositions
 f (x + δ; a∗ , W , b) = f (x + δ; a∗ , W , b) − f (x + δ; a∗ , ΠU W , b) + f (x + δ; a∗ , ΠU W , b),
and
  Z =f (x + δ; a∗ , W , b) − f (x + δ; a∗ , ΠU W , b) + f (x + δ; a∗ , ΠU W , b) − h(U (x + δ))
     + 2h(U (x + δ)) − 2y.
Plugging this decomposition into the above and using the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality yields

                  AR(a∗ , W , b) − AR∗ ≤ ( E1 + E2 )2 + E3 (E1 + E2 ),
                                             p       p        p
                                                                                           (D.1)
where

                                         ∗                            2
                 E1 := E max (f (x + δ; a , ΠU W , b) − h(U (x + δ))) ,                                        (D.2)
                          ∥δ∥≤ε

                                         ∗                         ∗         2
                 E2 := E max (f (x + δ; a , ΠU W , b) − f (x + δ; a , W , b)) ,                                (D.3)
                          ∥δ∥≤ε

                 E3 := 4 E max (h(U (x + δ)) − y) = 4AR∗ .
                                                 2
                                                                                                               (D.4)
                            ∥δ∥≤ε


Under Definition 3, we have a set of good neurons S to work with. To continue, we introduce a
similar subset of good neurons under Definition 2.
Definition 23. Suppose the weights
                                 √       W = (w1 , . . . , wN )⊤ are obtained from the α -DFL oracle of
Definition 2. Fix a maximal 2 2ζ-packing of Sk−1 with respect to the Euclidean norm, denoted by
                          U wj
(v̄i )M
      i=1 . Define vj := ∥U wj ∥ for all j ∈ [N ], and
                                                                       p
                                Si := {j ∈ [N ] : ∥vj − v̄i ∥ ≤            2ζ},
                                                                     SM
for all i ∈ [M ]. Note that (Si ) are mutually exclusive. Define S := i=1 Si . By upper and lower
bounds on the surface area of the spherical cap (see e.g. Wang et al. (2024a, Lemma F.11)), there
are constants ck , Ck > 0 such that ck (1/ζ)(k−1)/2 ≤ M ≤ Ck (1/ζ)(k−1)/2 . Therefore, using
Definition 2, we have |S|/N ≥ Ω(α).

Note that when considering the (α,β)-SFL oracle, we leave S unchanged from Definition 3. In either
                  / S, we will choose a∗j = 0. Then, we then have the following upper bound on E2 .
case, for every j ∈
                                                        p
Lemma 24. Suppose a∗j = 0 for j ∈  / S and ∥a∗ ∥ ≤ r̃a / |S|. Then,

                                                                             2(q̄−1)
E max (f (x + δ; a∗ , ΠU W , b) − f (x + δ; a∗ , W , b))2 ≲ L2σ Cq̄ r̃a2 (1+rb       +ε2(q̄−1) )(1+ε2 )ζ,
   ∥δ∥≤ε

where Cq̄ is a constant only depending on q̄.

Proof. To be concise, we define x̃δ := x + δ and hide dependence on a∗ and b in the following
notation. By pseudo-Lipschitzness of σ,
                                 X
f (x̃δ ; ΠU W ) − f (x̃δ ; W ) =   a∗j (σ(⟨ΠU wj , x̃δ ⟩ + bj ) − σ(⟨wj , x̃δ ⟩ + bj ))
                                j∈S
                                     X                                   q̄−1                       q̄−1
                              ≤ Lσ         a∗j (|⟨ΠU wj , x̃δ ⟩ + bj |          + |⟨wj , x̃δ ⟩ + bj |      + 1)|⟨ΠU wj − wj , x̃δ ⟩|.
                                     j∈S

Let
                                                     q̄−1                          q̄−1
                      Aj := |⟨ΠU wj , x̃δ ⟩ + bj |          + |⟨wj , x̃δ ⟩ + bj |         + 1,
and
                                      Bj := |⟨ΠU wj − wj , x̃δ ⟩|.


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then by the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality,
                                                                     
                                              2 2
                        X              2    L  r̃           X
      E2 ≤ L2σ E max        a∗j Aj Bj  ≤ σ a E max           A2j Bj2 
                 ∥δ∥≤ε                       |S|      ∥δ∥≤ε
                        j∈S                                 j∈S
                                              2 2 X

                                            L r̃
                                           ≤ σ a       E max A2j Bj2
                                             |S|         ∥δ∥≤ε
                                                   j∈S
                                                                    1/2              1/2
                                            L2 r̃2 X

                                           ≤ σ a       E max A4j          E max Bj4      .
                                             |S|         ∥δ∥≤ε              ∥δ∥≤ε
                                                         j∈S

Additionally, we have

                                         q̄−1             q̄−1
               max Aj ≤ Cq̄ |⟨ΠU wj , x⟩|     + |⟨wj , x⟩|     + εq̄−1 + rbq̄−1 + 1 ,
               ∥δ∥≤ε

and
                         max Bj ≤ ε∥ΠU wj − wj ∥ + |⟨ΠU wj − wj , x⟩|.
                        ∥δ∥≤ε
                                          d
Further, by Assumption 2, for all v ∈ R    , ⟨v, x⟩    is a centered subGaussian random variable with
                                                   q̄             q̄
subGaussian norm O(∥v∥), therefore E |⟨v, x⟩| ≤ Cq̄ ∥v∥ for all q̄ > 0. In summary,
                  1/2                                                             1/2
               4                  2(q̄−1)     2(q̄−1)                          4
    E max Aj          ≤ Cq̄ (1 + rb       + ε1         ),     and     E max Bj        ≲ (1 + ε2 )ζ,
       ∥δ∥≤ε                                                          ∥δ∥≤ε

                                                2
where we used the fact that ∥ΠU wj − wj ∥ ≤ 2ζ for all j ∈ S. This completes the proof.

While the term E1 defined in (D.2) is an expectation over the entire distribution of x, most approxi-
mation bounds support only a compact subset of Rd . The following lemma shows that approximation
on compact sets is sufficient to bound E1 .
                                                         p
Lemma 25. Suppose a∗j = 0 for j ∈   / S and ∥a∗ ∥ ≤ r̃a / |S|. Further, suppose rz ≥ 1 ∨ 2ε. Let
                         ϵapprox :=      sup |f (x; a∗ , ΠU W , b) − h(U x)|.
                                      ∥U x∥≤rz
                                            p
Assume h satisfies |h(z)| ≤ Lh (1 + ∥z∥ ) for all z ∈ Rk and some constant p ≥ 0. Then,
                                                                                         2
             E1 ≤ ϵ2approx + L2σ Cq̄ r̃a2 (1 + ε2q̄ + rb2q̄ ) + L2h Cp,k (1 + ε2p ) e−Ω(rz ) .

Proof. For brevity, define
                                                                             2
                             ∆δ := f (x̃δ ; a∗ , ΠU W , b) − h(U (x + δ))
where x̃δ := x + δ. Then,

          E max ∆δ ≤ E max ∆δ I[∥U x̃δ ∥ ≤ rz ] + E max ∆δ I[∥U x̃δ ∥ > rz ]
               ∥δ∥≤ε             ∥δ∥≤ε                           ∥δ∥≤ε
                                                 1/2                         1/2
                         ≤ ϵ2approx + E max ∆2δ     E max I[∥U x̃δ ∥ > rz ]
                                           ∥δ∥≤ε            ∥δ∥≤ε
                                               1/2
                            2               2                       1/2
                         ≤ ϵapprox + E max ∆δ      P(∥U x∥ > rz − ε)
                                           ∥δ∥≤ε
                                                 1/2
                            2                 2               rz  1/2
                         ≤ ϵapprox + E max ∆δ       P ∥U x∥ >         .
                                        ∥δ∥≤ε                 2

Furthermore, we have

                    2               ∗           4                    4
         E max ∆δ ≲ E max f (x̃δ ; a , ΠU W , b) + E max h(U (x + δ)) .
               ∥δ∥≤ε             ∥δ∥≤ε                              ∥δ∥≤ε


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Uw
Recall the notation vj := ∥U wjj ∥ and z := U x. Then, by Cauchy-Schwartz and Jensen inequalities,

                                                             4                            4
         E max f (x̃δ ; a∗ , ΠU W , b)4 ≤ E max ∥a∗ ∥ ∥σ(ΠU W (x + δ) + b)∥
            ∥δ∥≤ε                                 ∥δ∥≤ε
                                                                                               
                                              r̃a4           X
                                           ≤       E max           σ(⟨vj , z + U δ⟩ + bj )4 
                                             |S|       ∥δ∥≤ε
                                                               j∈S
                                                                                       
                                             r̃a4 L4σ Cq̄ X            4q̄
                                           ≤             E      ⟨vj , z⟩ + ε4q̄ + rb4q̄ 
                                                  |S|
                                                              j∈S

                                           ≤ Cq̄ L4σ r̃a4 (1 + ε4q̄ + rb4q̄ ).
Similarly we can prove

                             E max h(U (x + δ))4 ≤ Cp,k L4h (1 + ε4p ).
                                  ∥δ∥

In summary,
                           1/2
                        2
                 E max ∆δ      ≲ Cq̄ L2σ r̃a2 (1 + ε2q̄ + rb2q̄ ) + Cp,k L2h (1 + ε2p ).
                     ∥δ∥≤ε

Finally, the probability bound                  rz           2
                                  P ∥U x∥ ≥          ≤ e−Ω(rz )
                                                2
follows from subGaussianity of x and the fact that k = O(1).


D.1    A PPROXIMATING U NIVARIATE F UNCTIONS

In this section, we recall prior results on approximating univariate functions with random biases in
the infinite-width regime under ReLU and polynomial activations.
Lemma 26 (Damian et al. (2022, Lemma 9, Adapted)). Let σ be the ReLU activation, a ∼
Unif({−1, +1}), and b ∼ Unif(−rb , rb ). Then, there exists f : {−1, +1} × [−rb , rb ] → R, such
that for all |z| ≤ rb we have
                                    Ea,b [2rb f (b)σ(az + b)] = h(z).
                                                                                     (s−2)∨0
Additionally, if h is a polynomial of degree s, we have supa,b |f (a, b)| ≤ rb                 .

Proof. From integration by parts, namely
                                                      Z rb
               Ea,b [2rb (1 − a)h′′ (b)σ(az + b)] =        h′′ (b)(−z + b)db
                                                      z
                                                                          Z rb
                                                   = h′ (rb )(−z + rb ) −      h′ (b)db
                                                                                 z
                                                   = h′ (rb )(−z + rb ) + h(z) − h(rb ).
Therefore, it remains to approximate the constant and linear parts. It is straightforward to verify that

                              6b
                        Ea,b 2 · σ(az + b) = 1, Ea,b [2aσ(az + b)] = z.
                              rb
Thus, we let
                                                  ah′ (rb ) 3b(h′ (rb )rb − h(rb ))
                    f (a, b) = (1 − a)h′′ (b) +            −                        ,
                                                    rb                 rb3
which completes the proof.

Furthermore, we have the following result for infinite-width approximation with polynomial activa-
tions.


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 27 (Oko et al. (2024, Lemma 30, Adapted)). Let σ be a polynomial of degree q and suppose
b ∼ Unif(−rb , rb ) and h is a polynomial of degree p such that q ≥ p, and in particular satisfies
                     p
|h(z)| ≤ Lh (1 + |z| ). Suppose rb ≥ q. Then, there exists a function f : [−rb , rb ] → R such that
                                   Eb [2rb f (b)σ(z + b)] = h(z),               ∀z ∈ R.
Furthermore, we have |f (z)| ≤ Cσ,h for all z, where Cσ,h only depends on the activation and Lh .

Proof. In order for σ to approximate arbitrary polynomials of degree at most q, it is sufficient to show
that σ can approximate at least one polynomial per degree, ranging from degree 0 to q. Defining
the corresponding polynomial with degree i as gi (z), then h will be in the span of {gi }qi=0 . More
                              Pp                          Pi
specifically, suppose h(z) = j=0 αj z j , and gi (z) = j=0 γi,j z j . Then there exist {βi }qi=0 such
that
                             Xp             Xp X p                p
                                                                  X
                                βi gi (z) =         γi,j βi z j =   αj z j .
                                  i=0                  j=0 i=j                  j=0
Indeed, we can let βi = 0 for all i > p. Additionally, note that γi,i ̸= 0 for all i ≤ q by definition.
Therefore, the solution to the above equation is given iteratively by βp = αp /γp,p and
                                                 Pj−1
                                        αp−j − i=0 γp−i,p−j βp−i
                                βp−j =                                ,
                                                  γp−j,p−j
for 1 ≤ j ≤ p. Importantly, |βi | for all i can be bounded polynomially by {αj }j , {γi,j }i,j and
   −1
{γi,i  }i . Further, |αi | can be bounded polynomially by Lh for all i. Thus, it remains to construct
{gi }.
Following Oko et al. (2024), we define
                                                            Z 0
                                                gq (z) =           σ(z + b)db.
                                                             −q

It is straightforward to verify that gq has degree (exactly) q. We then iteratively define
                      gq−i (z) = gq−(i−1) (z + 1) − gq−(i−1) (z),                     ∀ 1 ≤ i ≤ q.
Using the definition above and by induction, one can verify gi has degree exactly i. Furthermore,
expanding the definition above yields
                              X i                   i
                                                    X      Z 0
                   gq−i (z) =     ci,j gq (z + j) =   ci,j     σ(z + b + j)db,
                                        j=0                         j=0      −q

                    i−j i
                                                                                        Pi
where ci,j = (−1)          j   , i.e. the coefficients that satisfy (z − 1)i =                       j
                                                                                           j=0 ci,j z . In particular, we
can write
                                                                                                            
                     i
                     X            Z j                                     i
                                                                          X
        gq−i (z) =         ci,j               σ(z + b)db = Eb 2rb              I[−q + j ≤ b ≤ j]σ(z + b).
                     j=0           −q+j                                   j=0

Therefore, we can define
                                               q
                                               X            i
                                                            X
                                  f (b) :=           βq−i         ci,j I[−q + j ≤ b ≤ j],
                                               i=0          j=0

which completes the proof.


D.2   A PPROXIMATING M ULTIVARIATE P OLYNOMIALS

We adapt the approximation result of this section from Damian et al. (2022), modifying the proof to
be consistent with our assumption on the first layer weights.
First, we remark that for any fixed v ∈ Sk−1 and any degree 0 ≤ s ≤ p, we can approximate the
                    s
function z 7→ ⟨v, z⟩ with random biases as established by Lemma 26 for the ReLU activation and


                                                              28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 27 for the polynomial activation. Therefore, our main effort will be spent in approximating a
                                        s
polynomial h(z) using monomials ⟨v, z⟩ . Note that we can represent h by
                                             Xp
                                     h(z) =      T (s) [z ⊗s ],
                                                      s=0
          (s)
where T         is a symmetric tensor of order s, and we use the notation
                                                                   k
                                                                                  (s)
                                                                   X
                    T (s) [z ⊗s ] = vec(T (s) )⊤ vec(z ⊗s ) =                   Ti1 ,...,is zi1 . . . zis .
                                                                i1 ,...,is =1
The approximation result relies on the following fact.
Lemma 28. Let v ∼ τk . Then, the matrix Ev∼τk vec(v ⊗s )vec(v ⊗s )⊤ is invertible.


Proof. Let T be an arbitrary symmetric tensor of order s with ∥T ∥F = 1. We need to find a constant
cs,k > 0 such that
                       vec(T )⊤ Ev∼τk vec(v ⊗s )vec(v ⊗s ) vec(T ) ≥ cs,k .


Note that                                                                         "           #
          ⊤
                          ⊗s      ⊗s
                                                               ⊗s 2
                                                                                    T [w⊗s ]2
   vec(T ) Ev∼τk vec(v )vec(v ) vec(T ) = Ev∼τk T [v ] = Ew∼N (0,Ik )                      2s   .
                                                                                      ∥w∥
Furthermore, (Damian et al., 2022, Lemma 23) implies that
                                 Ew∼N (0,Ik ) T [w⊗s ]2 ≥ c′s,k ,


for some constant c′s,k > 0. Therefore, for any r > 0, we have
          Ew∼N (0,Ik ) T [w⊗s ]2 I[∥w∥ > r] + Ew∼N (0,Ik ) T [w⊗s ]2 I[∥w∥ ≤ r] ≥ c′s,k .


Note that the first term on the LHS above can become arbitrarily small by choosing r sufficiently
large (depending on s and k). Thus for sufficiently large r we have
                                                                     c′s,k
                              Ew∼N (0,Ik ) T [w⊗s ]2 I[∥w∥ ≤ r] ≥

                                                                            .
                                                                          2
Finally, we have
                         "           #
                           T [w⊗s ]2       1                       ⊗s 2
                                                                                       c′s,k
            Ew∼N (0,Ik )        2s     ≥       Ew∼N  (0,I  )  T [w   ]  I[∥w∥ ≤ r]  ≥        .
                            ∥w∥           r2s            k
                                                                                       2r2s
                             c′
Therefore, taking cs,k = 2rs,k
                            2s completes the proof.



The following lemma establishes how we can use monomials of the form (v ⊤ z)s to approximate
each term appearing in h(z).
Lemma 29 (Damian et al. (2022, Corollary 4, Adapted)). There exists f : Sk−1 → R such that for
all z ∈ Rk and non-negative integers s ≥ 0,
                             Z
                                              s
                                   f (v)⟨v, z⟩ dτk (v) = T (s) [z ⊗s ].
                                    Sk−1
                              (s)
Further, |f (v)| ≤ Ck,s T           F
                                        for all v ∈ Sk−1 .
                                             s
Proof. Note that by definition, ⟨v, z⟩ = vec(v ⊗s )⊤ vec(z ⊗s ). Therefore,
                 Z                         Z                          ⊤
                               s
                   f (v)⟨v, z⟩ dτk (v) =      f (v)vec(v ⊗s )dτk (v) vec(z ⊗s ).

We need to match the first vector on the RHS above with vec(T ⊗s ), thus our choice of f is
                                                                   −1
                  f (v) = vec(v ⊗s )⊤ Ev∼τk vec(v ⊗s )vec(v ⊗s )⊤     vec(T (s) ).


The proof is then completed via the lower bound
                                                of Lemma 28 which     gaurantees the existence of
some constant cs,k > 0 such that λmin Ev∼τk vec(v ⊗s )vec(v ⊗s )⊤ ≥ cs,k .

The above result along with the univariate approximations proved earlier immediately yields the
following corollary.


                                                        29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                          Pp
Corollary 30. Suppose h is a polynomial of degree p denoted by h(z) = s=0 T (s) [z ⊗s ]. Further
assume the activation σ is either ReLU or a polynomial of degree q ≥ p. Then, there exists
ĥ : Sk−1 × [−rb , rb ] → R such that for every ∥z∥ ≤ rb , we have
                         Z
                                       ĥ(v, b)σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b)dτk (v)db = h(z).
                         Sk−1 ×[−rb ,rb ]

Furthermore, ĥ(v, b) ≤ Ck,q maxs≤p T (s) F for the polynomial activation and ĥ(v, b) ≤
    (p−2)∨0
Ck rb          T (s) F for the ReLU activation.
Proof. First, we consider the case where we use polynomial activations. Let
                                              p
                                              X
                                   ĥ(v, b) =    f1,s (v)f2,s (b),
                                               s=0
for (f1,s ) and (f2,s ) which we now determine. We choose f2,s according to and Lemma 27, then
                               Z rb
                                                                      s
                                      f2,s (b)σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b)db = ⟨v, z⟩ ,
                                b=−rb
for all ∥z∥ ≤ rb /2, and |f2,s (b)| ≤ Cs,q for all b. Then, we choose f1,s according to Lemma 29,
which yields
  Z                                                         Z
                                                                           s
                 f1,s (v)f2,s (b)σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b)dτk (v)db = f1,s (v)⟨v, z⟩ dτk (v) = T (s) [z ⊗s ],
    Sk−1 ×[−rb ,rb ]

for all ∥z∥ ≤ rb /2. Additionally |f1,s (v)| ≤ Cs,k T (s) F , which completes the proof of the
polynomial activation case.
Now, consider the case where we use the ReLU activation. Let
                                                p
                                                X
                                     ĥ(v, b) =   gs (v, b).
                                                   s=0
where
                                    1                          1
                       gs (v, b) =    f1,s (v)f˜2,s (1, b) + f1,s (−v)f˜2,s (−1, b)
                                    2                          2
with f1,s given above and f˜2,s introduced below. Since v and −v have the same distribution, we have
                                        1
Z                                   Z
   gs (v, b)σ(⟨v, z⟩)db dτk (v) =           f1,s (v)f˜2,s (1, b) + f1,s (−v)f˜2,s (−1, b) σ(⟨v, z⟩db dτk (v)
                                        2
                                                        Z rb
                                                     1
                                    Z
                                 =          f1,s (v)              ˜                          ˜
                                                                  f2,s (1, b)σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b) + f2,s (−1, b)σ(−⟨v, z⟩ + b)db dτk (v)
                                      Sd−1           2 b=−rb
                                    Z
                                                        s
                                 = f1,s (v)⟨v, z⟩ dτk (v) = T (s) [z ⊗s ].

As a result, it suffices to choose f˜2,s according to Lemma 26, which completes the proof of the
corollary.



As a last step in this section, we verify that one can indeed control maxs≤p T (s) F with an absolute
constant when h is the minimizer of the adversarial risk.
Lemma 31. Suppose F is the class of degree p polynomials on Rd . Let H = {z 7→
E[f (x) | U x = z] : f ∈ F}, and define

                                                       ′                2
                              h = arg min E max (h (U (x + δ)) − y) .
                                     h′ ∈H   ∥δ∥≤ε
                                             Pp
Denote the decomposition of h by h(z) = s=0 T (s) [z ⊗s ]. Then, T (s) F ≤ Ck,y , where Ck,y is

a constant depending only on k and the target second moment E y 2 (thus an absolute constant in
                                                            p
our setting). As a consequence, we have |h(z)| ≤ Lh (1 + ∥z∥ ) for all z ∈ Rk , where Lh > 0 is an
absolute constant.


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. By comparing with the zero function, we have

                E (h(U x) − y) ≤ E max (h(U (x + δ)) − y) ≤ E y 2 .
                                2                        2

                                                        ∥δ∥≤ε

Furthermore, by the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality,
                                                                       1/2   2  1/2
            E (h(U x) − y)2 ≥ E h(U x)2 + E y 2 − 2 E h(U x)2

                                                                           E y      .

Combining the two inequalities above, we obtain E h(U x)2 ≤ 4 E y 2 . Let z := U x, and let µz
be the marginal distribution of z. Then
                                              dµz
                                   Z
                      E h(z)2 = h(z)2

                                                        (z)dN (0, Ck Ik )(z).
                                         dN (0, Ck Ik )

Further, by subGaussianity of x and subsequent subGaussianity of z, we have dNdµ                ′
                                                                                 (0,Ck ) (z) ≤ Ck <
                                                                                   z

                        ′
∞ for all z, when Ck , Ck are sufficiently large constants depending only on k. Therefore,

                               Ez∼N (0,Ck Ik ) h(z)2 ≤ 4Ck′ E y 2 .


The proof is completed by using the Hermite decomposition of h.


D.3    A PPROXIMATING M ULTIVARIATE P SEUDO -L IPSCHITZ F UNCTIONS

We now turn to the more general problem of approximating pseudo-Lipschitz functions. Specifically,
when F satisfies Assumption 3, functions of the form h(z) = E[f (x) | U x = z] will be L-pseudo-
Lipschitz. The following lemma investigates approximating such functions with infinite-width
two-layer neural networks.
Lemma 32. Suppose h : Rk → R is L-Lipschitz on ∥z∥ ≤ rz and σ is the ReLU activation. Then,
for every ∆ ≥ Ck , there exists ĥ : Sk−1 × [−rb , rb ] → R such that
                                                                                            −2
                                                                                        ∆   k+1      ∆    ∆   k+1 rz  k
         Z                                                                                                     2k
h(z) −                        ĥ(v, b)σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b)dτk (v)db ≤ Ck Lrz                           log     +                 ,
           Sk−1 ×[−rb ,rb ]                                                            Lrz          Lrz   rz      rb

for all ∥z∥ ≤ rz . Furthermore, we have ĥ(v, b) ≤ Ck L(∆/Lrz )2k/(k+1) /rz for all v and b, and

                                                                                  Ck ∆2
                                    Z
                                                        ĥ(v, b)2 dτk (v)db ≤           .
                                     Sk−1 ×[−rb ,rb ]                              rz3

Proof. Let z̃ := (z ⊤ , rz )⊤ ∈ Rk+1 . By (Bach, 2017, Proposition 6), we know that for all ∆ ≥ Ck ,
there exists p : Sk → R, such that ∥p∥L2 (τk+1 ) ≤ ∆ and
                                               ⟨ṽ, z̃⟩                                 −2
                                                                                    ∆   k+1          ∆
                              Z
                 h(z) −             p(ṽ)σ                  dτk+1 (ṽ) ≤ Ck Lrz               log       ,
                               Sk                rz                                Lrz              Lrz
for all ∥z∥ ≤ rz . Furthermore, the proof of (Mousavi-Hosseini et al., 2024, Proposition 19)
demonstrated that
                                                  2k
                                             ∆   k+1
                          |p(ṽ)| ≤ Ck Lrz           , ∀ ṽ ∈ Sk .
                                            Lrz
             ⊤
Let ṽ = (ṽ1:k , ṽk+1 )⊤ be the decomposition of ṽ into its first k and last coordinate. Then, we will use
the fact that for ṽ ∼ Unif(Sk ) when conditioned on ṽk+1 , by symmetry ∥vv1:k   1:k ∥
                                                                                        is uniformly distributed
on Sk−1 . In other words, let v ∼ Unif(Sk−1 ) and b̃ ∼ ρk+1 independently, where we choose ρk+1
such that √ b̃ 2 has the same marginal distribution as ṽk+1 . Since the marginal distribution of
              1+b̃
                                      2
ṽk+1 is given by dP(ṽk+1 ) ∝ (1 − ṽk+1 )(k−2)/2 dṽk+1 , we have ρk+1 (b̃) = Zk (1 + b̃2 )−(k+1)/2 ,


                                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Zk is the normalizing constant. Then, ṽ = T(v, b̃) is distributed uniformly on Sk , where
T : Sk−1 × R → Sk is given by T(v, b̃) = √ 1 2 v ⊤ , b̃ . As a result,
                                                           1+b̃

Z              ⟨ṽ, z̃⟩                    Z                     ⟨v, z⟩ + b̃r
                                                                              z
    p(ṽ)σ                  dτk+1 (ṽ) =       p(T(v, b̃))σ         p           dτk (v)dρk+1 (b̃)
                 rz                                               rz 1 + b̃  2



                                                    p(T(v, b̃))           1
                                                Z
                                      = Zk             p         ·                 σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b̃rz )dτk (v)db̃
                                            Sk−1 ×R rz    1 + b̃2 (1 + b̃ )(k+1)/2
                                                                         2

                                                    rzk p(T(v, b/rz ))
                                           Z
                                      = Zk             2    2 (k+2)/2
                                                                       σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b)dτk (v)db.
                                            Sk−1 ×R (rz + b )

Therefore, our choice of ĥ will be

                                                            rk p(T(v, b/rz ))
                                               ĥ(v, b) = Zk z2               .
                                                            (rz + b2 )(k+2)/2
Next, we bound the following error term due to cutoff of bias,

                                                       rzk p(T(v, b/rz ))
                                Z
                   E := Zk                                2    2 (k+2)/2
                                                                          σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b)dτk (v)db .
                                  Sk−1 ×(R\[−rb ,rb ]) (rz + b )

We have
                                                     ∆   k+1         rzk (rz + |b|)
                                                          2k
                                                               Z
                                 E ≲ Ck Lrz                          2      2 (k+2)/2
                                                                                      db
                                                    Lrz     |b|>rb (rz + b )

                                                ∆   k+1                    rzk
                                                     2k
                                                         Z
                                    ≲ Ck Lrz                         2      2 (k+1)/2
                                                                                      db
                                               Lrz          |b|>rb (rz + b )

                                                          rzk
                                                Z
                                            2k
                                    ≲ Ck ∆ k+1           k+1
                                                               db
                                                 |b|>rb b
                                                    ∆   k+1
                                                         2k rz  k
                                    ≲ Ck Lrz                      .
                                                    rz      rb

Finally, we prove the guarantees provided for ĥ. The uniform bound on ĥ(v, b) follows directly by
plugging in the uniform bound on p. For the L2 bound on ĥ, we have
           Z                                  Z
                                 2
                         ĥ(v, b) dτk (v)db ≤         ĥ(v, b)2 dτk (v)db
                 Sk−1 ×[−rb ,rb ]                               Sk−1 ×R

                                                                   Zk2 rz2k p(T(v, b/rz ))2
                                                               Z
                                                           =                                dτk (v)db
                                                                         (rz2 + b2 )k+2
                                                                Zk2 p(T(v, b̃))2
                                                               Z
                                                           =                      dτk (v)db̃
                                                                rz3 (1 + b̃2 )k+2
                                                            Zk         p(T(v, b̃))2
                                                                 Z
                                                           = 3                         dτk (v)dρk+1 (b̃)
                                                             rz      (1 + b̃2 )(k+3)/2
                                                            Zk
                                                                 Z
                                                                            2
                                                           = 3 (1 − ṽk+1       )(k+3)/2 p(ṽ)2 dτk+1 (ṽ)
                                                             rz
                                                                       2
                                                               Zk ∥p∥L2 (τk+1 )       Z k ∆2
                                                           ≤                      ≤          ,
                                                                      rz3               rz3
completing the proof.


                                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.4    D ISCRETIZING I NFINITE -W IDTH A PPROXIMATIONS

In this section, we provide finite-width guarantees corresponding to the infinite-width approximations
proved earlier. Define the following integral operator
                                   Z
                       T ĥ(z) =                 ĥ(v, b)σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b)dτk (v)db.                 (D.5)
                                       Sk−1 ×[−rb ,rb ]

The type of discretization error depends on whether we are using the α -DFL or the (α,β)-SFL
oracle. We first cover the case of α -DFL oracles.
Proposition 33 (Approximation by Riemann Sum). Suppose σ satisfies (B.1). Let (w1 , . . . , wN ) be
                                                                                          U wi
the first layer weights obtained from the α -DFL oracle (Definition 2), and define vi = ∥U  wi ∥ for
                              i.i.d.
i ∈ [N ]. Suppose (bj )j∈[N ] ∼ Unif(−rb , rb ), and let ∥ĥ∥∞ := supv,b ĥ(v, b) . Then, there exists
                           / S and a∗j ≤ Ck ∥ĥ∥∞ rb log(αN/(ζδ))/(αN ) for j ∈ S (where S is
a∗ such that a∗j = 0 for j ∈
given by Definition 23), and

            X                                                        p    rb log(N/δ)
                a∗j σ(⟨vj , z⟩ + bj ) − T ĥ(z) ≤ Cq̄ ∥ĥ∥∞ Lσ rbq̄ rz ζ + (k−1)/2      ,            (D.6)
            j∈S
                                                                          ζ        αN

for all z ∈ Rk where ∥z∥ ≤ rz ≤ rb , with probability at least 1 − δ over the randomness of biases.

Proof. The proof is a multivariate
                          √        version of the argument given in (Oko et al., 2024, Lemma
                                                                                          √     29). Let
{v̄i }M
      i=1 be the maximal 2   2ζ-packing  of S k−1
                                                   from Definition 23, which  is also a 2   2ζ-covering
of Sk−1 . Recall from Definition 23 that M ≤ Ck ( ζ1 )(k−1)/2 .
For every i ∈ [M ], define                                   p
                               Si := {j ∈ [N ], ∥vj − v̄i ∥ ≤ 2ζ}.
Note that by definition of packing and Definition 2, each vj can only belong to exactly one of Si
when j ∈ S, meaning that (Si ) are disjoint and i∈[M ] Si = S. In particular, |Si |/N ≥ ζ (k−1)/2 α,
                                                S

and |Si |/N ≤ 1/M ≤ ζ (k−1)/2 /ck .
We want each group of biases (bj )j∈Si to cover the interval [−rb , rb ]. We divide this interval into 2A
                                                                                      i.i.d.
subintervals of the form [−rb (1 + Al ), rb (1 + l+1
                                                  A )) for 0 ≤ l ≤ 2A − 1. When bj ∼ Unif(−rb , rb ),
by a union bound, the probability that there exists some subinterval and some Si such that the
                                                                        PM            1 |Si |
subinterval contains no element of {bj : j ∈ Si } is at most 2A i=1 (1 − 2A             ) . Thus, taking
            |Si |
A ≤ ⌊ 2 log(|Si |M/δ) ⌋ for all i ∈ [M ] guarantees that all subintervals have at least one bias from every
Si inside them with probability at least 1 − δ.
Next, we define Π1 : Sk−1 → Sk−1 as the projection onto the packing, i.e. Π1 (v) =
arg min{v̄i :i∈[M ]} ∥v − v̄i ∥. Further, we define Π2 : [M ] × [−rb , rb ] → [−rb , rb ] by Π2 (i, b) =
arg min{bj :j∈Si } |b − bj |. Tie braking can be performed by choosing any of the answers. By defini-
                                    √
tion, we have ∥v − Π1 (v)∥ ≤ 2 2ζ, and additionally |b − Π2 (i, b)| ≤ rb /A for all i ∈ [M ] on the
event described above.
We are now ready to construct a∗ . Specifically, let
               (R
           ∗        ĥ(v, b)I[i = Π1 (v), bj = Π2 (i, b)]dτk (v)db if j ∈ Si for some i,
          aj =
                 0                                                 if j ∈
                                                                        / S.

Note that by definition,
                               M X
                               X
                                            I[i = Π1 (v), bj = Π2 (i, b)] = 1,
                               i=1 j∈Si

For conciseness, we define E(v, i, j) = I[i = Π1 (v), bj = Π2 (i, b)]. When j ∈ Si , on the event
E(v, i, j) we have                                                p
                         ∥v − vj ∥ ≤ ∥v − v̄i ∥ + ∥v̄i − vj ∥ ≤ 3 2ζ.


                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                     √
Moreover, since Pv∼τk [∥v − v̄i ∥ ≤ 2 2ζ] ≤ Ck ζ (k−1)/2 , for j ∈ S we have

                                      Ck ∥ĥ∥∞ ζ (k−1)/2 rb   Ck ∥ĥ∥∞ rb log(N/δ)
                            a∗j ≤                           ≤                      .
                                              A                       αN
As a result,

 X                                               X                                   Z
       a∗j σ(⟨vj , z⟩ + bj ) − T ĥ(z) =                   a∗j σ(⟨vj , z⟩ + bj ) −          ĥ(v, b)σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b)dτk (v)db
 j∈S                                             j∈S

                                                 M X Z
                                                 X
                                             =                        ĥ(v, b)E(v, i, j)(σ(⟨vj , z⟩ + bj ) − σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b))dτk (v)db
                                                 i=1 j∈Si
                                                                                    rb
                                             ≲ Cq̄ ∥ĥ∥∞ Lσ rbq̄ (rz
                                                                           p
                                                                               ζ+      ),
                                                                                    A
for all ∥z∥ ≤ rz , where we used the fact that σ(z) is O(Lσ rbq̄−1 ) Lipschitz when restricted to
|z| ≤ rb . This concludes the proof.

Next, we provide a discretization guarantee when using (α,β)-SFL oracles.
Proposition 34. Consider the same setting as Proposition 33, except the first-layer weights
(w1 , . . . , wN ) are obtained from the (α,β)-SFL oracle (Definition 3). Then, there exists a∗ such
that a∗i = 0 for i ∈ / S and |a∗i | ≤ ∥ĥ∥∞ rb /(βαN ) for i ∈ S, and
                                                                           r
                   X
                         ∗                              Cq̄ Lσ ∥ĥ∥∞ rbq̄+1 log(αN/δ)
                       aj σ(⟨vj , z⟩ + bj ) − T ĥ(z) ≤                               ,
                                                                 β             αN
                  j∈S

for all z ∈ Rk with ∥z∥ ≤ rb , with probability
                                       h        ati least 1 − δ over the randomness of (vi , bi )i∈[N ] .
                                                                                dµ
Moreover, suppose Ev,b∼τk ⊗Unif(−rb ,rb ) ĥ(v, b)2 ≤ M2 (ĥ)2 . Then, assuming dτ k
                                                                                     ≤ β ′ , we have

                 2      rb2 β ′ M2 (ĥ)2                                                           ∥ĥ∥4∞ log(1/δ)
            ∥a∗ ∥ ≲                      ,                  provided that,                   N≳                       ,
                             αβ 2 N                                                                 αβ ′ 2 M2 (ĥ)4
which also holds with probability at least 1 − δ.

Proof. By definition,
                                  Z
                     T ĥ(z) =                             ĥ(v, b)σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b)dτk (v)db
                                   Sk−1 ×[−rb ,rb ]
                                                                      dτk
                                  Z
                              =                            ĥ(v, b)       (v)σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b)dµ(v)db
                                   Sk−1 ×[−r     b ,rb ]
                                                                      dµ

                                                                   dτk
                              = Ev,b∼µ⊗Unif(−rb ,rb ) 2rb ĥ(v, b)     (v)σ(⟨v, z⟩ + b) .
                                                                   dµ
                         i.i.d.
Consider (vi , bi )i∈S ∼ µ ⊗ Unif(−rb , rb ) from Definition 3. Let
                                   (
                                     2rb ĥ(vi ,bi ) dτk
                              ∗
                             ai =         |S|        dµ (vi ) if i ∈ S,
                                    0                         if i ∈
                                                                   / S.
Consequently
                                                2rb ∥ĥ∥∞
                                                      |a∗i | ≤
                                                             ,
                                                    β|S|
for all i ∈ S. Given z, define the random variable
                                              X
                                   T̂ ĥ(z) =   a∗i σ(⟨vi , z⟩ + bi ).
                                                             i∈S


                                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our next step is to bound the difference between T̂ ĥ(z) and T ĥ(z) uniformly over all ∥z∥ ≤ rb .
Let (ẑj )M                                                             k
          j=1 be a ∆-covering of {z : ∥z∥ ≤ rb }, therefore M ≤ (3rb /∆) . Note that for any fixed z
with ∥z∥ ≤ rb , we have T̂ ĥ(z) ≲ ∥ĥ∥∞ Lσ rbq̄+1 /β. Thus, by Hoeffding’s lemma,
                                                              s
                                               ∥ĥ∥∞ Lσ rbq̄+1 log(1/δ)
                         T̂ ĥ(z) − T ĥ(z) ≲                            ,
                                                      β           |S|
with probability at least 1 − δ for a fixed z. By a union bound,
                                                                          s
                                                        ∥ĥ∥∞ Lσ rbq̄+1       log(M/δ)
                         max T̂ ĥ(ẑj ) − T ĥ(ẑj ) ≲                                ,
                         j∈[M ]                               β                  |S|
with probability at least 1 − δ. For any z with ∥z∥ ≤ rb , let ẑ denote the projection of z onto the
covering (ẑj )M
               j=1 . Then,

  sup       T̂ ĥ(z) − T ĥ(z) ≤ max T̂ ĥ(ẑj ) − T ĥ(ẑj ) + T ĥ(ẑ) − T ĥ(z) + T̂ ĥ(ẑ) − T ĥ(z)
∥z∥≤rb /2                           j∈[M ]
                                                     s
                                   ∥ĥ∥∞ Lσ rbq̄+1       log(M/δ) ∥ĥ∥∞ Lσ rbq̄ ∆
                                 ≲                               +                .
                                         β                  |S|        β
                                                     s
                                   ∥ĥ∥∞ Lσ rbq̄+1       log(rb /(∆δ)) ∥ĥ∥∞ Lσ rbq̄ ∆
                                 ≲                                    +                .
                                         β                    |S|           β
                 p
Choosing ∆ = rb / |S| implies
                                                                          s
                                                   ∥ĥ∥∞ Lσ rbq̄+1            log(|S|/δ)
                          sup T̂ ĥ(z) − T ĥ(z) ≲
                        ∥z∥≤rb /2                        β                        |S|
with probability at least 1 − δ over the randomness of (vi , bi )i∈[N ] .
                                   2
The last step is to bound ∥a∗ ∥ . Note that,
                                             2      4rb2 X ĥ(vi , bi )2
                                         ∥a∗ ∥ ≤                         .
                                                   β 2 |S|     |S|
                                                             i∈S

Further, by the Hoeffding inequality,
                                                                                  s
                 X ĥ(vi , bi )2                              h       i               log(1/δ)
                                   − Ev,b∼µ⊗Unif(−rb ,rb ) ĥ(v, b)2 ≲ ∥ĥ∥2∞
                           |S|                                                           |S|
                  i∈S

with probability at least 1 − δ. Moreover,

                                                                              2 dµ
                                  h          i
                                           2
             Ev,b∼µ⊗Unif(−rb ,rb ) ĥ(v, b) = Ev,b∼τk ⊗Unif(−rb ,rb ) ĥ(v, b)      (v)
                                                                                dτk
                                                   ≤ β ′ M2 (ĥ)2 .
                        ∥ĥ∥4 log(1/δ)                   2
Thus, when |S| ≥ β ′2∞M (ĥ)4 , we have ∥a∗ ∥ ≲ rb2 β ′ M2 (ĥ)2 /(β 2 |S|) with probability at least
                         2
1 − δ, which completes the proof.


D.5     C OMBINING A LL S TEPS

We can finally bound our original objective of this section, i.e. AR(a∗ , W , b) − AR∗ . Let us begin
with the case where F is the class of polynomials of degree p.
                                                                                  i.i.d.
Proposition 35. Suppose F and σ satisfy Assumption 4 and (bi )i∈[N ] ∼ Unif(−rb , rb ). Recall
                                 ϵ2
that ε1 := 1 ∨ ε, and ϵ̃ := ϵ ∧ AR  ∗ for any ϵ ∈ (0, 1). Using the simplification k, q, p, Lσ ≲ 1 and

recalling ε1 := 1 ∨ ε, there exists a choice of rb = Θ̃(ε1 ) such that:


                                                         35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  • If W = (w1 , . . . , wN )⊤ are given by the α -DFL oracle, there exists a∗ such that |a∗i | ≤
    Õ(ε1 /(αN )) for all i ∈ [N ], and AR(a∗ , W , b) − AR∗ ≤ ϵ as soon as
                                     ϵ̃                                                               εq+1
                                                                                                       1

                 ζ ≤ Õ         2(q+1)
                                                                and                 N ≥ Ω̃                    √         .
                               ε1                                                                 αζ (k−1)/2 ϵ̃

  • If W = (w1 , . . . , wN )⊤ are given by the (α,β)-SFL oracle, there exists a∗ such that |a∗i | ≤
    Õ(ε1 /(βαN )) for all i ∈ [N ], and AR(a∗ , W , b) − AR∗ ≤ ϵ as soon as
                                 β 2 ϵ̃                                                               ε2(q+1)
                                                                                                       1
                  ζ ≤ Õ                                            and                  N ≥ Ω̃                     .
                                     2(q+1)
                                    ε1                                                                 αβ 2 ϵ̃

Both cases above hold with probability at least 1 − n−c for some absolute constant c > 0 over the
choice of random biases (bi )i∈[N ] (and random weights (wi ) in the case of SFL).

Proof. Recall from (D.1) that

                           AR(a∗ , W , b) − AR∗ ≲ E1 + E2 +
                                                                                  p
                                                                                      E3 (E1 + E2 ).
By definition, E3 ≲ AR∗ . By Lemma 24, we have
                                                              2(q̄−1)
                                    E2 ≲ L2σ r̃a2 (1 + rb               + ε2(q̄−1) )(1 + ε2 )ζ.
                                                                              p
Further, thanks to Lemma 31 we have |h(z)| ≲ 1 + ∥z∥ . Therefore, by Lemma 25 with rz = rb ,
we have                                                                         2
                    E1 ≲ ϵ2approx + L2σ r̃a2 (1 + ε2q̄ + rb2q̄ ) + 1 + ε2p e−Ω(rb ) .


Let us now consider the case of α -DFL. Define p̄ = (p − 2) ∨ 0 if the ReLU activation is used and
p̄ = 0 if the polynomial activation is used. Notice that by the definition in Assumption 4, we have
q̄ + p̄ = q. By Proposition 33, we know there exists a∗ with |a∗i | ≤ Õ(rb1+p̄ /(αN )) (we used the
fact that maxs≤p T (s) F ≲ 1 from Lemma 31) such that
                                                              1
                             ϵapprox ≤ Õ rbq+1
                                                 p
                                                   ζ + (k−1)/2           ,
                                                        ζ        αN
provided that rb ≳ ε1 where we recall ε1 = 1 ∨ ε, and the above statement holds with probability
at least 1 − δ for any polynomially decaying δ, e.g. δ = n−c for some absolute constant c > 0.
Therefore,
      q     we have r̃a ≤ Õ(rb1+p̄ ). Further, it suffices to choose rb large enough such that rb ≳
ε1 ∨   log(N L2σ r̃a2 rb2q̄ + ε2p
                               1 ) = Θ̃(ε1 ) to have

                                                       2(q+1)                  1
                                              E1 ≤ Õ rb      ζ+                          .
                                                                          ζ k−1 α2 N 2
Plugging in the values of r̃a and rb , we obtain,
                                                                                                           2(q+1)
                      2(q+1)

                                                                                    2(q+1)              ε1
          E2 ≤ Õ(ε1                ζ),                 and                E1 ≤ Õ ε1      ζ+                               .
                                                                                                      ζ k−1 α2 N 2
Hence, choosing
                               ϵ̃                                                                     εq+1
                                                                                                       1

             ζ ≤ Õ        2(q+1)
                                              ,               and                  N ≥ Ω̃                    √
                          ε1                                                                      αζ (k−1)/2 ϵ̃
which concludes the proof of the α -DFL case.
In the case of (α,β)-SFL, we instead invoke Proposition 34, thus obtain |a∗i | ≲ rb1+p̄ /(βαN ), and
                                                                       L rq+1
                                                                        σ b
                                                      ϵapprox ≤ Õ      √       ,
                                                                       β αN

                                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which holds with probability at least 1 − δ for any polynomially decaying δ such as δ = n−c for
some absolute constant c > 0. Consequently, with the same choice of rb = Θ̃(ε1 ) as before, we have
                       ε2(q+1) ζ                                          ε2(q+1)
             E2 ≤ Õ 1 2           ,            and              E1 ≤ Õ 12          ,
                          β                                                β αN
which completes the proof.

We can also combine approximation bounds for the more general class of pseudo-Lipschitz F.
                                                                             i.i.d.
Proposition 36. Suppose F and σ satisfy Assumption 3 and (bi )i∈[N ] ∼ Unif(−rb , rb ). Recall
                                   ϵ2
that ε1 := 1 ∨ ε, and ϵ̃ := ϵ ∧ AR     for any ϵ ∈ (0, 1). Using the simplification k, p, L ≲ 1, there
                                   √∗ 1+1/k
exists a choice of rb = Θ̃ ε1 (ε1 / ϵ̃)        such that:

       • If W =√(w1 , . . . , wN )⊤ is given by the α -DFL oracle, there exists a∗ such that |a∗i | ≤
         Õ((ε1 / ϵ̃)k+1+1/k /(αN )) for all i ∈ [N ], and AR(a∗ , W , b) − AR∗ ≤ ϵ as soon as
                         ϵ̃                                           1       ε1  k+3+2/k
                               k+2+1/k
                ζ ≤ Õ     2             ,     and       N ≥ Ω̃ (k−1)/2 √                   .
                         ε1                                       ζ       α     ϵ̃

       • If W = (w1 ,√    . . . , wN )⊤ is given  by the (α,β)-SFL oracle, there exists a∗ such that
         |a∗i | ≤ Õ (ε1 / ϵ̃)k+1+1/k /(αβN ) , and AR(a∗ , W , b) − AR∗ ≤ ϵ as soon as
                                   ϵ̃  k+2+1/k                            1 ε2
                                                                                1 k+3+2/k
                  ζ ≤ Õ β 2 2                   ,     and       N ≥ Ω̃                      .
                                  ε1                                     αβ 2 ϵ̃

Both cases above hold with probability at least 1 − n−c for some absolute constant c > 0 over the
choice of random biases (bi )i∈[N ] (and random weights (wi ) in the case of SFL).
Proof. Our starting point is once again the decomposition
                       AR(a∗ , W , b) − AR∗ ≤ E1 + E2 +
                                                              p
                                                                  E3 (E1 + E2 ).
                                                                                               p−1
Given Assumption 3, it is straightforward to verify that |h(z1 ) − h(z2 )| ≲ (ε1−p  1   ∥z1 ∥     +
            p−1                                                                                   p
ε1−p
 1    ∥z 2 ∥    + 1)∥z1 −   z2 ∥ for z1 , z2 ∈ R k
                                                   . As a consequence, we have |h(z)| ≲  1 +  ∥z∥
              k                                                                       2
for all z ∈ R . Therefore, by Lemma 25 with a choice of rz = Θ̃(ε1 ), we have E1 ≲ ϵapprox . In the
rest of the proof we will fix rz = Θ̃(ε1 ).
We begin by considering the case of α -DFL. Unlike the proof of Proposition 35 where T ĥ = h, in
this case we have an additional error due to T ĥ only approximating h. From Lemma 32, we have
                                                1 ∆
                                                         2k/(k+1)
                                  ∥ĥ∥∞ ≤ Õ                        .
                                                 ε1 ε1
Thus,
                      X
  ϵapprox ≤ sup           a∗j σ(⟨vj , z⟩ + bj ) − T ĥ(z) + T ĥ(z) − h(z)
             ∥z∥≤rz j∈S
                  r    ∆   k+1
                            2k              rb                      ∆  − k+1
                                                                          2        ∆   k+1
                                                                                        2k  ε 1  k
                  b
                                 p
          ≤ Õ                 ε1 ζ + (k−1)/2          + Õ ε1               + ε1                    ,
                   ε1 ε1                ζ       αN                  ε1             ε1       rb
where we bounded the first term via Proposition 33 with q̄ = 1, and the second term via Lemma 32.
Additionally, we have
                                                rb    ∆   k+1
                                                           2k
                                       a∗j ≤                  ,
                                              ε1 αN ε1
                                                                                          √
for all j ∈ [N ]. To obtain AR(a∗ , W , b) ≤ AR∗ + ϵ, we must choose ∆ = Θ̃(ε1 (ε1 / ϵ̃)(k+1)/2 ).
                                   √                                                            √
Next, we choose rb = Θ̃(ε1 (ε1 / ϵ̃)(k+1)/k ). This combination ensures T ĥ(z) − h(z) ≲ ϵ̃. To
                                   √
make sure T̂ ĥ(z) − T ĥ(z) ≲ ϵ̃, we should let
                   ϵ̃                                                  1      ε1  k+3+2/k
                        k+2+1/k
          ζ ≤ Õ     2            ,       and         N = Θ̃ (k−1)/2 √                      .
                    ε1                                            ζ        α    ϵ̃


                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                         √                          √
The above guarantees that ϵapprox ≲ ϵ̃ and consequently E1√+ E3 E1 ≲ ϵ. Note that the above
choices imply a∗j ≤ r̃a /|S| for all i ∈ S with r̃a = Õ((ε1 / ϵ̃)k+1+1/k ). From Lemma 24 with
q̄ = 1, we have E2 ≲ r̃a2 ε21 ζ. Therefore, if we let
                                                  ϵ̃
                                                        k+2+1/k
                                         ζ = Θ̃                   ,
                                                    ε21
                                           √
we have E2 ≲ ϵ̃ and consequently E2 + E3 E1 ≲ ϵ. This concludes the proof of the α -DFL case.

Next, we consider the case of (α,β)-SFL. Note that the error T ĥ(z) − h(z) remains unchanged.
However, this time we invoke Proposition 34 for controlling T̂ ĥ(z) − T ĥ(z) . Therefore,

                                 X
           ϵapprox ≤ sup             a∗j σ(⟨vj , z⟩ + bj ) − T ĥ(z) + T ĥ(z) − h(z)
                     ∥z∥≤rz j∈S

                            r2             r
                             b   ∆   k+1
                                      2k      1               ∆  − k+12      ∆   k+1
                                                                                  2k ε 1  k
                   ≤ Õ                            + Õ ε1              + ε1                  .
                             βε1 ε1          αN               ε1             ε1      rb
                                                                                      √
Since the second term is unchanged, we have the same choices of ∆ = Θ̃ ε1 (ε1 / ϵ̃)(k+1)/2 and
                   √ 1+1/k
rb = Θ̃ ε1 (ε1 / ϵ̃)           as in the α -DFL case. However, for the finite-width discretization, we
should choose                                   1 ε2
                                                         1 k+3+2/k
                                       N = Θ̃      2
                                                                      .                          (D.7)
                                                αβ ϵ̃
                                                                         √
Moreover, Proposition 34 implies a∗j ≤ r̃a /|S| with r̃a = Õ (ε1 / ϵ̃)k+1+1/k /β . As a result, to


get E2 ≲ r̃a2 ε21 ζ ≤ ϵ̃ from Lemma 24 with q = 1, we let
                                                      ϵ̃  k+2+1/k
                                         ζ = Θ̃ β 2 2               ,
                                                     ε1
completing the proof.


E    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we perform a simple experiment on the MNIST dataset (LeCun et al., 1998) to
demonstrate that the intuitions from our theoretical results go beyond the setting of multi-index
models, squared loss, and ℓ2 norm attacks. We choose a convolutational neural network as our
predictor, given by two convolution layers with 32 and 64 channels respectively, a max pooling layer,
and two fully connected layers. For each choice of ϵ, we do two experiments:

      1. ADV training: We train the network adversarially for 11 epochs, where we initialize the
         model using the default PyTorch initialization, then use the adversarial training algorithm
         of Madry et al. (2018).
      2. STD + ADV training: We first train the model with standard SGD for 10 epochs from
         PyTorch initialization, then perform 10 epochs of adversarial training on top of this standard
         presentation.

For both approaches, we use the corss entropy loss, a batch size of 64, a learning rate of 0.01 for both
PGD and SGD updates, and we use ℓ∞ norm to constrain perturbations, where pixels are normalized
between 0 and 1. Note that due to the additional cost of generating adversarial samples, taking one
additional epoch on ADV ensures a fare comparison where ADV and STD + ADV will roughly have
the same computational complexity.
As can be seen from Table 1, the STD + ADV training approach achieves a higher test accuracy
compared to the ADV approach across all model architectures considered here. This is consistent
with our intuition from the guarantees of Algorithm 1. The standard training phase can recover an


                                                    38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Algorithm        ε = 0.2         ε = 0.3       ε = 0.4
                        ADV              91 ± 1          82 ± 2       69 ± 2
                      STD + ADV       93.80 ± 0.09     87.2 ± 0.4   75.3 ± 0.6

Table 1: Adversarial test accuracy comparison between ADV and STD + ADV across three different
values for ε on the MNIST dataset. The error shown for each accuracy is the standard deviation over
three runs.


optimal low-dimensional representation on top of which adversarial training becomes easier. Note
that since we work with multi-layer convolutional neural networks, there is no longer a single layer
that captures the entirety of the low-dimensional projection, which is why we choose to retrain
all parameters of the network adversarially. One interesting direction for future research is to
understand in settings beyond two layers, which parameters need to be adversarially trained after
the standard training phase. The code to reproduce the results of Figure 1 and Table 1 is provided at:
https://github.com/mousavih/robust-feature-learning.


                                                  39
