Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACT S AFE : ACTIVE E XPLORATION WITH S AFETY C ON -
STRAINTS FOR R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Yarden As, Bhavya Sukhija ∗                       Lenart Treven                  Carmelo Sferrazza
 ETH Zürich                                       ETH Zürich                    UC Berkeley

 Stelian Coros                                       Andreas Krause
 ETH Zürich                                         ETH Zürich



                                              A BSTRACT
            Reinforcement learning (RL) is ubiquitous in the development of modern AI sys-
            tems. However, state-of-the-art RL agents require extensive, and potentially unsafe,
            interactions with their environments to learn effectively. These limitations confine
            RL agents to simulated environments, hindering their ability to learn directly in
            real-world settings. In this work, we present ACT S AFE, a novel model-based RL
            algorithm for safe and efficient exploration. ACT S AFE learns a well-calibrated
            probabilistic model of the system and plans optimistically w.r.t. the epistemic
            uncertainty about the unknown dynamics, while enforcing pessimism w.r.t. the
            safety constraints. Under regularity assumptions on the constraints and dynamics,
            we show that ACT S AFE guarantees safety during learning while also obtaining
            a near-optimal policy in finite time. In addition, we propose a practical variant of
            ACT S AFE that builds on latest model-based RL advancements and enables safe ex-
            ploration even in high-dimensional settings such as visual control. We empirically
            show that ACT S AFE obtains state-of-the-art performance in difficult exploration
            tasks on standard safe deep RL benchmarks while ensuring safety during learning.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful paradigm for sequential decision-making under uncertainty,
with many applications in games (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016), recommender systems
(Maystre et al., 2023), nuclear fusion control (Degrave et al., 2022), data-center cooling (Lazic et al.,
2018) and robotics (Lee et al., 2020; Brohan et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2024). Despite the notable
progress, its application without any use of simulators remains largely limited. This is primarily
because, in many cases, RL methods require massive amounts of data for learning while also being
inherently unsafe during exploration.
In many real-world settings, environments are complex and rarely align exactly with the assumptions
made in simulators. Learning directly in the real world allows RL systems to close the sim-to-real
gap and continuously adapt to evolving environments and distribution shifts. However, to unlock
these advantages, RL algorithms must be sample-efficient and ensure safety throughout the learning
process to avoid costly failures or risks in high-stakes applications. For instance, agents learning
driving policies in autonomous vehicles must prevent collisions with other cars or pedestrians, even
when adapting to new driving environments. This challenge is known as safe exploration, where the
agent’s exploration is restricted by safety-critical, often unknown, constraints that must be satisfied
throughout the learning process.
Several works study safe exploration and have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in terms
of both safety and sample efficiency for learning in the real world (Sui et al., 2015; Wischnewski
et al., 2019; Berkenkamp et al., 2021; Cooper & Netoff, 2022; Sukhija et al., 2023; Widmer et al.,
2023). These methods maintain a “safe set” of policies during learning, selecting policies from
this set to safely explore and gradually expand it. Under common regularity assumptions about the
constraints, these approaches guarantee safety throughout learning. However, explicitly maintaining
and expanding a safe set, limits these methods to low-dimensional policies, such as PID controllers.
This makes them difficult to scale to more complex tasks such as those considered in deep RL.

    ∗
        Equal contribution. Correspondence to: yardas@ethz.ch


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The goal of this work is to address this gap. To this end, we propose a scalable model-based RL
algorithm – ACT S AFE – for efficient and safe exploration. Crucially, ACT S AFE learns an uncertainty-
aware dynamics model, which it uses to implicitly define and expand the safe set of policies. We
theoretically show that ACT S AFE ensures safety throughout learning and converges to a near-optimal
policy within a finite number of episodes. Moreover, ACT S AFE is practical and integrates seamlessly
with state-of-the-art dynamics modeling techniques, for instance Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2023),
delivering strong empirical performance. Thus, ACT S AFE advances the frontier of safe RL methods,
both in theory and practice. Our main contributions are summarized below.
Contributions
 • We propose ACT S AFE, a novel model-based RL algorithm for safe exploration in continuous
   state-action spaces. ACT S AFE maintains a pessimistic set of safe policies and optimistically
   selects policies within this set that yield trajectories with the largest model epistemic uncertainty.
 • We show that when the dynamics lie in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), ACT S AFE
   guarantees safe exploration. In addition, we provide a sample-complexity bound for ACT S AFE,
   illustrating that ACT S AFE obtains ϵ-optimal policies in a finite number of episodes. To the best of
   our knowledge, we are the first to show safety and finite sample complexity for safe exploration in
   model-based RL with continuous state-action spaces.
 • In our experiments, we demonstrate that ACT S AFE, when combined with a Gaussian process
   dynamics model, achieves efficient and safe exploration. Additionally, we show that ACT S AFE
   scales to high-dimensional environments of the S AFETY-G YM and RWRL benchmarks, excelling
   in challenging exploration tasks with visual control while also incurring significantly fewer
   constraint violations.

2    R ELATED W ORKS
Constrained Markov decision processes (CMDP) for safe RL Safety in reinforcement learning
can be modeled in various ways (Garcı́a et al., 2015; Brunke et al., 2022). Constrained Markov
decision processes (CMDPs) serve as a natural option for this purpose, as they can encode unsafe
behaviors through constraints and enjoy many classical results from planning in MDPs (Altman,
1999). Learning and planning in CMDPs have been extensively explored in the RL community,
both theoretically and in practice. Notably, the works of Efroni et al. (2020); Vaswani et al. (2022);
Ding et al. (2022); Müller et al. (2024) derive sample complexity bounds for CMDPs in discrete
state-action spaces, whereas Achiam et al. (2017); Tessler et al. (2018); Stooke et al. (2020); Xu
et al. (2021); Liu et al. (2022); As et al. (2022); Sootla et al. (2022); Huang et al. (2024) develop
deep RL algorithms for CMDPs in continuous state-action spaces. However, all the aforementioned
works relax the requirement of safe exploration and thus do not ensure the safety during learning.
This is in contrast to this work, where we tackle the hard problem of safe exploration.
Provably safe exploration Turchetta et al. (2016); Wachi et al. (2018); Wachi & Sui (2020) focus
on safe exploration in CMDPs with discrete state-action spaces and a constraint function that lies in
an RKHS. Zheng & Ratliff (2020) study sample complexity for safe exploration in discrete CMDPs.
For continuous state-action spaces, Berkenkamp et al. (2021) and extensions thereof (Baumann et al.,
2021; Sukhija et al., 2023; Hübotter et al., 2024), leverage ideas from safe Bayesian optimization (Sui
et al., 2015) to directly optimize over the policy parameters in a model-free manner. The proposed
algorithms guarantee safe exploration and finite sample complexity for learning an ϵ-optimal solution.
When evaluated on real-world systems, these methods exhibit remarkable sample efficiency while
also being safe during learning (Cooper & Netoff, 2022; Kirschner et al., 2019; Widmer et al., 2023).
However, these approaches are limited to simple low-dimensional policies, e.g., PID controllers, and
are hard to scale to policies with more than few parameters. In a similar spirit, Berkenkamp et al.
(2017) propose a model-based RL algorithm for safe learning, where safety is modeled in terms of
Lyapunov stability. Even though the method enjoys similar theoretical guarantees as Berkenkamp
et al. (2021), it assumes access to a generative simulator and thus cannot be applied to traditional
online RL settings. In contrast, Koller et al. (2018); Curi et al. (2022) propose more practical
safe learning methods in combination with model-predictive control (MPC). While these methods
guarantee safety during learning, they lack optimality guarantees and are computationally expensive
to run in real-time.
A common aspect among most of the aforementioned methods is their use of an intrinsic objective,
such as the model epistemic uncertainty, to guide and restrain exploration. Crucially, these methods


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


maintain a safe set of policies which they gradually expand during learning by sampling policies that
yield the highest intrinsic reward. In this work, we build on this key insight to propose a model-based
RL algorithm for online learning that enjoys the same kind of guarantees while also being applicable
in real-world settings such as deep RL.
Safe exploration with deep RL A common approach to safe exploration is the use of safety
filters (Dalal et al., 2018; Wabersich & Zeilinger, 2021; Curi et al., 2022), which modify the actions
produced by an unsafe policy to meet safety constraints before they are executed on the real system.
A key advantage of safety filters is that they can be easily added to any “off-the-shelf” unsafe RL
algorithm. However, while safety is ensured, safety filters can lead to arbitrarily bad exploration
and therefore lack guarantees for optimality. The works of Srinivasan et al. (2020); Thananjeyan et al.
(2021) rely on learning safety critics that certificate state-actions as safe, either for policy optimization
or during online data collection. These works provide strong empirical results, including demonstra-
tions of safe policies on real hardware. In addition, following this approach, Bharadhwaj et al. (2020)
upper bound the the probability of making infeasible policy updates. Another line of work, relies on
guaranteeing feasibility of policy optimization algorithms. Notably, Chow et al. (2019) use Lyapunov
functions to guarantee feasibility of policy gradients iterates and derive their analysis on discrete
state-action spaces. Usmanova et al. (2024) propose Log-Barriers SGD (LBSGD), an optimization
algorithm that ensures feasibility of all its iterates with barrier functions, showcasing its application
in navigation tasks with image observations. More recently, As et al. (2024); Ni & Kamgarpour
(2024) use LBSGD for safe learning with greedy policy gradients, i.e., without considering intrinsic
rewards to expand the safe set of policies. Crucially, this form of greedy policy search may result
in sub-optimal policies, as described in Section 4 and empirically shown in Section 5.

3       P ROBLEM S ETTING
We consider a discrete-time, episodic, constrained Markov decision process (CMDP), where the
goal is to find a policy that not only maximizes the reward but also keeps the accumulated costs
below a specified threshold, i.e., satisfies a safety constraint. This type of formulation is common in
real-world scenarios, such as robot navigation. In this setting, the reward could represent the negative
distance to a target destination, while the costs could represent penalties, such as a cost of 1 incurred
for each collision with an obstacle. The CMDP formulation allows us to separate these two objectives,
thus ensuring constraint satisfaction and safety, for an optimal policy. In this setup, we consider
dynamical systems with additive noise and bounded running rewards r and costs c
                 st+1 = f ∗ (st , at ) + wt , (st , at ) ∈ S × A, s(0) = s0
                                              r(s, a) ∈ [0, Rmax ]      (Running reward)              (1)
                                              c(s, a) ∈ [0, Cmax ]     (Running cost).
Here st ∈ S ⊂ Rds is the state, at ∈ A ⊂ Rda the control input, and wt ∈ W ⊆ Rds the process
noise. The dynamics f ∗ are unknown and without loss of generality, the reward r and cost c are
assumed to be known.
Task In this work, we study the following constrained RL problem (Altman, 1999)
                              "T −1            #                          "T −1            #
                                X                                          X
             ∗                                               ∗
 max Jr (π, f ) := max Es0 ,π       r(st , at ) s.t. Jc (π, f ) := Es0 ,π       c(st , at ) ≤ d;
    π∈Π                   π∈Π
                                         t=0                                          t=0
                                                                                                           (2)
                                 ∗
                      st+1 = f (st , πt (st )) + wt .
We study the episodic setting, with episodes n = 1, . . . , N . At the beginning of the episode n, we
deploy a policy πn = (πn,0 , πn,1 , . . . , πn,T −1 ), chosen from the policy space Π for a horizon of T
on the system. Next, we obtain the trajectory τn = (sn,0 , . . . , sn,T ), which we add to a dataset of
transitions Dn = {(zn,i = (sn,i , πn,i (sn,i )), yn,i = sn,i+1 )0≤i<T } and use the collected data to
learn a model of f ∗ .

4       ACT S AFE : ACTIVE E XPLORATION WITH S AFETY C ONSTRAINTS
A key challenge in learning with safety constraints is ensuring that these constraints are not violated
during exploration. In the following, we introduce an idealized version of ACT S AFE, which guar-
antees safe exploration for dynamical systems with Gaussian process dynamics 1 . Moreover, we also
    1
        These guarantees can be extended to more general well-calibrated models as in Curi et al. (2020)


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


provide a bound on the sample complexity of ACT S AFE for learning an ϵ-optimal policy. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first model-based safe RL algorithm for continuous state-action spaces that
provides guarantees for both safety and sample complexity. In Section 4.3, we discuss a practical vari-
ant scaling to more complex domains. Our choice of a model-based approach is motivated by its supe-
rior empirical sample efficiency (Chua et al., 2018; As et al., 2022) as well as our theoretical analysis.
4.1 A SSUMPTIONS
Theoretically studying safe exploration without any assumptions on the underlying dynamical system
is an ill-posed problem. In the following, we make some assumptions on the underlying problem that
are common in the model-based RL (Curi et al., 2020; Kakade et al., 2020) and safe RL (Berkenkamp
et al., 2021; Baumann et al., 2021) literature.
Assumption 4.1 (Continuity of f ∗ and π). The dynamics model f ∗ is Lf –Lipschitz, the cost c is
Lc –Lipschitz, and all π ∈ Π are continuous.
Assumption 4.2 (Process noise distribution). The process noise is i.i.d. Gaussian with variance
              i.i.d
σ 2 , i.e., wt ∼ N (0, σ 2 I).
We focus on the setting where w is homoscedastic for simplicity. However, our framework can also
be applied to the more general heteroscedastic and sub-Gaussian case (Sukhija et al., 2024; Hübotter
et al., 2024).
Assumption 4.3 (Initial safe seed). We have access to an initial nonempty safe set S0 of policies, i.e.,
∀π ∈ S0 : Jc (π) ≤ d and S0 ̸= ∅.
This assumption is crucial since without any prior knowledge about the system, ensuring safety is
unrealistic. Therefore, S0 allows us to start the learning process by selecting policies from this set. In
practice, this safe set could be obtained from a simulator or offline demonstration data.
In the following, we assume that at each step n we learn a mean estimate µn of f ∗ and can quantify
our uncertainty σn over the estimate. This allows us to learn an uncertainty-aware model of f ∗ ,
which is crucial for exploration and safety. More formally, we learn a well-calibrated statistical model
of f ∗ as defined below.
                                                                                              def
Definition 4.4 (Well-calibrated statistical model of f ∗ , Rothfuss et al. (2023)). Let Z = S × A.
An all-time well-calibrated statistical model of the function f is a sequence {Qn (δ)}n≥0 , where
                                                                 ∗

             def
     Qn (δ) = f : Z → Rds | ∀z ∈ Z, ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , ds } : |µn,j (z) − fj (z)| ≤ βn (δ)σn,j (z) ,
if, with probability at least 1 − δ, we have f ∗ ∈ n≥0 Qn (δ). Here, fj , µn,j and σn,j denote the j-th
                                                    T

element in the vector-valued functions f , µn and σn respectively, and βn (δ) ∈ R≥0 is sequence of
scalar functions that depends on the confidence level δ ∈ (0, 1] and is monotonically increasing in n.
Next, we assume that f ∗ resides in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) of vector-valued
functions and show that this is sufficient for us to obtain a well-calibrated model.
Assumption 4.5. We assume that the functions fj∗ , j = {1, . . . , ds } lie in a RKHS with kernel k
                                                 ds          ds
and have a bounded norm B, that is f ∗ ∈ Hk,B        , with Hk,B = {f | ∥fj ∥k ≤ B, j = {1, . . . , ds }}.
Moreover, we assume that k(z, z) ≤ σmax for all z ∈ Z.
Assumption 4.5 allows us to model f ∗ with GPs for which the mean and epistemic uncertainty
(µn (z) = [µn,j (z)]j≤ds , and σn (z) = [σn,j (z)]j≤ds ) have an analytical formula (c.f., Equation (9)
in Appendix A).
                                                                                                  ds
Lemma 4.6 (Well calibrated confidence intervals for RKHS, Rothfuss et al. (2023)). Let f ∗ ∈ Hk,B    .
Suppose µn and σn are the posterior mean and variance of a GP with kernel k after episode n. There
exists βn (δ), for which the sequence (µn , σn , βn (δ))n≥0 represents a well-calibrated statistical
model of f ∗ .
In summary, Assumption 4.5 and Lemma 4.6 show that in the RKHS setting, a GP is a well-calibrated
model. For more general models like Bayesian neural networks (BNNs), methods such as Kuleshov
et al. (2018) can be used for calibration. Overall, our results can also be extended beyond the RKHS
setting to other classes of well-calibrated models similar to Curi et al. (2020).
4.2 ACT S AFE : A LGORITHMIC F RAMEWORK
A crucial element of safe exploration algorithms is the exploration–expansion dilemma (Hübotter
et al., 2024). In the following, we explain this in further detail, we then present a sketch of ACT S AFE
and finally the formal algorithm.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 ACT S AFE: ACTIVE E XPLORATION WITH S AFETY C ONSTRAINTS (Expansion stage)
    Init: Aleatoric uncertainty σ, Probability δ, Statistical model (µ0 , σ0 , β0 (δ))
    for episode n = 1, . . . , n∗ do            hP                              i
                                                    T −1
        πn = arg maxπ∈Sn maxf ∈Mn Eτ π,f            t=0  ∥σ n−1 (ŝt , π(ŝt ))∥       ➤ Prepare policy
       Dn ← ROLLOUT(πn )                                                               ➤ Collect data
       Update (Mn , Sn ) ← D1:n                                 ➤ Update statistical model and safe set
    end for


Safe set expansion To ensure the safety of the agent during the initial phases of learning, ACT S AFE
begins exploration by selecting policies from S0 (Assumption 4.3). This reduces uncertainty σn
about f ∗ for policies in S0 , allowing us to infer the safety of policies beyond S0 and expand the safe
set (see Figure 1). Safe set expansion is critical in safe RL because the optimal policy may lie outside
the initial safe set, and expanding the safe set is necessary to reach it. Unlike traditional RL, where
exploration focuses on maximizing reward, safe RL methods must also explore to expand the safe
set. Methods like optimism and Thompson sampling, which focus on reward maximization, do not
address this need for safe set expansion (Sui et al., 2015).

Algorithm Sketch ACT S AFE operates in two stages; (i) expansion by intrinsic exploration and
(ii) exploitation of extrinsic reward. In the first stage, ACT S AFE uses the model epistemic uncertainty
as an intrinsic reward rexplore (s, a) = ∥σn−1 (s, a)∥ and selects policies within the safe set that yield
trajectories with high uncertainties. This enables ACT S AFE to efficiently reduce its uncertainty within
the safe set and expand it. ACT S AFE performs the intrinsic exploration phase for a fixed number
of episodes n∗ till the safe set is sufficiently large and then transitions to the second stage. In the
exploitation stage, ACT S AFE greedily maximizes the extrinsic reward r, effectively aiming to solve
the problem in Equation (2).
Most model-based safe RL methods (As et al., 2022) focus only on the second stage and ignore safe set
expansion. In contrast, the theoretically grounded approaches of Berkenkamp et al. (2021); Baumann
et al. (2021); Sukhija et al. (2023); Hübotter et al. (2024) explicitly account for the expansion, but are
not scalable to high dimensional policies typically considered in RL.
Next, we present our main algorithm. To ensure safety during learning, we maintain a conservative
(pessimistic) estimate of the safe set which is defined below.
                            def
Definition 4.7. Let Mn = Mn−1 ∩ Qn , ∀n ≥ 1 denote the set of plausible models, and Pn (π) =
maxf ∈Mn Jc (π, f ) our pessimistic estimate of the expected costs w.r.t. Mn . Then, we define the
safe set Sn as
                def
             Sn = Sn−1 ∪ {π ∈ Π \ Sn−1 ; ∃π ′ ∈ Sn−1 s.t. Pn (π ′ ) + D(π, π ′ ) ≤ d} ,                (3)

where

   D(π, π ′ ) =
         "T −1                                                                                #
                                                                   Lf ∥π ′ (st ) − π(st )∥
          X
                         ′
   Eτ π′       min {Lc ∥π (st ) − π(st )∥ , 2Cmax } + T Cmax min                           ,1
          t=0
                                                                              σ


Interpretation of Definition 4.7 We maintain a pessimistic estimate, Pn of the constraint value
function Jc w.r.t. our model set Mn . In Equation (3) we define the expansion operator for the safe
set. This operator adds new policies π that are not yet in the safe set, i.e., those in Π \ Sn−1 , to Sn
if they are close to some policy π ′ from within the safe set. The distance D(π, π ′ ) measures how
close the two policies are in terms of the underlying cost function, and it is similar to other distance
metrics, such as the one in Foster et al. (2024, Theorem 2.1).
The expansion operator is common in the safe BO and RL literature (Wischnewski et al., 2019;
Fiducioso et al., 2019; Berkenkamp et al., 2021; Baumann et al., 2021; Cooper & Netoff, 2022;
Sukhija et al., 2023; Holzapfel et al., 2024; Fiedler et al., 2024), and while it is generally difficult to
evaluate in continuous spaces, it gives a key insight for safe RL methods: to effectively expand our
knowledge of what is safe, we have to reduce our pessimism across policies in our safe set.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Π                                            Π                            Π
                         RϵH (S0 )                                     RϵH (S0 )                    RϵH (S0 )

                    π∗                                        π∗                               π∗


        S1
               S0



Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the expansion process. We expand the safe set at iteration n − 1
by reducing our uncertainty around policies at the boundary of Sn−1 . The pale blue area depicts
the reachable set RεH (S0 ) after H expansion iterations. The arrow on the leftmost illustration
demonstrates that without explicit expansion, finding the optimal policy π ∗ is intractable.

Accordingly, during the expansion phase, we use the following objective for ACT S AFE, which, in
the n-th episode, selects the policy πn that yields the high uncertainty about the underlying dynamics
                                                      "T −1                       #
                                                       X
                      πn , fn = arg max Eτ π,f              ∥σn−1 (ŝt , π(ŝt ))∥ .               (4)
                                     π∈Sn ,f ∈Mn              t=0
                                                     |             def
                                                                             {z            }
                                                                   = Jrn (π,f )

Furthermore, akin to Curi et al. (2020); Sukhija et al. (2024), we introduce additional exploration, by
also optimistically picking the dynamics fn from our set of plausible models Mn . Moreover, since the
true dynamics, f ∗ are unknown, we have to plan w.r.t. some dynamics model in Mn . A theoretically
grounded and well-established strategy for model-based RL methods is to pick an optimistic model
fn from Mn . As we show in Theorem 4.8 this results in first-of-its-kind sample complexity and
safety guarantees. The expansion phase of the algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Theorem 4.8. Let Assumptions 4.1 to 4.3 and 4.5 hold. Then, we have with probability at least 1 − δ
that Jc (πn , f ∗ ) ≤ d ∀n ≥ 0, i.e., ACT S AFE is safe during all episodes.
Moreover, consider any ϵ > 0 and define RϵH (S0 ) as the reachable safe set after H expansions
          def
RϵH (S0 ) = RϵH−1 (S0 ) ∪ π ∈ Π \ RϵH−1 (S0 ); ∃π ′ ∈ RϵH−1 (S0 ) s.t. Jc (π ′ ) + D(π, π ′ ) ≤ d − ϵ

         def
Rϵ0 (S0 ) = S0 .
Let n∗ be the smallest integer such that
                                                                   6     4        ds σ02
                                     n∗         (H + 1)T C log(1+σ−2 σ2 )
                                        4     ≥                       0
                                                                          .,                               (5)
                               γn∗ (k)βn∗ (δ)             ϵ2
                 √
where C = (1 + ds ) max{Cmax , Rmax , σ0 }, γn (k) the maximum information gain (Srinivas et al.,
2012), and π̃n the solution to arg max minf ∈Mn Jr (π, f ). Then we have ∀n ≥ n∗ with probability
                                     π∈Sn
at least 1 − δ
                                         max         Jr (π) − Jr (π̃n ) ≤ ϵ.
                                       π∈RϵH (S0 )


The theorem shows that ACT S AFE is safe during all episodes. Furthermore, it shows that after
finishing the expansion phase, ACT S AFE achieves an ϵ-optimal solution within RϵH (S0 ) for the
underlying reward function r, where RϵH (S0 ) is the largest safe set we can obtain after H expansion
steps if we know the dynamics to ϵ precision. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to prove
safety and give sample complexity bounds for safe model-based RL algorithms in the episodic setting
with continuous state-action spaces.
Intuitively, by maximizing the epistemic uncertainty, we explore our dynamics uniformly among all
policies in the safe set Sn , making our model more confident, i.e., reducing σn . As our uncertainty


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 ACT S AFE: Practical Version
    Init: Model Set Q0
    for episode n = 1, . . . , n∗ do                                      ➤ Intrinsic exploration phase
        Select πn by solving Equation (7)                                             ➤ Prepare policy
        Dn ← ROLLOUT(πn )                                                               ➤ Collect data
        Update Qn ← D1:n                                                           ➤ Update dynamics
    end for
    for episode n = n∗ , . . . , N do                                    ➤ Extrinsic exploration phase
        Select πn by solving Equation (8)
        Dn ← ROLLOUT(πn )
        Update Qn ← D1:n
    end for


within Sn shrinks, we add more policies to our safe set (c.f. Definition 4.7) and thus facilitate its
expansion. The proof of Theorem 4.8 is given in Appendix A.
While the algorithm itself is difficult to implement for continuous state-action spaces, it gives key
insights that guide our practical implementation in Section 4.3: (i) maximization of intrinsic rewards
for expansion, (ii) pessimism w.r.t. plausible dynamics to define a safe set of policies Sn , and
(iii) selecting πn only from Sn to ensure safety. Building on these insights, we introduce a practical
version of ACT S AFE designed to excel in real-world scenarios, such as visual control tasks.
4.3 P RACTICAL I MPLEMENTATION
Optimizing over safe policies In Equation (4) we optimize over the policies within the safe set,
where the safe set is defined according to Definition 4.7. This is particularly challenging in continuous
state-action spaces since it requires us to maintain the model set Mn and the safe set Sn . We modify
the definition of the safe set which makes the optimization problem more tractable.

                                                                     ′
                               Sbn = π ∈ Π; s.t. max ′
                                                           J c (π, f   ) ≤ d                           (6)
                                                   f ∈Qn

Note that Sbn ⊆ Sn , making it a conservative estimate of Sn , therefore selecting policies from Sbn
still preserves the safety guarantees. Furthermore, in Sbn , we are pessimistic w.r.t. the dynamics
f ∈ Qn and thus we can simply use µn , σn to induce pessimism, i.e., we do not have to maintain
the model set Mn = Mn−1 ∩ Qn (c.f. Definition 4.4). A similar relaxation is made by other safe
RL algorithms such as Berkenkamp et al. (2021); Baumann et al. (2021).
To practically solve Equation (4) we use Sbn instead of Sn , resulting in the following problem
                          arg max max Jn (π, f ) s.t. max
                                                      ′
                                                          Jc (π, f ′ ) ≤ d.                           (7)
                            π∈Π    f ∈Qn                f ∈Qn

Equation (7) is a constrained optimization problem with the added complexity of optimizing over
the dynamics in Qn . Moreover, it does not require us to maintain Sbn since we implicitly account
for it in the constraint in Equation (7), making it tractable for continuous state-action spaces. In
Equation (7), we have to solve maxf ′ ∈Qn Jc (π, f ′ ) to enforce pessimism for safety. To this end,
we use the methods from Yu et al. (2020) for our experiments. In practice, we solve Equation (7)
by using a CMDP planner based on Log-Barrier SGD (LBSGD, Usmanova et al., 2024). Further
technical details can be found in Appendix B.
From CMDPs to visual control ACT S AFE can be seamlessly integrated with state-of-the-art
model-based RL methods for learning in visual control tasks (Hafner et al., 2019; 2023). To tighten
the gap between RL and real-world problems, we relax the typical full observability assumption and
consider problems where the agent receives an observation ot ∼ p(·|st ) instead of st at each time step.
To handle partial observability, we choose to base our dynamics model on the Recurrent State Space
Model (RSSM) introduced in Hafner et al. (2019). The RSSM can be thought of as a sequential varia-
tional auto-encoder that learns the (latent) dynamics f . We leverage approximate Bayesian inference
techniques, in particular probabilistic ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), to approximate
the posterior p(f |Dn ) over RSSMs. In particular, we learn an ensemble of M models and define
              SM −1
Qn as Qn = i=0 {f i }. The model’s epistemic uncertainty (disagreement) is then used to enforce
pessimism w.r.t. the safety constraints and for the intrinsic reward exploration (see Algorithm 2).


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            Trajectories          Safe Boundary                Initial State
                          Episode 1                   Episode 3                        Episode 7                            Episode 10

    ACT S AFE    5

      ω          0

                −5


                             θ                             θ                              θ                                     θ

                 5
    O PAX
      ω


                 0

                −5


                     −π       0        π      −π           0          π           −π       0             π           −π         0        π


Figure 2: Safe exploration in the P ENDULUM S WINGUP task. Each plot above visualizes trajectories
considered during exploration across all past learning episodes. The red box in the plot depicts the
safety boundary in the state space. ACT S AFE maintains safety throughout learning.

Online policy improvement After the first intrinsic exploration phase, it is often necessary to per-
form additional learning updates during the second exploitation phase (Sekar et al., 2020). Therefore,
after n∗ iterations of intrinsic exploration, we optimize the extrinsic reward by solving

                                  arg max max Jr (π, f ) s.t. max
                                                              ′
                                                                  Jc (π, f ′ ) ≤ d.                                                          (8)
                                      π∈Π    f ∈Qn                        f ∈Qn


5       E XPERIMENTS
In the following, we evaluate ACT S AFE on state-based and visual control tasks. For the state-based
tasks, we use GPs to model the dynamics f ∗ . For the visual control tasks, we use the RSSM model
from Hafner et al. (2019) as described in Section 4.3. We thus validate both the theoretical and
practical aspects of ACT S AFE in this section.

5.1       D OES ACT S AFE E XPLORE S AFELY WITH GP S ?
We evaluate ACT S AFE on the P ENDULUM and              ACT S AFE (Ours)     ACT S AFE (No Pessimism)     O PAX
C ARTPOLE environments. Additional details
                                                                                                               Cumulative


                                                           1
                                                                      Objective
                                                                      Swingup


on the experimental setup, including the safety                                          1
                                                                                                                 Cost


constraints, are provided in Appendix B. For
both environments, we run the algorithms for
                                                           0                             0
ten episodes and then use the learned model                    Pendulum Cartpole             Pendulum Cartpole
to plan w.r.t. known extrinsic rewards after the
expansion phase. For extrinsic rewards, we con- Figure 3: Evaluation of safety via pessimism and
sider the S WINGUP task. We study the effects intrinsic exploration. The cumulative cost accumu-
of pessimism with respect to the model uncer- lates all the incurred costs during learning, the re-
tainty for safety. To this end, we consider as ported objective performance is normalized. ACT-
baselines a version of ACT S AFE without pes- S AFE maintains safety during learning while at-
simism, which only uses the mean model µn for taining high zero-shot performance on the P ENDU -
planning and O PAX (Sukhija et al., 2024), an LUM S WINGUP objective at test time.
unsafe active exploration algorithm.
We present our results in Figure 3, where we report the performance and the total accumulated costs
during exploration of our method. We conclude that ACT S AFE does not incur any costs during
learning. In contrast, the variant of ACT S AFE without pessimism and O PAX are unsafe during
learning. This validates the necessity of using the model epistemic uncertainty to enforce pessimism
during exploration. Note that ACT S AFE pays a price in terms of performance for pessimism, as it
converges to a lower reward value than the other algorithms.
In Figure 2 we visualize the trajectories of ACT S AFE and O PAX in the state space during exploration.
We observe that both algorithms cover the state space well, however, ACT S AFE remains within the
safety boundary during learning whereas O PAX violates the constraints.


                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          ACT S AFE (Ours)            LAMBDA          CPO        BSRP-L AG
                 G OTO G OAL                           P RESS B UTTONS                   P USH B OX
        20
                                             10
                                                                            10

        10                                    5
  Jˆr
                                                                             5


                                              0                              0
         0


                                             75                             40
        75

        50                                   50
  Jˆc


                                                                            20
        25                                   25

         0                                    0                              0

             0     2000       4000                0       2000       4000        0           2000       4000
                   Episodes                               Episodes                           Episodes

Figure 4: Safety of ACT S AFE in S AFETY-G YM with vision control. The dotted horizontal line
depicts the safety constraint. We report the mean and standard error across 10 seeds. The vertical
dashed line illustrates the transition of ACT S AFE from the intrinsic exploraiton/expansion phase
to the extrinsic reward phase. Grey shaded area represents the warm-up phase.
5.2 D OES ACT S AFE S CALE TO V ISION C ONTROL ?
While with GPs we can work closer to theory, scaling them to high dimensions with large data regimes,
in particular visual control tasks, is challenging. We demonstrate our practical implementation
(Algorithm 2) on high-dimensional RL tasks. We highlight that ensuring safety with an NN model
with randomly initialized weights is impractical without any additional prior knowledge. To this
end, for all experiments hereon, we assume access to an initial data collection (warm-up) period of
200K environment steps, where the agent collects data and uses it to calibrate its world model. This
experimental setup is simple as it seamlessly integrates with both off and on-policy algorithms, such
as CPO. Furthermore, it simulates a realistic setting, where the agent can collect some data initially
in a controlled/supervised setting where safety is not directly penalized. However, after the initial
data collection period, the agent is required to be safe during learning. We use the same training
procedure across all baselines and environments (akin to Dalal et al., 2018). In Appendix C, we
present additional experiments that study safe exploration under distribution shifts of the dynamics,
effectively leveraging the simulator to calibrate the model and imitating sim-to-real transfer.
Safety We investigate ACT S AFE’s performance in terms of constraint satisfaction during learning
and compare it with state-of-the-art baseline algorithms for safe vision control (As et al., 2022;
Huang et al., 2024) and with CPO (Achiam et al., 2017). We use the same experimental setup
from S AFETY-G YM (Ray et al., 2019) and As et al. (2022), with the P OINT robot in all tasks. As
shown in Figure 4, compared to the baselines, ACT S AFE, significantly reduces constraint violation
on all tasks. Notably, while ACT S AFE slightly underperforms LAMBDA, it incurs much smaller
costs. This result may be interpreted by the conservatism needed to maintain safety during learning.
Furthermore, we observe that BSRP-L AG generally underperforms both algorithms in terms of safety
and performance. We provide more details on our comparison in Appendix B. Additionally, we ablate
our choice of LBSGD in Appendix C and highlight its benefits.
Exploration In this experiment, we examine the influence of using an intrinsic reward in hard
exploration tasks. To this end, we extend tasks from S AFETY-G YM and introduce three new tasks
with sparse rewards, i.e., without any reward shaping to guide the agent to the goal. We provide more
details about the rewards in Appendix B. In Figure 5 we compare ACT S AFE with a G REEDY baseline
that collects trajectories only based on the sparse extrinsic reward. As shown, ACT S AFE substantially
outperforms G REEDY in all tasks, while violating the constraint only once in the G OTO G OAL task. In
addition to S AFETY-G YM, we evaluate on C ARTPOLE S WINGUP S PARSE from RWRL (Dulac-Arnold
et al., 2019) with additional penalty for large actions (see Curi et al., 2020, and Appendix B).
We compare ACT S AFE with three baselines. (i) U NIFORM, which samples actions uniformly at
random during exploration, (ii) O PTIMISTIC, which uses the model epistemic uncertainty estimates
as exploration reward bonuses and (iii) G REEDY, which optimizes the extrinsic reward directly.


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  ACT S AFE (Ours)         G REEDY
                    G OTO G OAL [S PARSE ]          P RESS B UTTONS [S PARSE ]                P USH B OX [S PARSE ]


                                              2                                      10
            5
      Jˆr
                                              0                                       0
            0

                0         2000       4000           0         2000        4000            0           5000        10000
           60                                40

           40                                                                        20
                                             20
     Jˆc


           20

            0                                 0                                       0


                0         2000       4000           0         2000        4000            0           5000        10000
                          Episodes                             Episodes                            Episodes

Figure 5: Performance on hard safe exploration tasks. The vertical dashed line illustrates the transition
from data collection with intrinsic to extrinsic reward.
Figure 6 indicates that using uncertainty quantification for exploration is crucial, as only ACT S AFE
and O PTIMISTIC find non-trivial policies. Despite that, ACT S AFE outperforms O PTIMISTIC.
Furthermore, even though U NIFORM initially explores with an unsafe policy, it is insufficient to learn
a good dynamics model, and thus underperforms ACT S AFE. This is mainly due to the undirected
exploration strategy of U NIFORM, which does not leverage the model’s epistemic uncertainty.
Discussion Our experiments underscore the               ACT S AFE (Ours)  U NIFORM    O PTIMISTIC   G REEDY
following key findings. First, intuitively, in                                     1000
the GP setting, where our implementation is            500
closer to theory, pessimism w.r.t. the model
                                                                 Jˆr


                                                                                                Jˆc
                                                                                    500
uncertainty plays a crucial role as we achieve            0
strict safe exploration. Second, in our visual                                        0
control experiments, using a small fraction                    0    2000 4000             0    2000 4000
of data (<5% of total data collected) as the                       Episodes                   Episodes
warm-up period for calibrating the model and
policy is sufficient for drastically reducing Figure 6: Hard exploration performance in C ART-
constraint violation. Learning safely typically POLE S WINGUP S PARSE of RWRL benchmark.
requires some form of prior knowledge about We report the mean and standard error.
the problem, hence, using the data from the warm-up period keeps the experiment setup realistic
without imposing specific domain knowledge and thus sacrificing generality. Third, in addition to
exploring safely ACT S AFE, also solves tough exploration problems with the intrinsic rewards playing
a crucial role. These results underline the importance of intrinsic exploration in RL, especially in
safety-critical tasks. Moreover, ACT S AFE transfers directly from the GP setting to the vision control
setting and in both cases our results show that ACT S AFE outperforms the baselines in terms of both
safety and performance. We provide additional experiments in Appendix C, where ablate our choice
of the LBSGD planner, evaluate ACT S AFE on a setting with distribution shifts in the dynamics and on
a realistic robotics task from the state-of-the-art humanoid benchmark from Sferrazza et al. (2024).

6    C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we introduce ACT S AFE, a safe model-based RL algorithm that leverages epistemic
uncertainty as an intrinsic reward to learn a dynamics model efficiently and safely. We theoretically
study systems with continuous state-action spaces and non-linear dynamics that lie in the RKHS,
and provide guarantees on safety and near-optimality. We derive a practical variant of ACT S AFE,
and demonstrate safe exploration and competitive performance with a Gaussian process dynamics
model. Furthermore, we identify the key concepts that enable safe exploration with ACT S AFE and
demonstrate how one can heuristically apply them to solve high-dimensional safe RL problems. Our
empirical results showcase the importance of intrinsic rewards in the context of safety, demonstrating
that ACT S AFE outperforms the baselines in the majority of tasks. In conclusion, ACT S AFE represents
a significant advancement in safe reinforcement learning methods, enhancing both theoretical insights
and practical applications.


                                                              10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jonas Hübotter for the insightful discussion and feedback on this work. This project
has received funding from the Swiss National Science Foundation under NCCR Automation, grant
agreement 51NF40 180545, the Microsoft Swiss Joint Research Center, grant of the Hasler foundation
(grant no. 21039) and the SNSF Postdoc Mobility Fellowship 211086.

R EFERENCES
Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In
  ICML, 2017.

E. Altman. Constrained Markov Decision Processes. Chapman and Hall, 1999.

Yarden As, Ilnura Usmanova, Sebastian Curi, and Andreas Krause. Constrained policy optimization
  via bayesian world models. ICLR, 2022.

Yarden As, Bhavya Sukhija, and Andreas Krause. Safe exploration using bayesian world models and
  log-barrier optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.05890, 2024.

Dominik Baumann, Alonso Marco, Matteo Turchetta, and Sebastian Trimpe. Gosafe: Globally
  optimal safe robot learning. In ICRA, 2021.

Felix Berkenkamp, Matteo Turchetta, Angela Schoellig, and Andreas Krause. Safe model-based
  reinforcement learning with stability guarantees. NeurIPS, 2017.

Felix Berkenkamp, Andreas Krause, and Angela P Schoellig. Bayesian optimization with safety
  constraints: safe and automatic parameter tuning in robotics. Machine Learning, 2021.

Homanga Bharadhwaj, Aviral Kumar, Nicholas Rhinehart, Sergey Levine, Florian Shkurti, and
 Animesh Garg. Conservative safety critics for exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14497, 2020.

Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics
  transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.

Lukas Brunke, Melissa Greeff, Adam W Hall, Zhaocong Yuan, Siqi Zhou, Jacopo Panerati, and
  Angela P Schoellig. Safe learning in robotics: From learning-based control to safe reinforcement
  learning. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, 2022.

Xuxin Cheng, Yandong Ji, Junming Chen, Ruihan Yang, Ge Yang, and Xiaolong Wang. Expressive
 whole-body control for humanoid robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16796, 2024.

Yinlam Chow, Ofir Nachum, Aleksandra Faust, Edgar Duenez-Guzman, and Mohammad
  Ghavamzadeh. Lyapunov-based safe policy optimization for continuous control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1901.10031, 2019.

Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement
  learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. NeurIPS, 31, 2018.

Scott E. Cooper and Théoden I. Netoff. Multidimensional bayesian estimation for deep brain
  stimulation using the safeopt algorithm. medRxiv, 2022.

Sebastian Curi, Felix Berkenkamp, and Andreas Krause. Efficient model-based reinforcement
  learning through optimistic policy search and planning. NeurIPS, 2020.

Sebastian Curi, Armin Lederer, Sandra Hirche, and Andreas Krause. Safe reinforcement learning via
  confidence-based filters. In CDC, 2022.

Gal Dalal, Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Matej Vecerik, Todd Hester, Cosmin Paduraru, and Yuval
  Tassa. Safe exploration in continuous action spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.08757, 2018.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jonas Degrave, Federico Felici, Jonas Buchli, Michael Neunert, Brendan Tracey, Francesco Carpanese,
  Timo Ewalds, Roland Hafner, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Diego de las Casas, Craig Donner, Leslie
  Fritz, Cristian Galperti, Andrea Huber, James Keeling, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Jackie Kay, Antoine
  Merle, Jean-Marc Moret, Seb Noury, Federico Pesamosca, David Pfau, Olivier Sauter, Cristian
  Sommariva, Stefano Coda, Basil Duval, Ambrogio Fasoli, Pushmeet Kohli, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
  Demis Hassabis, and Martin Riedmiller. Magnetic control of tokamak plasmas through deep
  reinforcement learning. Nature, 2022.
Dongsheng Ding, Kaiqing Zhang, Jiali Duan, Tamer Başar, and Mihailo R Jovanović. Convergence
  and sample complexity of natural policy gradient primal-dual methods for constrained mdps. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2206.02346, 2022.
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Daniel Mankowitz, and Todd Hester. Challenges of real-world reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12901, 2019.
Yonathan Efroni, Shie Mannor, and Matteo Pirotta. Exploration-exploitation in constrained mdps.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02189, 2020.
Marcello Fiducioso, Sebastian Curi, Benedikt Schumacher, Markus Gwerder, and Andreas Krause.
 Safe contextual Bayesian optimization for sustainable room temperature PID control tuning. In
 IJCAI, 2019.
Christian Fiedler, Johanna Menn, Lukas Kreisköther, and Sebastian Trimpe. On safety in safe
  bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12948, 2024.
Dylan J Foster, Adam Block, and Dipendra Misra. Is behavior cloning all you need? understanding
  horizon in imitation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15007, 2024.
Javier Garcı́a, Fern, and o Fernández. A comprehensive survey on safe reinforcement learning. JMLR,
  2015.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In ICML, 2019.
Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains
  through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.
Antonia Holzapfel, Paul Brunzema, and Sebastian Trimpe. Event-triggered safe Bayesian optimiza-
  tion on quadcopters. In L4DC, 2024.
Weidong Huang, Jiaming Ji, Chunhe Xia, Borong Zhang, and Yaodong Yang. Safedreamer: Safe
 reinforcement learning with world models. In ICLR, 2024.
Jonas Hübotter, Bhavya Sukhija, Lenart Treven, Yarden As, and Andreas Krause. Information-based
  transductive active learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15898, 2024.
Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Kendall Lowrey, Motoya Ohnishi, and Wen Sun. Information
  theoretic regret bounds for online nonlinear control. NeurIPS, 2020.
Johannes Kirschner, Mojmir Mutny, Nicole Hiller, Rasmus Ischebeck, and Andreas Krause. Adaptive
  and safe Bayesian optimization in high dimensions via one-dimensional subspaces. In ICML,
  2019.
Torsten Koller, Felix Berkenkamp, Matteo Turchetta, and Andreas Krause. Learning-based model
  predictive control for safe exploration. In CDC, 2018.
Volodymyr Kuleshov, Nathan Fenner, and Stefano Ermon. Accurate uncertainties for deep learning
  using calibrated regression. In ICML, 2018.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. NeurIPS, 2017.
Nevena Lazic, Craig Boutilier, Tyler Lu, Eehern Wong, Binz Roy, MK Ryu, and Greg Imwalle. Data
  center cooling using model-predictive control. NeurIPS, 2018.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning
  quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain. Science Robotics, 2020.
Zuxin Liu, Zhepeng Cen, Vladislav Isenbaev, Wei Liu, Steven Wu, Bo Li, and Ding Zhao. Constrained
  variational policy optimization for safe reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2022.
Lucas Maystre, Daniel Russo, and Yu Zhao. Optimizing audio recommendations for the long-term:
  A reinforcement learning perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03561, 2023.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
  Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
  through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 2015.
Adrian Müller, Pragnya Alatur, Volkan Cevher, Giorgia Ramponi, and Niao He. Truly no-regret
  learning in constrained mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15776, 2024.
Tingting Ni and Maryam Kamgarpour. A safe exploration approach to constrained markov decision
  processes. In ICML 2024 Workshop: Foundations of Reinforcement Learning and Control–
  Connections and Perspectives, 2024.
Cristina Pinneri, Shambhuraj Sawant, Sebastian Blaes, Jan Achterhold, Joerg Stueckler, Michal
  Rolinek, and Georg Martius. Sample-efficient cross-entropy method for real-time planning. In
  CoRL, 2021.
Alex Ray, Joshua Achiam, and Dario Amodei. Benchmarking safe exploration in deep reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01708, 2019.
Jonas Rothfuss, Bhavya Sukhija, Tobias Birchler, Parnian Kassraie, and Andreas Krause. Hallucinated
  adversarial control for conservative offline policy evaluation. UAI, 2023.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In ICML, 2020.
Carmelo Sferrazza, Dun-Ming Huang, Xingyu Lin, Youngwoon Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Humanoid-
  bench: Simulated humanoid benchmark for whole-body locomotion and manipulation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2403.10506, 2024.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman,
  Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine
  Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game of go with
  deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 2016.
Aivar Sootla, Alexander I Cowen-Rivers, Taher Jafferjee, Ziyan Wang, David H Mguni, Jun Wang,
  and Haitham Ammar. Sauté rl: Almost surely safe reinforcement learning using state augmentation.
  In ICML, 2022.
Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham M. Kakade, and Matthias W. Seeger. Information-theoretic
  regret bounds for gaussian process optimization in the bandit setting. IEEE Transactions on
  Information Theory, 2012.
Krishnan Srinivasan, Benjamin Eysenbach, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, and Chelsea Finn. Learning to be
  safe: Deep rl with a safety critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14603, 2020.
Adam Stooke, Joshua Achiam, and Pieter Abbeel. Responsive safety in reinforcement learning by
  PID lagrangian methods. In ICML, 2020.
Yanan Sui, Alkis Gotovos, Joel Burdick, and Andreas Krause. Safe exploration for optimization with
  gaussian processes. In ICML, 2015.
Bhavya Sukhija, Matteo Turchetta, David Lindner, Andreas Krause, Sebastian Trimpe, and Dominik
  Baumann. Gosafeopt: Scalable safe exploration for global optimization of dynamical systems.
  Artificial Intelligence, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bhavya Sukhija, Lenart Treven, Cansu Sancaktar, Sebastian Blaes, Stelian Coros, and Andreas
  Krause. Optimistic active exploration of dynamical systems. NeurIPS, 2024.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Budden,
  Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, Timothy Lillicrap, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Deepmind control suite, 2018.
Chen Tessler, Daniel J Mankowitz, and Shie Mannor. Reward constrained policy optimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1805.11074, 2018.
Brijen Thananjeyan, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Michael Luo, Krishnan Srinivasan, Minho
  Hwang, Joseph E Gonzalez, Julian Ibarz, Chelsea Finn, and Ken Goldberg. Recovery rl: Safe
  reinforcement learning with learned recovery zones. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2021.
Matteo Turchetta, Felix Berkenkamp, and Andreas Krause. Safe exploration in finite markov decision
 processes with gaussian processes. NeurIPS, 29, 2016.
Ilnura Usmanova, Yarden As, Maryam Kamgarpour, and Andreas Krause. Log barriers for safe
   black-box optimization with application to safe reinforcement learning. JMLR, 2024.
Sharan Vaswani, Lin Yang, and Csaba Szepesvari. Near-optimal sample complexity bounds for
  constrained mdps. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Kim Peter Wabersich and Melanie N Zeilinger. A predictive safety filter for learning-based control of
  constrained nonlinear dynamical systems. Automatica, 2021.
Akifumi Wachi and Yanan Sui. Safe reinforcement learning in constrained markov decision processes.
  In ICML, 2020.
Akifumi Wachi, Yanan Sui, Yisong Yue, and Masahiro Ono. Safe exploration and optimization of
  constrained mdps using gaussian processes. AAAI, 2018.
Daniel Widmer, Dongho Kang, Bhavya Sukhija, Jonas Hübotter, Andreas Krause, and Stelian Coros.
  Tuning legged locomotion controllers via safe bayesian optimization. In CoRL, 2023.
Alexander Wischnewski, Johannes Betz, and Boris Lohmann. A model-free algorithm to safely
  approach the handling limit of an autonomous racecar. In IEEE International Conference on
  Connected Vehicles and Expo, 2019.
Tengyu Xu, Yingbin Liang, and Guanghui Lan. Crpo: A new approach for safe reinforcement
  learning with convergence guarantee. In ICML, 2021.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization. NeurIPS, 2020.
Liyuan Zheng and Lillian Ratliff. Constrained upper confidence reinforcement learning. In L4DC,
  2020.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    P ROOFS
In the following, we prove Theorem 4.8. First, we provide the analytical formula for the mean and
epistemic uncertainty of a GP model. We denote x := (s, a), so that


                          µn,j (x) = kn⊤ (x)(Kn + σϵ2 I)−1 yn,j
                                                                                                           (9)
                           2
                          σn,j (x) = k(x, x) − knT (x)(Kn + σϵ2 I)−1 kn (x)

where yn,j = [s′i,j ]⊤
                     i≤n is the vector of the j-th element of the observed next states si , kn (x) =
                                                                                        ′

           i≤n , and Kn = [k(xi , xl )]i,l≤n is the kernel matrix. By concatenating the element-
[k(x, xi )]⊤
wise posterior mean and standard deviation, we obtain µn (x) = [µn,j (x)]⊤     j≤ds and σn (x) =
[σn,j (x)]⊤
          j≤ds  .
Corollary A.1. Let assumption 4.5 hold, then we have for all π ∈ Π, n ≥ 0, with probability at least
1−δ

                                            Pn (π) ≥ Jc (π, f ∗ )



Proof. Note that f ∗ ∈ Qn for all n ≥ 0 with probability at least 1 − δ (Lemma 4.6). Therefore,
f ∗ ∈ Mn . Furthermore,

                                         Pn (π) = max Jc (π, f )
                                                     f ∈Mn

                                                   ≥ Jc (π, f ∗ )


Lemma A.2 (Difference in Policy performance, Sukhija
                                                hP et al. (2024)). i Consider any function
                                 ∗                 T −1
r : S × A → R. Let Jr,k (π, f , sk ) = Eτ     π
                                                   t=k r(st , π(st )) and Ar,k (π, s, a) =
Eτ π [r(s, a) + Jr,k+1 (π, f ∗ , s′ ) − Jr,k (π, f ∗ , s)] with s′ = f ∗ (s, a) + w. For simplicity we
refer to Jr,0 (π, f ∗ , s0 ) = Jr (π, f ∗ , s0 ). The following holds for all s0 ∈ S:

                                                                "T −1                                  #
                                                                 X
                      ′   ∗                    ∗
                Jr (π , f , s0 ) − Jr (π, f , s0 ) = Eτ π′                Ar,t (π, s′t , π ′ (s′t ))
                                                                    t=0


Proof. See Lemma 5. Sukhija et al. (2024).



Lemma A.3 (Comparing safety costs of policies).

                              Jc (π, f ∗ , s0 ) − Jc (π ′ , f ∗ , s0 ) ≤ D(π, π ′ )


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. For notational convenience we will omit the dependance on f ∗ .
                                      "T −1                             #
                                       X
 Jc (π, s0 ) − Jc (π ′ , s0 ) = Eτ π′       −Ac,t (π, s′t , π ′ (s′t ))
                                         t=0
           "T −1                                            #
            X
                               ′
 = Eτ π′           −(c(st , π (st )) − c(st , π(st )))
             t=0
           "T −1                                                                                  #
            X
                                                  ′                                        ′

 + Eτ π′           Es′t+1 |st ,π(st ) Jc,k+1 (π, st+1 ) − Es′t+1 |st ,π′ (st ) Jc,k+1 (π, st+1 )
             t=0
           "T −1                                        #
            X
 = Eτ π′           c(st , π(st )) − c(st , π ′ (st ))
             t=0
           "T −1                                                                                  #
            X
                                                  ′                                        ′

 + Eτ π′           Es′t+1 |st ,π(st ) Jc,k+1 (π, st+1 ) − Es′t+1 |st ,π′ (st ) Jc,k+1 (π, st+1 )
             t=0
           "T −1                                                 #
            X
                                   ′
 ≤ Eτ π′           min {Lc ∥π (st ) − π(st )∥ , 2Cmax }
             t=0
         "T −1 r                                           ∗                                           #
          X                       h
                                    2          ′
                                                    i     ∥f (st , π(st )) − f ∗ (st , π ′ (st ))∥
 + Eτ π′        Es′t+1 |st ,π(st ) Jc,k+1 (π, st+1 ) min                                           ,1
          t=0
                                                                           σ
                                                                (Kakade et al., 2020, Lemma C.2.)
         "T −1                                                                                         #
                                                                              ′

          X                                                           L  f ∥π   (st ) − π(s   t )∥
 ≤ Eτ π′       min {Lc ∥π ′ (st ) − π(st )∥ , 2Cmax } + T Cmax min                                 ,1
           t=0
                                                                                   σ
 = D(π, π ′ )


Lemma A.4. Let assumption 4.1 – assumption 4.5 hold. Then we have ∀n ≥ 0, π ∈ Sn \ Sn−1 with
probability at least 1 − δ, Jc (π) ≤ d.

Proof. Consider any π ∈ Sn \ Sn−1 . By Definition 4.7, we have that there exists a π ′ in Sn−1 such
that
                                   Pn (π ′ ) + D(π, π ′ ) ≤ d
Therefore,
                                          d ≥ Pn (π ′ ) + D(π, π ′ )
                                             ≥ Jc (π ′ , f ∗ ) + D(π, π ′ )                      (Corollary A.1)
                                             ≥ Jc (π, f ∗ ).                                       (Lemma A.3)


Corollary A.5 (All policies in Sn are safe). Let assumption 4.1 – assumption 4.5 hold. Then we have
∀n ≥ 0, π ∈ Sn with probability at least 1 − δ, Jc (π) ≤ d.

Proof. We prove this by induction. For n = 0, this holds due to assumption 4.3. Consider any
n > 0. By induction, ∀π ∈ Sn we have that Jc (π, f ∗ ) ≤ d. Hence, we focus on π ∈ Sn+1 \ Sn . In
Lemma A.4, we show Jc (π, f ∗ ) ≤ d for all π ∈ Sn+1 \ Sn . This completes the proof.

Lemma A.6. Consider any positive and bounded function c ∈ [0, Cmax ]. Let assumption 4.1 – 4.5
hold. Then we have ∀n ≥ 0, ∀f ∈ Mn . with probability at least 1 − δ
                                                "T −1  √                                  #
                                                 X (1 + ds )βn−1 (δ) ∥σn−1 (st , π(st ))∥
      |Jc (π, f ) − Jc (π, f ∗ )| ≤ T Cmax Eτ π                                             .
                                                 t=0
                                                                    σ



                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. From Sukhija et al. (2024, Corollary 2.) we have,
                                        "T −1                                              #
                                         X
                              ∗                                                       ′
         Jc (π, f ) − Jc (π, f ) = Eτ π       Jc,t+1 (π, f , st+1 ) − Jc,t+1 (π, f , st+1 ) ,
                                            t=0
                                                           (Expectation w.r.t π under true dynamics f ∗ )
                                                  ∗
                                  with st+1 = f (st , π(st )) + wt ,
                                  and s′t+1 = f (st , π(st )) + wt .

Furthermore, Jc,t+1 (π, f , s) ∈ [0, T Cmax ] for all π, f , s, and t. Therefore, given st ,

   Ewt Jc,t+1 (π, f , s′t+1 ) − Jc,t+1 (π, f , st+1 )

                                                                                 ∗
         nq                                q                            o        ∥f (st , π(st )) − f (st , π(st ))∥
  ≤ max              2
              Ewt [Jc,t+1 (π, f , s′t+1 )], Ewt [Jc,t+1
                                                     2   (π, f , st+1 )] min                                         ,1
                                                                                                 σ
                                                                      (Kakade et al., 2020, Lemma C.2.)
                   ∗
                    ∥f (st , π(st )) − f (st , π(st ))∥
  ≤ T Cmax min                                          ,1
                                      σ
                          √
                    (1 + ds )βn−1 (δ) ∥σn−1 (st , π(st ))∥
  ≤ T Cmax min                                                  ,1     (Sukhija et al., 2024, Corollary 3)
                                          σ


                           √
                                   max ,Cmax ,σ0 }
From hereon let C = (1+ ds ) max{R
                                 σ                 .
Lemma A.7. Let assumption 4.1 – 4.5 hold. Then we have ∀n, N ≥ 0 with probability at least 1 − δ
                                                        √
           "T −1                        #                           s
                                                                       2
                                                                      βn+N
                                                          d  σ
                                                            s 0            −1 (δ)γn+N −1 (k)
             X
  max Eτ π       ∥σN +n−1 (st , π(st ))∥ ≤ T 2 C p                2
                                                                                              .
  π∈Sn
             t=0
                                                               −2
                                                     log(1 + σ σ0 )             N



Proof. Consider any N > 0,
         "T −1                        #     N −1
                                                             "T −1                        #
           X                              1 X                  X
max Eτ π       ∥σN +n−1 (st , π(st ))∥ ≤         max Eτ π          ∥σn+i (st , π(st ))∥
π∈Sn
           t=0
                                          N i=0 π∈Sn           t=0
                                                                   (Monotonocity of the variance)
                                              −1
                                            N
                                                               "T −1                        #
                                          1 X                    X
                                        ≤         max Eτ π           ∥σn+i (st , π(st ))∥
                                          N i=0 π∈Sn+i           t=0
                                                                    (Monotonocity of the safe set)
                                                 −1
                                            n+N
                                                           "T −1                      #
                                          1 X               X
                                                                             ∗
                                        =           Eτ πi∗       ∥σi (st , πi (st ))∥
                                          N i=n              t=0
                                                                                    (Definition of πi∗ )
                                            n+N −1
                                                           "T −1                     #
                                          1 X               X                              1
                                        =           Eτ πi        ∥σi (st , πi (st ))∥ + (J(πi∗ ) − J(πi ))
                                          N i=n             t=0
                                                                                          N

Let ri = Ji (πi∗ ) − J(πi ), where πi is the policy proposed by Equation (4). We analyze this regret
term. Note that since, we optimistically pick dynamics from Mn , we have Ji (πi∗ ) ≤ J(πi , fi ),
where fi are the optimistic dynamics. Therefore, ri ≤ J(πi , fi ) − J(πi , f ∗ ). Hence, we can invoke
Lemma A.6 to get
                                         "T −1                          #
                                           X
                               ri ≤ T C        βi (δ) ∥σi (st , π(st ))∥ .
                                           t=0


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore,
             "T −1                          #              n+N −1
                                                                        "T −1                     #
              X                             T Cβn+N −1 (δ) X             X
max Eτ π          ∥σN +n−1 (st , π(st ))∥ ≤                       Eτ πi       ∥σi (st , πi (st ))∥
π∈Sn
              t=0
                                                 N           i=n         t=0
                                                           n+N −1
                                                                        "T −1                     #
                                            T Cβn+N −1 (δ) X             X
                                          ≤                       Eτ πi       ∥σi (st , πi (st ))∥
                                                 N           i=n         t=0
                                                                 v
                                                                 un+N −1         "T −1                         #
                                            T Cβn+N −1 (δ) √     u X              X                          2
                                          ≤                  NT  t         Eτ πi        ∥σi (st , πi (st ))∥
                                                 N                  i=n            t=0
                                                                                  (Cauchy-Schwartz)
                                                                      v
                                                                      un+N −1       "T −1                        #
                                                  T Cβn+N −1 (δ) √    u X            X                         2
                                                ≤                  NT t       Eτ πi       ∥σi (st , πi (st ))∥
                                                       N                i=0          t=0
                                                                √
                                                                T ds σ0
                                                    TC √                     βn+N −1 (δ) √
                                                            log(1+σ −2 σ02 )                      p
                                                ≤                                            NT       γn+N −1 (k)
                                                                          N
                                                                            (Curi et al., 2020, Lemma 17)
                                                            √
                                                                           s
                                                                              2
                                                                             βn+N
                                                              ds σ0                 −1 (δ)γn+N −1 (k)
                                                = T 2C p               2
                                                         log(1 + σ −2 σ0 )                N



Lemma A.8. Let assumption 4.1 – 4.5 hold and define Nn to be the smallest integer such that
                             √                          s
                               ds σ0                      γn+Nn −1 (k)
                 T 3C 2 p              2
                                           2
                                          βn+N n −1
                                                    (δ)                ≤ ϵ.
                                    −2
                          log(1 + σ σ0 )                      Nn

Then, we have ∀π ∈ Sn , f ∈ Mn+Nn −1 with probability at least 1 − δ
                     |Jc (π, f ) − Jc (π, f ∗ )| ≤ ϵ, and, |Jr (π, f ) − Jr (π, f ∗ )| ≤ ϵ.


Proof.
                                                "T −1  √                                        #
                                                 X (1 + ds )βn+N −1 (δ) ∥σn+N −1 (st , π(st ))∥
  |Jc (π, f ) − Jc (π, f ∗ )| ≤ T Cmax Eτ π                                     n            n


                                                    t=0
                                                                                    σ
                                                                                                       (Lemma A.6)
                                                 "T −1                                  #
                                                  X
                              ≤ T Cβn+Nn −1                ∥σn+Nn −1 (st , π(st ))∥
                                                     t=0
                                                                    √                         s
                                                     2                  ds σ0                     γn+Nn −1 (k)
                              ≤ T Cβn+Nn −1 T C p                   βn+Nn −1 (δ)
                                                 log(1 + σ −2 σ02 )                                   Nn
                                                                                                     (Lemma A.7)
                              ≤ϵ
We can apply the same inequalities for Jr .

Corollary A.9. Let assumption 4.1 – 4.5 hold. Consider any n ≥ 0 and define Nn as in Lemma A.8.
Then we have with probability at least 1 − δ
                                             Sn+Nn ⊇ Rε (Sn ).



                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. From Lemma A.8, we have ∀π ∈ Sn , f ∈ Mn+Nn −1 , |Jc (π, f ) − Jc (π, f ∗ )| ≤ ϵ,
therefore Pn+Nn −1 (π) ≤ Jc (π, f ∗ ) + ϵ. For the sake of contradiction, assume there exists a policy
π ∈ Rε (Sn ) \ Sn+Nn . We study the case where π ∈ Rε (Sn ) \ Sn else we have a contradiction
(Sn ⊆ Sn+Nn ). Since π ∈ Rε (Sn ) \ Sn , there exists a π ′ ∈ Sn such that Jc (π ′ ) + D(π, π ′ ) ≤ d − ϵ
(see Theorem 4.8). Hence, we get
                                   d ≥ Jc (π ′ ) + ϵ + D(π, π ′ )
                                     ≥ Pn+Nn −1 (π ′ ) + D(π, π ′ ).
Since, π ′ ∈ Sn ⊆ Sn+Nn −1 , by the definition of the safe set (c.f. Definition 4.7), this implies that
π ∈ Sn+Nn , which is a contradiction.
A key property of Nn is that it increases monotonously with n. Moreover, for a given n ≥ 0, Nn is
the smallest integer satisfying
                                            4                                d σ2
                               γn+Nn −1 (k)βn+Nn −1
                                                    (δ)T 6 C 4 log(1+σ
                                                                     s 0
                                                                       −2 σ 2 )
                        Nn ≥                                        0
                                                                       .
                                                      ϵ2
Both functions n 7→ γn , and n 7→ βn are monotonically increasing with n. Hence increasing n,
increases the right-hand side of the inequality, and therefore Nn .
Lemma A.10. Let assumption 4.1 – 4.5 hold and consider n∗ ≥ (H + 1)Nn∗ . Then we have with
probability at least 1 − δ for all n ≥ n∗
                                            Sn ⊇ RεH (S0 ).


Proof. To prove this, we show for any positive integer k ≤ H, that SkNn∗ ⊇ Rεk (S0 ) by induction.
Moreover for any k, let Tk = Tk−1 + NTk−1 and T0 = 0. We inductively show that Tk ≤ kNn∗ for
all k ≤ H.
For the base case k = 1, we have T1 = N0 ≤ Nn∗ since n∗ ≥ 0. Consider any k ≤ H, then, we have
Tk = Tk−1 + NTk−1 . By induction Tk−1 ≤ (k − 1)Nn∗ . Therefore, Tk ≤ (k − 1)Nn∗ + N(k−1)Nn∗ .
Furthermore, note that (k −1)Nn∗ ≤ n∗ for all k ≤ H. Therefore, Tk ≤ (k −1)Nn∗ +Nn∗ = kNn∗ .
Next, we have from Corollary A.9, STk ⊇ Rε (STk−1 ) := Rεk (S0 ). Moreover, ST1 := SN0 ⊇
Rε (S0 ). Similarly, ST2 := SN0 +NN0 ⊇ Rε (S1 ) := Rε2 (S0 ), etc. Therefore, we get SHNn∗ ⊇
STH ⊇ RεH (S0 ). As n∗ ≥ HNn∗ , this completes the proof.
Lemma A.11. Let assumption 4.1 – 4.5 hold and consider the smallest integer n∗ such that
                                                         6       4       ds σ02
                                n∗         (H + 1)T C log(1+σ−2 σ2 )
                                   4     ≥                             0
                                                                         .                        (10)
                          γn∗ (k)βn∗ (δ)                 ϵ2
Then we have for all n ≥ n∗
                                         Sn ⊇ RεH (S0 ).
Moreover, we have for all n ≥ n , π ∈ RεH (S0 ) that |Jc (π, f ) − Jc (π, f ∗ )| ≤ ϵ and |Jr (π, f ) −
                                 ∗

Jr (π, f ∗ )| ≤ ϵ.
Proof. Note that for any n, Nn is defined as the smallest integer satisfying:
                                                             6       4     ds σ02
                                    Nn               T C log(1+σ−2 σ2 )
                                       4           ≥                0
                                                                        .
                          γn+Nn −1 (k)βn+Nn −1 (δ)          ϵ2
From Lemma A.10, for n∗ = (H + 1)Nn∗ , we have for all n ≥ n∗
                                            Sn ⊇ RεH (S0 ).
We show that the solution to Equation (5) satisfies this condition. Moreover, let n∗ = (H + 1)Nn∗
                                                                           n∗
                               Nn ∗                               H+1
                                                   =
                  γn∗ +Nn∗ −1 (k)βn4 ∗ +Nn∗ −1 (δ)   γn∗ + n∗ −1 (k)βn4 ∗ + n∗ −1 (δ)
                                                             H+1                    H+1

                                                          n∗
                                                         H+1
                                                  ≥
                                                    γn∗ (k)βn4 ∗ (δ)


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Picking n∗ as the smallest integer satisfying
                                                             6   4       ds σ02
                                 n∗         (H + 1)T C log(1+σ−2 σ2 )
                                    4     ≥                       0
                                                                      ,
                           γn∗ (k)βn∗ (δ)             ϵ2
ensures that
                                                                 6   4        ds σ02
                                    Nn ∗                T C log(1+σ−2 σ2 )
                                        4             ≥                0

                       γn∗ +Nn∗ −1 (k)βn∗ +Nn∗ −1 (δ)          ϵ2

Finally, from Lemma A.8 we have that SHNn∗ ⊇ RεH (S0 ).
Therefore, for all n ≥ n∗ , π ∈ RεH (S0 ), f ∈ Mn∗ +Nn∗ −1 with probability at least 1 − δ
                  |Jc (π, f ) − Jc (π, f ∗ )| ≤ ϵ, and, |Jr (π, f ) − Jr (π, f ∗ )| ≤ ϵ.


Proof of Theorem 4.8. We prove in Corollary A.5, that all policies in Sn are safe for all n ≥ 0.
ACT S AFE is safe since it picks policies only from Sn .
For optimality, we showed in Lemma A.10 for all n ≥ n∗ that Sn ⊇ RεH (S0 ). Moreover, we have
∀π ∈ RεH (S0 ), f ∈ Mn∗ +Nn∗ −1 ⊇ Mn , |Jr (π, f )−Jr (π, f ∗ )| ≤ ϵ. Let π ∗ be the optimal policy
and let π̃n denote the solution to arg maxπ∈Sn minf ∈Mn Jr (π, f ). For the sake of contradiction,
assume that
                                 Jr (π̃n ) < max ϵ
                                                      Jr (π, f ∗ ) − ϵ.                        (11)
                                                π∈RH (S0 )

Furthermore, let Pnr (π) = minf ∈Mn Jr (π, f ) for all π ∈ Π.
                       Pnr (π ∗ ) ≤ max Pnr (π)
                                   π∈Sn
                                 = Pnr (π̃n )
                                 ≤ Jr (π̃n )
                                 < Jr (π ∗ , f ∗ ) − ϵ                                 (contradiction assumption)
                                 ≤ Pnr (π ∗ ).                                                     (Lemma A.11)
This is a contradiction, which completes the proof.


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
B.1 GP E XPERIMENTS
For the GP experiments, we approximate Equation (7) with the following unconstrained optimization
problem.

                                                                      ′
                  arg max max Jn (π, f ) − λ max max  ′
                                                            J c (π, f   ) − d, 0   .         (12)
                      π∈Π     f ∈Qn                        f ∈Qn

Here λ is a (large) penalty term that is used to discourage constraint violation. We use the iCEM (Pin-
neri et al., 2021) optimizer to solve the constrained optimization above. Effectively, given a sequence
of actions {at }Ht=0 , we roll them out on our learned GP model using the TS1 approach from Chua
et al. (2018). Moreover, we maintain P particles, and given the state (spt , apt ) for the p-th particle, we
determine the next state spt+1 , by sampling from N (µn (spt , apt ), σn (spt , apt )). Accordingly, for each
action sequence {at }H  t=0 , we obtain P trajectories and we empirically solve maxf ′ ∈Qn Jc (π, f ) by
                                                                                                         ′

taking the max over the P trajectories. This approach is also proposed by Kakade et al. (2020) as a
heuristic for optimizing over the dynamics.
Rewards and constraints The reward function is designed to penalize deviations in both the
angular position and the control input from the target behavior. For both the P ENDULUM and
C ARTPOLE, the state of the pole can be defined as follows. Let θ be the current angle, ω the angular
velocity, and u the control input. The target angle is denoted as θtarget , and the angular error between
the current angle and the target angle is ∆θ. The reward and cost functions for the P ENDULUM
environment are given by
     rPendulum = − ∆θ2 + 0.1 · ω 2 + 0.02 · u2 , cPendulum = max{|ω| − 6.0, 0.0}, d = 0.0.


For the C ARTPOLE environment, the position and velocity of the slider are defined as p and v
respectively. The reward for the C ARTPOLE environment is the given by
rCartpole = − ∆θ2 + p2 + 0.1 · v 2 + ω 2 − 0.01 · u2 , cCartpole = max{|p| − 0.5, 0.0}, d = 0.75.


B.2 V ISION C ONTROL E XPERIMENTS
We provide an open-source implementation of our experiments in https://github.com/
yardenas/actsafe. We encourage readers to use it, as it contains additional important im-
plementation details. In all the experiments below, our policy consists of 750K parameters, a several
orders of magnitudes compared to previous works on provable safe explorations.
Approximating Equation (7) We solve the constraint optimization problem in Equation (7) using
the LBSGD solver from Usmanova et al. (2024). LBSGD is a first-order optimizer that uses a
logarithmic barrier function to enforce constraint satisfaction. Previous works from Ni & Kamgarpour
(2024); As et al. (2024) have successfully applied LBSGD for planning in model-based RL with
CMDPs, showing notably fewer constraint violations than alternative solvers like the augmented
Lagrangian method (As et al., 2022).
To approximate Equation (7), we maintain an RSSM ensemble of P particles and given the state
action pair (st , πn (at |st )), we obtain P estimates {spt+1 }P p=1 for the next state. We  estimate σn
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                     p
with the variance/disagreement between the ensemble members, i.e., Var {st+1 }P          p=1 . We obtain
the next state st+1 by uniform sampling from {spt+1 }P   p=1 , i.e., TS1 from Chua et al. (2018). Akin to
Yu et al. (2020), we approximate maxf ′ ∈Qn Jc (π, f ′ ) by penalizing the cost function with σn
                                           "H                                       #
                                            X
                                                  t
                      Jc−λσ (πn ) = Eπn          γ (c(st , at ) + λ ∥σn (st , at )∥) ,
                                             t=0

where λ is a pessimism parameter. Yu et al. (2020) show that for an appropriate choice of λ,
Jc−λσ (πn ) is indeed a pessimistic estimate of Jc (πn ). However, in our experiments we treat λ as a
hyper-parameter.
Safety experiments We focus on S AFETY-G YM to showcase our practical algorithm design
maintains constraint satisfaction during learning. Our experiments rely on a newer fork of S AFETY-
G YM which is available via our open-source code. We follow the experimental setup of Ray et al.
(2019); As et al. (2022) and an episode length of T = 1000. We set the cost budget for each episode


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to d = 25 for S AFETY-G YM (see Ray et al., 2019). After each training epoch we estimate Jr (πn ) and
Jc (πn ) by sampling 50 episodes, denoting the estimates with Jˆr and Jˆc . Unless specified otherwise,
in all our experiments we use 5 random seeds and report the median and standard error across these
seeds. Finally, we use a budget of 5M training steps for each training run. To make a fair comparison
with As et al. (2022); Huang et al. (2024), we fix the ratio of environment steps and update steps of
the model and policy. While Huang et al. (2024) use the RSSM model from Hafner et al. (2023), our
implementation uses the (older) one from Hafner et al. (2019) and As et al. (2022).
Sparse S AFETY-G YM Let dRG     t be the euclidean distance between the robot and the goal/button at
time step t, dBG                                                        RB
              t the distance between the box and the goal position and dt the distance between the
robot and the box positions. Furthermore, denote tol(x, l, u) as the tolerance function from Tassa
et al. (2018), where l, u denotes lower and upper bounds respectively.

 Environment         Dense Reward                              Sparse Reward
 G OTO G OAL         dRG     RG
                      t−1 − dt + 1dBG
                                   t ≤0.3
                                                               tol(dRG               RG     RG
                                                                    t , 0, 0.45) · (dt−1 − dt ) +
                                                               1dRG
                                                                  t ≤0.3

 P RESS B UTTON      dRG     RG
                      t−1 − dt + 1dBG
                                   t ≤0.3
                                                               1dRG
                                                                 t ≤0.1

 P USH B OX          dRB     RB   BG     BG
                      t−1 − dt + dt−1 − dt + 1dBG
                                               t ≤0.3
                                                               tol(dRB            RB    RB   BG
                                                                    t , 0, 0.5)·(dt−1 −dt )+dt−1 −
                                                                BG
                                                               dt + 1dBG t ≤0.3



Table 1: Comparison of the reward functions in the base environments of S AFETY-G YM and our
sparse rewards environments.



   Safe


Unsafe



                                               Training Progress

Figure 7: C ARTPOLE environment as an example of a problem instance of safe exploration. Each
scene summarizes a trajectory that was collected in increasing training iterations. The agent incurs a
cost whenever the cart goes outside of the area between the two red vertical lines. The goal is to learn
a policy that swings the pole to the top position, while ensuring the expected accumulated cost is
bounded during learning. Learning in this setting is much more challenging, as agents can only try
out control policies that known to be safe.

Cartpole exploration In this task, the agent receives a sparse reward when it swings up a pendulum
to the top position and when the slider (a.k.a cart) is centered. The RWRL benchmark (Dulac-Arnold
et al., 2019) adds a safety constraint that enforces the slider to remain in a certain distance from
the center (see Figure 7). As in Dulac-Arnold et al. (2019), we use a cost budget of d = 100 and
an episode length of T = 1000 steps. Adding the safety constraint adds a significant challenge, as
any safe policy is much more limited in exploration. In addition to the safety constraint, we add a
cost for taking actions, as done in Curi et al. (2020). Combining all these factors together, makes a
challenging exploration task, as we show in our experiments. Further implementation details can be
found in our open-source code.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              ACT S AFE (Ours)               LAMBDA             CPO               BSRP-L AG
                               G OTO G OAL                                                    P RESS B UTTONS
                                                                      10


             10                                                        5
       Jˆr
              0                                                        0


            100

                                                                      50
             50
      Jˆc


              0                                                        0



                  0   2000     4000       6000        8000    10000         0         2000        4000   6000        8000     10000
                                 Episodes                                                          Episodes

                      Figure 8: Performance and safety in with the D OGGO robot.

                                          ACT S AFE (Ours)            ACT S AFE [L AGRANGIAN ]
                      G OTO G OAL                             P RESS B UTTONS                                 P USH B OX
                                                 15                                          20
             20

                                                 10
                                                                                             10
       Jˆr


             10
                                                  5

              0                                   0                                           0


            100                                                                              60

                                                 50
                                                                                             40
      Jˆc


             50
                                                 25                                          20

              0                                   0                                           0

                  0    2000        4000                 0        2000        4000                  0          2000          4000
                        Episodes                                 Episodes                                     Episodes

Figure 9: Augmented Lagrangian from As et al. (2022) compared to LBSGD of Usmanova et al.
(2024). LBSGD significantly reduces the number of unsafe episodes.

C    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
Experiments with the D OGGO Robot In this experiment we compare ACT S AFE with the same
baseline algorithms from Section 5 on S AFETY-G YM’s D OGGO robot. We omit our results in the
P USH B OX environment as all baselines failed to solve it. As shown in Figure 8, similarly to the
results in Section 5, ACT S AFE maintains safety during learning, while moderately underperforming
LAMBDA. Overall, ACT S AFE outperforms CPO both in terms of safety and performance and
BSRP-L AG of Huang et al. (2024) in terms of performance.

Ablating LBSGD One assumptions of LBSGD that we cannot formally satisfy relates to unbiased-
ness of the evaluation of the objective, constraints and their gradients. In principle, satisfying this
assumption will allow us to guarantee that all iterates of Equation (7) are feasible, i.e., satisfy the
pessimistic constraint. This is in contrast to primal-dual methods, such as the Augmented Lagrangian
of As et al. (2022) that lacks any guarantees on feasibility during optimization. While it is hard to
formally satisfy LBSGD’s unbiasedness assumption, we empirically observe that LBSGD allows us
to keep constraint satisfaction during learning. We present this result in Figure 9. As shown, even
after initializing both variants with initial data from the burn-in period, ACT S AFE [L AGRANGIAN ]
fails to satisfy the constraints throughout learning. As in the main results on safety in Figure 4,
compared to Augmented Lagrangian, LBSGD maintains safety during learning at a slight price of
performance.


                                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Safe Adaptation Here, instead of the warm-up period of data collection, we study the effect of
first training on a “safe” environment, like a simulator, and then continuing training on a similar
environment, but with shifted dynamics. To this end, we extend G OTO G OAL from S AFETY-G YM to
two additional tasks, in which we change the motor gear and floor damping coefficients. The agent
is first allowed to explore the “sim” environment for 300K interaction steps before being deployed
on the “real” environment. We analyze the impact of our LBSGD optimizer and of pessimism in
handling constraint violation during deployment. As shown in Figure 10, without LBSGD and
pessimism, ACT S AFE does not always transfer safely to the deployment environment. Furthermore,
intuitively, while pessimism is crucial for maintaining safety while adapting to distribution shifts, it
may sometimes hinder performance of the main objective. This experiment demonstrates that, if one
has no initial data, one can use ACT S AFE in combination with a simulator to achieve safe exploration
in practice, with a clear tradeoff of the simulator’s fidelity and the degree of pessimism in ACT S AFE.

                   ACT S AFE (Ours)          ACT S AFE (N O P ESSIMISM )               ACT S AFE [L AGRANGIAN ] (N O P ESSIMISM )
                            G OTO G OAL [DAMPING ]                                               G OTO G OAL [M OTOR ]
              20

              10                                                            20
      Jˆr


               0
                                                                             0
             −10


             100                                                           100
       Jˆc


              50                                                            50



               0                                                             0

                   0      1000        2000   3000     4000      5000               0          1000    2000      3000     4000         5000
                                       Episodes                                                            Episodes

Figure 10: Adaptation to domain shifts. The red dashed vertical line represents the step after which
we switch dynamics. Black dashed vertical line represents changing from active exploration to
greedily maximizing the reward. We report the mean metrics across 5 seeds.
Humanoid Proof-of-Concept We further demonstrate the scalability of ACT S AFE on the H U -
MANOID B ENCH benchmark (Sferrazza et al., 2024). We use a robust, low-level walking policy
provided with the benchmark, and input visual observations from a third-person camera view. We
compare ACT S AFE with O PAX (Sukhija et al., 2024) on the P OLE task, where a humanoid robot must
navigate through a field of pole obstacles, as illustrated in Figure 11. In this task, the agent incurs
a cost of 1 for each pole it hits and when it falls, while the reward is based on the robot’s forward


                                                                                                ACT S AFE (Ours)              O PAX
                                                                             1000

                                                                                 750
                                                                       Jˆr


                                                                                 500



                                                                                 200
                                                                        Jˆc


                                                                                   0

                                                                                          0          500      1000     1500     2000         2500
                                                                                                               Episodes
(a) P OLE task of H UMANOID B ENCH. The robot has                      (b) Performance and safety on the P OLE task of H U -
to cross to the other side of the maze while avoiding                  MANOID B ENCH .
hitting the poles.
                       Figure 11: Overview of the Pole task and its performance metrics.


                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


velocity. As shown in Figure 11, ACT S AFE significantly reduces the number of constraint violations
compared to O PAX, while maintaining competitive performance on the objective.
Comparison with O PAX on C ARTPOLE We                         ACT S AFE (Ours)    O PAX @ 1.25M
compare ACT S AFE with O PAX (Sukhija et al.,                 O PAX @ 1M
2023) on the C ARTPOLE S WINGUP S PARSE task
from Section 5.2. Both ACT S AFE and O PAX                   500


                                                          Jˆr
rely on intrinsic rewards for exploration and                  0
model learning, however, ACT S AFE only con-
siders policies from within the pessimistic safe            1000
set. We compare ACT S AFE with O PAX trained
for 1M and 1.25M steps of pure exploration.


                                                         Jˆc
ACT S AFE uses 1M exploration steps, as in Sec-
                                                               0
tion 5.2. As shown in Figure 12, O PAX fails
to sufficiently explore the dynamics within 1M                       0     1000 2000 3000 4000 5000

steps. The reason being that ACT S AFE can                                       Episodes
explore in a much more confined state-action
space, and therefore visits states with non-zero Figure 12: Comparison of ACT S AFE and O PAX in
rewards quicker. This is in contrast to O PAX the C ARTPOLE S WINGUP S PARSE task of RWRL.
which is permitted to explore unsafe action-states as well, and therefore less likely to visit these states
within the given training budget. We note that a result in a similar spirit has been observed by Widmer
et al. (2023, Figure 2). While 1M steps are not enough for O PAX to fully learn the dynamics when no
constraints are imposed on the policy, in Figure 12 we show that after having explored the dynamics
for 1.25M steps, O PAX is able to recover an optimal policy. Unsurprisingly, in both experiments
O PAX fails to satisfy the constraints, as it optimizes only for the intrinsic reward.


                                                    25
