Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S TABILIZED N EURAL P REDICTION OF
P OTENTIAL O UTCOMES IN C ONTINUOUS T IME
 Konstantin Hess & Stefan Feuerriegel
 Munich Center for Machine Learning
 LMU Munich
 {k.hess,feuerriegel}@lmu.de



                                            A BSTRACT
         Patient trajectories from electronic health records are widely used to estimate con-
         ditional average potential outcomes (CAPOs) of treatments over time, which then
         allows to personalize care. Yet, existing neural methods for this purpose have a
         key limitation: while some adjust for time-varying confounding, these methods
         assume that the time series are recorded in discrete time. In other words, they are
         constrained to settings where measurements and treatments are conducted at fixed
         time steps, even though this is unrealistic in medical practice. In this work, we
         aim to estimate CAPOs in continuous time. The latter is of direct practical rele-
         vance because it allows for modeling patient trajectories where measurements and
         treatments take place at arbitrary, irregular timestamps. We thus propose a new
         method called stabilized continuous time inverse propensity network (SCIP-Net).
         For this, we further derive stabilized inverse propensity weights for robust esti-
         mation of the CAPOs. To the best of our knowledge, our SCIP-Net is the first
         neural method that performs proper adjustments for time-varying confounding in
         continuous time.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Estimating conditional average potential outcomes (CAPOs) of treatments is crucial to personalize
treatment decisions in medicine (Feuerriegel et al., 2024). Such CAPOs are increasingly predicted
based on patient data from electronic health records (Bica et al., 2021). This thus requires methods
that can model the time dimension in patient trajectories and, therefore, estimate CAPOs over time.
Existing neural methods for estimating CAPOs over time primarily model the patient trajectory in
discrete time (e.g., Bica et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; Lim et al., 2018; Melnychuk et al., 2022). As
such, these methods make unrealistic assumptions that both health measurements and treatments oc-
cur on a fixed, regular schedule (such as, e.g., daily or hourly). However, both health measurements
and treatments take place at arbitrary, irregular timestamps based on patient needs. For example,
patients in a critical state may be subject to closer monitoring, so that measurements are recorded
more frequently (Allam et al., 2021).
To account for arbitrary, irregular timestamps of both health measurements and treatments, methods
are needed that correctly model the patient trajectory in continuous time (Lok, 2008; Røysland,
2011; Rytgaard et al., 2022). However, neural methods that operate in continuous time are scarce
(see Sec. 2). Crucially, existing neural methods have a key limitation in that they fail to properly
account for time-varying confounding (e.g., Seedat et al., 2022). This means that, for a sequence
of future treatments, the corresponding confounders lie also in the future, are thus unobserved,
and therefore need to be adjusted for. Yet, existing neural methods rely only on heuristics such as
balancing, which targets an improper estimand and thus leads to estimates that are biased. To the
best of our knowledge, there is no neural model that estimates CAPOs in continuous time while
properly adjusting for time-varying confounding.
In this paper, we aim to estimate CAPOs for sequences of treatments in continuous time while prop-
erly adjusting for time-varying confounding. However, this is a non-trivial challenge, as this requires
a method that can perform adjustments at arbitrary timestamps. While there are methods to adjust
for time-varying confounding in discrete time, similar methods for continuous time are still lacking.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                              Correct          Adjustment for        Existing works
                                           timestamps?   time-varying confounding?

                                               ✗                      ✗              CRN (Bica et al., 2020), CT (Melnychuk et al., 2022)
     1 Neural methods in discrete time         ✗                      ✓              RMSNs (Lim et al., 2018), G-Net (Li et al., 2021)

     2 Neural methods in continuous time       ✓                      ✗              TE-CDE (Seedat et al., 2022)

    SCIP-Net (ours)                            ✓                      ✓              —


Table 1: Comparison of key neural methods for estimating CAPOs over time. Our SCIP-Net is the
first method to perform proper adjustments for time-varying confounding in continuous time.

Therefore, we first derive a tractable expression for inverse propensity weighting (IPW) in continu-
ous time. However, a direct application of IPW may suffer from severe overlap violations and thus
lead to extreme weights. As a remedy, we further derive stabilized IPW in continuous time. We
then use our stabilized IPW to propose a novel method, which we call stabilized continuous time
inverse propensity network (SCIP-Net). Unlike existing methods, ours is the first neural method
to estimate CAPOs in continuous time while properly adjusting for time-varying confounding.
We make the following contributions:1 (1) We introduce SCIP-Net, a novel neural method for esti-
mating conditional average potential outcomes in continuous time. (2) We derive a tractable version
of IPW in continuous time, which provides the theoretical foundation of our paper for proper adjust-
ments for time-varying confounding. Further, we propose stabilized IPW in continuous time, which
we then use in our SCIP-Net. (3) We demonstrate through extensive experiments that our SCIP-Net
outperforms existing neural methods.

2         R ELATED W ORK
Table 1 presents an overview of key neural methods for estimating CAPOs over time. An extended
related work is in Supp. A.
Average vs. individualized estimation: Estimating average potential outcomes over time is a well-
studied problem in classical statistics (e.g., Bang & Robins, 2005; Lok, 2008; Robins, 1986; 1999;
Robins & Hernán, 2009; Røysland, 2011; Rytgaard et al., 2022; 2023; van der Laan & Gruber,
2012). However, these methods are population-level approaches and thus do not make individu-
alized estimates at the patient level. Put simply, the observed history of an individual patient is
ignored. Therefore, they are not suitable for personalized medicine. In contrast, our work (and the
following overview) focuses on potential outcome estimation conditional on the observed patient
history, which thus allows us to make individual-level estimates for personalized medicine.
 1 Neural methods in discrete time: Some neural methods for estimating CAPOs over time impose
a discrete time model on the data (e.g., Bica et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; Lim et al., 2018; Melnychuk
et al., 2022). As such, these methods operate under the assumption of both fixed observation and
treatment schedules, yet which is unrealistic in clinical settings. Instead, patient health is typically
monitored at arbitrary, irregular timestamps, and the timing of treatments also takes place at arbi-
trary, irregular timestamps, which may directly depend on the health condition of a patient. Hence,
methods in discrete time rely on a data model that is not flexible enough to account for arbitrary,
irregular monitoring and treatment times, because of which their suitability in medical practice is
limited.
 2 Neural methods in continuous time: Only few neural methods have been developed for es-
timating CAPOs in continuous time. Yet, existing methods have key limitations. One stream of
methods (Hess et al., 2024b; Vanderschueren et al., 2023) ignores time-varying confounding and is
thus not applicable to our setting.
To the best of our knowledge, there is only one neural method that works in continuous time and that
is applicable to our setting: TE-CDE (Seedat et al., 2022). This method tries to handle time-varying
confounding through balancing. However, balancing is a heuristic approach to adjust for time-
varying confounding; in fact, balancing was originally proposed for variance reduction (Johansson
et al., 2016) and may even increase bias (Melnychuk et al., 2024). Therefore, TE-CDE suffers
from an infinite data bias that comes from the fact that is does not properly adjust for time-varying
confounding.
      1
          Code is available at https://github.com/konstantinhess/SCIP-Net.


                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Research gap: To the best of our knowledge, none of the above neural methods performs proper
adjustments for time-varying confounding in continuous time. As a remedy, we propose SCIP-Net,
which is the first neural method that estimates CAPOs in continuous time while properly adjusting
for time-varying confounding.

3    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Notation: Let [0, τ ] be the time window. In the following, we
assume every stochastic process Vt = V (t) defined on [0, τ ] to                                                  Hard intervention
                                                                         Treatments
be càdlàg, and we let Vt− = lims→t Vs denote the left time                           Confounding &
                                                                                      treatment effects
limit. Further, we write V̄t = {Vs }s≤t and V t = {Vs }s≥t .
                                                                                                     Covariates
                                                                                                                       Potential outcome
Setup (see Fig. 1): We consider outcomes Yt ∈ Rdy , discrete
treatments At ∈ {0, 1}da , and covariates Xt ∈ Rdx , where
we assume that Xt contains Ys for all s < t. Without loss               Figure 1: Setup. Shown are
of generality, we assume that static covariates are included in         treatment and covariate trajecto-
Xt . At time t, we let π0,t (At ) and µ0,t (Xt ) denote the ob-         ries in continuous time.     Ob-
servational treatment propensity and the covariate distribution,        servational treatment assignments
respectively. Both measurement times and treatment times are            are confounded by covariates and,
typically dynamic and do not follow fixed schedules. Rather,            hence, estimating CAPOs requires
both are recorded at arbitrary, irregular timestamps.                   adjustments.

To formalize the above in continuous time, we need to be able to model arbitrary timestamps, which
increases the complexity compared to the discrete time setting considerably. Following Rytgaard
et al. (2022; 2023), we let the counting processes Ntx and Nta govern the times at which covariates
are measured and at which treatments may be administered, respectively. For both z ∈ {a, x}, we let
Tτz = {T1z , . . . , TNz τz } denote the set of jumping times of the process Ntz with TNz τz ≤ τ . Further, we
let Λz0 denote the cumulative intensity of Ntz , and we let λz0 (t) denote the corresponding intensity
function. Further, we use the short-hand notation dt = [t, t + dt) as in (Gill & Johansen, 1990;
Rytgaard et al., 2022). Then, we have that
                        λz0 (t) dt = dΛz0 (t) = EP0 [N z (dt)] = P0 (N z (dt) = 1).                                                   (1)

Observational likelihood: We write the full observed history up to time t as
                          H̄t = {ATja , XTjx , N̄ta , N̄tx : Tja ∈ Tta , Tjx ∈ Ttx }.                                                 (2)
Then, following (Rytgaard et al., 2022), we can write the observational likelihood of the data H̄τ
via
                                                                     N x (ds)                      1−N x (ds)
dP0 (H̄τ ) =µ0,0 (X0 )            dΛx0 (s | H̄s− )µ0,s (Xs | H̄s− )           1 − dΛx0 (s | H̄s− )
                        T
                       s∈(0,τ ]
                                                   N a (ds)                       1−N a (ds)
            × dΛa0 (s | H̄s− )π0,s (As | H̄s− )             1 − dΛa0 (s | H̄s− )               ,         (3)
where P is the geometric product integral. Intuitively, the geometric product integral P can be
thought of as the infinitesimal limit of the discrete product operator Π. Importantly, the geometric
product integral in Equation 3 is the natural way to describe joint likelihoods in continuous time.
For more details, we provide a brief overview of product integration in Supp. B.
Objective: We are interested in estimating the response of the outcome variable Yτ when intervening
on the treatment sequence starting at time t, given an observed history H̄t− = h̄t− . For this, we
adopt the potential outcomes framework (Neyman, 1923; Rubin, 1978). That is, we seek to estimate
the CAPO                            h                               i
                                  E Yτ [a∗,t , na∗,t ] | H̄t− = h̄t− ,                          (4)
under interventions on both the treatment propensity At = a∗,t and the treatment frequency
N at = na∗,t , given the history H̄t− = h̄t− . Here, the interventions are hard interventions, which
is standard in the literature (e.g., Bica et al., 2020; Lim et al., 2018; Melnychuk et al., 2022; Seedat
et al., 2022). That is, for s ≥ t, we are interested in deterministic interventions of the form
As ∼ π∗,s (As | H̄t− = h̄t− ) = 1{As =a∗,s } ,      Nsa ∼ dΛa∗ (s | H̄t− = h̄t− ) = 1{ta∗,j }Jj=1 (s) ds, (5)


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where a∗,s : R+ → A is a step-wise constant function with jumping points {ta∗,j }Jj=1 .
Estimating the CAPO for a treatment sequence is notoriously challenging due to the fundamental
problem of causal inference (Imbens & Rubin, 2015). This means, only factual outcomes Yτ in are
observed in the data, but not the potential outcomes when intervening on the treatment. In the fol-
lowing, we first define the interventional distribution for our objective and then ensure identifiability.
Interventional distribution: We now define the interventional distribution for our objective. For
this, we rewrite Equation 4 by reweighting Yτ under the observational distribution dP0 . For this, we
follow Rytgaard et al. (2023) and first split the likelihood into two separate parts as

               dP0 (H̄τ ) = dPQ0 ,G0 (H̄τ ) = µ0,0 (X0 )               dG0,s (H̄s ) dQ0,s (H̄s ),          (6)
                                                             T
                                                            s∈(0,τ ]

where
                                                          N a (ds)                       1−N a (ds)
        dG0,s (H̄s ) = dΛa0 (s | H̄s− ) π0,s (As | H̄s− )          1 − dΛa0 (s | H̄s− )                    (7)
is the treatment part the we intervene on and where
                                                            N x (ds)                         1−N x (ds)
        dQ0,s (H̄s ) = dΛx0 (s | H̄s− )µ0,s (Xs | H̄s− )                1 − dΛx0 (s | H̄s− )               (8)
remains unchanged. Then, we can write the interventional distribution as

               dP∗ (H̄τ ) = dPQ0 ,G∗ (H̄τ ) = µ0,0 (X0 )               dG∗,s (H̄s ) dQ0,s (H̄s ),          (9)
                                                             T
                                                            s∈(0,τ ]

where
                                                       N a (ds)                      1−N a (ds)
     dG∗,s (H̄s ) = dΛa∗ (s | H̄s− ) π∗,s (As | H̄s− )          1 − dΛa∗ (s | H̄s− )            .         (10)

Identifiability: To ensure identifiability, we need to make the following assumptions (Lok, 2008;
Robins & Hernán, 2009; Rytgaard et al., 2022) that are standard in the literature for estimat-
ing CAPOs over time (e.g., Seedat et al., 2022). (i) Consistency: Given an intervention on
the treatment propensity and the frequency [a∗,t , na∗,t ], the observed outcome Yτ coincides with
the potential outcome Yτ [a∗,t , na∗,t ] under this intervention. (ii) Positivity: Given any history
H̄t− , the Radon-Nikodỳm derivative dG∗,t /dG0,t exists. (iii) Unconfoundedness: Given any his-
tory H̄t− , the potential outcome is independent of the treatment assignment probability, that is,
Yτ [a∗,t , na∗,t ] ⊥ (At , N at ) | H̄t− .
Proposition 1. Under assumptions (i)–(iii), we can estimate the CAPO from observational data
(i.e., from data sampled under dP0 ) via inverse propensity weighting, that is,
       h                                   i h                                                  i
    E Yτ [a∗,t , na∗,t ] H̄t− = h̄t− = E Yτ        Ws (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗, ), H̄t− = h̄t− , (11)
                                               T
                                               s≥t

where the inverse propensity weights for s ≥ t are defined as
                                                         dG∗,s (H̄s )
                                     Ws ≡ ws (H̄s ) =                 .                                   (12)
                                                         dG0,s (H̄s )

Proof. See Supp. D.

Proposition 1 is important for the rest of our paper: it tells us that we can estimate CAPOs in
continuous time from data sampled under dP0 . For this, we need to quantify the change in measure
from the observational distribution dP0 to the interventional distribution dP∗ , which is given by
Equation 12.
However, the above formulation is based on a product integral P, which is not computationally
tractable. ⇒ We later
                  Q derive a novel, tractable formulation where we rewrite Equation 11 using the
product operator (Sec. 4.1). Further, inverse propensity weights Ws may lead to extreme weights
and, hence, unstable performance. This is a known issue because settings over time are prone to low
overlap (Frauen et al., 2025; Lim et al., 2018). ⇒ We later derive novel stabilized weights that are
tailored to our continuous time setting (Sec. 4.2).


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4       SCIP-N ET
In this section, we introduce our SCIP-Net. It is designed to perform proper adjustments for time-
varying confounding in continuous time.
Objective: Our objective is to find the optimal parameters2 ϕ̂ of a neural network mϕ via
                                                                          2
      ϕ̂ = arg min EP∗        Yτ [a∗,t , na∗,t ] − mϕ (At , N at , H̄t− )   H̄t− = h̄t−                                       (13)
             ϕ
                         h                                   2                                                       i
        = arg min EP0         Yτ − mϕ (At , N at , H̄t− )              Ws (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t− .       (14)
             ϕ                                                   T
                                                                 s≥t

Note that the above objective makes use of inverse propensity weights Ws . However, these weights
suffer from two drawbacks: they are (1) intractable as they rely on product integrals P, and (2) they
may lead to unstable performance. As a remedy, we (1) derive a tractable expression for this product
integral (Sec. 4.1), and we further (2) introduce stabilized weights (Sec. 4.2). Finally, we present our
neural architecture (Sec. 4.3) and how to perform inference (Sec. 4.4).

4.1     R EWRITING THE OBJECTIVE FOR COMPUTATIONAL TRACTABILITY

We now derive a tractable expression to compute our unstabilized weights Ws in Equation 12.
Proposition 2. Let ta∗,0 = t for notational convenience. The unstabilized weights in Equation 12
satisfy
                                                                       J
                                                                       Y
        Ws    (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t− =                  Wta∗,j    (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t− ,
T                                                                      j=1
 s≥t
                                                                                                                              (15)
where
                                                                             λa0 (s | H̄s− ) ds
                                                   R
                                                exp s∈[ta            a
                                                             ∗,j−1 ,t∗,j )
                                Wta∗,j =                                                                .                     (16)
                                            λa0 (ta∗,j | H̄ta∗,j − ) π0,ta∗,j (a∗,ta∗,j | H̄ta∗,j − )

Proof. See Supp. D.

Proposition 2 has important implications for tractability: Given a history H̄t− = h̄t− and the future
sequence of treatments (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), the
                                                        Q product integral P of the unstabilized inverse
propensity weights Ws reduces to a finite product . This product includes both treatment propen-
sities and treatment intensities. In Sec. 4.3, we show how to learn these quantities from data.
Importantly, the unstabilized weights in Equation 16 are already sufficient to adjust for time-varying
confounding. However, as they may lead to extreme weights, we now propose stabilized weights.

4.2     S TABILIZED WEIGHTS

In the following, we first define our stabilized weights (Def. 1). Then, we show that the optimal
parameters ϕ̂ in Equation 14 are the same, regardless of whether the original, unstabilized inverse
propensity weights from above are used or our stabilized weights (Proposition 3). Finally, we present
a tractable expression to compute the stabilized weights (Proposition 4).
Definition 1. For s ≥ t, let the scaling factor Ξs be given by the ratio of the marginal transition
probabilities of treatment, that is,
                                                        dG0,s (Ās , N̄sa )
                                Ξs ≡ ξs (Ās , N̄sa ) =                     .                    (17)
                                                        dG∗,s (Ās , N̄sa )
We define the stabilized weights W fs as
                                                         W
                                                         fs = Ξs Ws .                                                         (18)
    2
     Throughout, we refer to the weights of neural nets as parameters to make the distinction to inverse propen-
sity weights clear.


                                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The idea of stabilized weights (e.g., Lim et al., 2018) is that the marginal transition probabilities Ξs ,
on average over the population, downscale the inverse propensity weights. Importantly, the scaling
factors are not conditioned on the individual history and, therefore, do not change the objective.
To formalize this, we make use of the fact that the optimal parameters in Equation 14 are invariant
to multiplicative scaling of the optimization problem with respect to constant scaling factors. We
summarize this in the following proposition.
Proposition 3. The optimal parameters ϕ̂ in Equation 14 can equivalently be obtained by
                      "                                                                                              #
                                                             2
   ϕ̂ = arg min EP0        Yτ − mϕ (At , N at , H̄t− )                              a              a
                                                                         Ws (At , N t ) = (a∗,t , n∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t− .
                                                                         f                                                (19)
           ϕ                                                     T
                                                                  s≥t



Proof. See Supp. D.

Proposition 3 guarantees that we can substitute the original, unstabilized weights Ws with the stabi-
lized version W
              fs . As the scaling factors Ξs downscale Ws , we reduce the risk of receiving extreme
inverse propensity weights, and, thus, obtain a more stable objective.
The results from Proposition 3 still rely on product integrals P. However, as in Proposition 2, we
now derive an equivalent, tractable expression that relies on the product operator Π instead.
Proposition 4. Let ta∗,0 = t for notational convenience. The scaling factor Ξs from Equation 17
then satisfies

                       Ξs    (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t−
                                                                       a
                                                                          ) = (āt− , n̄at− )   (20)
                T
                      s≥t
                    J
                    Y
                =            Ξta∗,j        (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t−
                                                                                     a
                                                                                        ) = (āt− , n̄at− ) ,             (21)
                    j=1

where
                                λa0 (ta∗,j | Āta∗,j − , N̄taa∗,j − ) π0,ta∗,j (ata∗,j | Āta∗,j − , N̄taa∗,j − )
                  Ξ   ta      =                 R                                                                 .       (22)
                       ∗,j
                                           exp s∈[ta ,ta ) λa0 (s | Ās− , N̄s−            a ) ds
                                                          ∗,j−1    ∗,j



Proof. See Supp. D.

Together, Propositions 2, 3 and 4 yield a (1) tractable objective function that relies on (2) stabilized
inverse propensity weights. As we show in the following Sec. 4.3, we can estimate the stabilized
weights from data. Thereby, we present our SCIP-Net, which adjusts for time-varying confounding
in continuous time.

4.3     N EURAL ARCHITECTURE

Overview: We now introduce the neural architecture of our SCIP-Net, which consists of four com-
ponents (see Fig. 2): The S stabilization network learns an estimator of the scaling factors ξs (·)
from Equation 17. The W weight network learns an estimator of the unstabilized inverse propensity
weights ws (·) from Equation 12. Combining both, we have an estimator for the stabilized weights
wes (·) from Equation 18. The E encoder learns a representation of the observed history, which is
then passed to the decoder. Finally, the D decoder takes the learned
                                                                  h representations and the stabi-
                                                                                              i
lized inverse propensity weights as input to estimate the CAPOs E Yτ [a∗,t , na∗,t ] | H̄t− = h̄t− .

Backbones: All components S , W , E , and D use neural controlled differential equations (CDEs)
(Kidger et al., 2020; Morrill et al., 2021) as backbones. Neural CDEs have several benefits for our
SCIP-Net. First, neural CDEs process data in continuous time. Second, neural CDEs update their
hidden states as data becomes available over time. We provide a brief introduction in Supp. C.


                                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                   S     Stability
                                         network                                BCE                                     D
                                                         Neural
                                                          CDE                                                                 Decoder


                                                                                 CE


                                                                                                                               Neural
                                                                                                                                CDE
                                   W     Weight
                                         network                                BCE
                                                         Neural
                                                          CDE


                                                                                 CE

      Legend
                                                                                                                               WMSE
     CE            Cross entropy   E     Encoder         Neural
     BCE               Binary CE                          CDE
                                                                                MSE
     MSE     Mean squared error
     WMSE         Weighted MSE


                                    Figure 2: Neural architecture of our SCIP-Net.


In the following, we denote the training samples by {h̄i,τ }ni=1 and the test samples by
{(h̄k,t− , a∗,t , na∗,t )}m
                          k=1 . Reassuringly, we emphasize that h̄i,t− , h̄k,t− are realizations from the
observational distribution dP0 , whereas (a∗,t , na∗,t ) is the interventional treatment sequence.

S  Stability network: The stability network learns an estimator ξˆs (·) for the scaling factors Ξta∗,j
from Proposition 4. It consists of a linear input layer νϕS , a neural vector field fϕS , and two linear
output layers µS,I      S,P
               ϕ and µϕ , which estimate the treatment intensity and propensity, respectively.

Training: The stability network receives treatment decisions and treatment times (Āτ , N̄τa ) =
(āi,τ , n̄ai,τ ). We distinguish two cases. For 0 ≤ t < τ , the latent representation zi,t
                                                                                        S
                                                                                            evolves as
                                                Z t
                                   S      S
                                  zi,t = zi,0 +     fϕS (zi,s , s) d[ai,s− , nai,s− ],                 (23)
                                                                  0
where d[ai,s− , nai,s− ] denotes Riemann-Stieltjes integration with respect to the control path and
 S
zi,0 = νϕS (ai,0 , nai,0 ). Case (1): The latent representation is then passed to the intensity layer µS,I
                                                                                                       ϕ
in order to estimate the probability whether a treatment decision is made at time t. For this, our
SCIP-Net optimizes the binary cross entropy (BCE) loss

                                     LS,I
                                      t   (ϕ) = BCE    µS,I S
                                                        ϕ  (z i,t ), dn a
                                                                        i,t .                         (24)
Thereby, the intensity layer µS,I
                              ϕ learns an estimator of the treatment intensity function via

                                                     λ̂a0 (t | Āt− , N̄t−
                                                                        a
                                                                           ) = µS,I S
                                                                                ϕ (Zt ).                                                   (25)
Case (2): If a treatment decision is made at time Tja = tai,j , the latent representation is additionally
passed through the propensity output layer µS,Pϕ  to estimate which treatment is administered. For
this, our SCIP-Net minimizes the cross entropy (CE) loss

                              LS,P
                               j   (ϕ) =  CE   µS,P
                                                ϕ   (z S
                                                         a
                                                      i,ti,j ), ai,ti,j ,
                                                                    a                                                                      (26)
Hence, the propensity layer learns an estimator of the propensity score via
                                                π̂0a (at | Āt− , N̄t−
                                                                    a
                                                                       ) = µS,P S
                                                                            ϕ (Zt ).                                                       (27)

Scaling factor: After training, the stability network again receives the training samples
(Āτ , N̄τa ) = (āi,τ , n̄ai,τ ). Following Proposition 4, it then computes

       ξˆs (āi,s , n̄ai,s )                                                                                                               (28)
T
 s≥t

      J λ̂a (ta | Ā a                  , N̄taai,j − = n̄ai,tai,j − ) π̂0,tai,j (atai,j | Ātai,j − = āi,tai,j − , N̄taai,j − = n̄ai,tai,j − )
     Y    0 i,j     ti,j − = āi,ta
                                  i,j −
 =                                    R                                                                                                         ,
     j=1                        exp s∈[ta           ,ta ) 0
                                                           λ̂a (s | Ās− = āi,s− , N̄sa = n̄ai,s− ) ds
                                                      i,j−1   i,j


                                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where we can use an arbitrary quadrature scheme to compute the integral in the denominator.
W Weight network: The weight network learns an estimator ŵs (·) for the unstabilized weights
Wta∗,j from Proposition 2. It also consists of a linear input layer νϕW , a neural vector field fϕW , and
two linear output layers µW,I
                          ϕ   and µW,P
                                   ϕ   , which are trained to estimate the treatment intensity and
propensity, respectively.
                                                                                            W
Training: The weight network receives samples H̄τ = h̄i,τ . After hi,0 is transformed into zi,0 via
 W                     W
νϕ , the latent state zi,t of the weight network evolves as
                                                Z t
                                   W      W
                                 dzi,t = zi,0 +     fϕW (zi,s
                                                          W
                                                              , s) d[hi,s− ],                  (29)
                                                        0

where d[hi,s− ] denotes Riemann-Stieltjes integration w.r.t. the control path. Case (1): As for the
stability network, the weight network estimates the probability of a treatment decision at time t
through the intensity layer µW,I
                             ϕ   via

                                 LW,I
                                   t  = BCE µW,I      W        a
                                                ϕ (zi,t ), dni,t ,                             (30)

and, hence, learns an estimator of the treatment intensity function via

                                            λ̂a0 (t | H̄t− ) = µT,I W
                                                                ϕ (Zt ).                                           (31)
Case (2): If a treatment decision is made at time Tja = tai,j , the latent state is also passed through
the propensity layer µW,P
                      ϕ    and jointly trained via

                                LW,P
                                  j    = CE µW,Pϕ  (z W
                                                     i,ta ), ai,ta
                                                        i,j       i,j
                                                                        ,                           (32)

such that our SCIP-Net learns an estimator of the propensity score as

                                          π̂0a (at | H̄t− ) = µW,P
                                                               ϕ   (ZtW ).                                         (33)

Inverse propensity weight: After training, the weight network again receives the training samples
H̄τ = h̄i,τ and estimates the unstabilized inverse propensity weights according to Proposition 2 via

                                           exp s∈[ta ,ta ) λ̂a0 (s | H̄s− = h̄i,s− ) ds
                                                 R
                              YJ
                                                      i,j−1 i,j
              ŵs (h̄i,s− ) =                                                                                      . (34)
         T                       λ̂ a (ta | H̄ a
                              j=1 0 i,j       t i,j − =  h̄tai,j − ) π̂0,tai,j (ai,tai,j | H̄ta∗,j − = h̄tai,j − )
           s≥t


 E Encoder: The encoder computes a latent representation of the history, which is then passed to
the decoder. It consists of a linear input layer νϕE , a neural vector field fϕE , and an output layer µE
                                                                                                        ϕ.
                                                                                      E
Training: The encoder receives samples H̄τ = h̄i,τ . First, it transforms h̄i,0 into zi,0 via νϕE . The
              E
latent state zi,t then evolves according to
                                               Z t
                                  E      E
                                 zi,t = zi,0 +     fϕE (zi,s
                                                         E
                                                             , s) d[hi,s− ],                        (35)
                                                       0

where d[hi,s− ] denotes Riemann-Stieltjes integration w.r.t. the control path. At jumping times nxi,t ,
we pass the latent state zi,t to the encoder output layer µEϕ and minimize the mean squared error
(MSE) loss for outcomes at the jumping times via

                                   LE            E E
                                    t = MSE µϕ (zi,t , ai,t ), yi,t .                           (36)

 D Decoder: The decoder receives as input: (i) the encoded history of the encoder and (ii) the future
sequence of treatments. Then, it outputs an estimate of the CAPOs by adjusting for time-varying
confounding. It has a linear input layer νϕD , a neural vector field fϕD and an output layer µD
                                                                                              ϕ.


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                     E
Training: During training, the decoder receives the final latent representation zi,t   of the encoder as
                                           a              a
well as the observed treatments (At , N t ) = (ai,t , ni,t ). It then transforms the encoder representa-
              D
tion through zi,t = νϕD (zi,t
                          E
                              ) and computes
                                             Z τ
                                D     D
                              zi,τ = zi,t +      fϕD (zi,s
                                                       D
                                                           , s) d[ai,s− , nai,s− ],                 (37)
                                           t
                 a
where d[ai,s− , ni,s− ] denotes Riemann-Stieltjes integration w.r.t. the control path. At time τ , we
      D
pass zi,τ through the linear output layer µD
                                           ϕ . Importantly, the decoder is trained by minimizing the
MSE loss weighted by the stabilized weights, i.e.,
                                     J
                                     Y
                             LD           ˆeta MSE µD (z D , ai,τ ), yi,τ ,
                              τ =         w  i,j    ϕ   i,τ                                        (38)
                                    j=1

where
                      w      ˆeta (h̄i,ta ) = ξˆta (āi,ta , n̄a a )ŵta (h̄i,ta ),
                      ˆeta ≡ w                                                                     (39)
                         i,j    i,j     i,j      i,j     i,j   i,ti,j  i,j     i,j


using the stability network ξˆs (·) and the weight network ŵs (·), respectively. By Proposition 3, we
thereby target the optimal model parameters ϕ̂ which, unlike existing methods, explicitly adjust for
time-varying confounding in continuous time.

4.4   I NFERENCE

In order to estimate CAPOs for an observed history H̄t− = h̄k,t− and a future sequence of treat-
ments (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), we first encode the history via
                                                   Z t
                                      E       E
                                    zk,t = zk,0  +     fϕE (zk,s
                                                             E
                                                                 , s) d[hk,s− ].           (40)
                                                    0
This latent representation is then passed to the decoder along with (a∗,t , na∗,t ) in order to compute
the final representation
                                             Z τ
                          D
                         zk,τ = νϕD (zk,t
                                      E
                                          )+     fϕD (zk,s
                                                       D
                                                           , s) d[a∗,s− , na∗,s− ].                (41)
                                                t

Finally, the output layer µD
                           ϕ of the decoder is used to estimate the CAPO at time τ , given the history
H̄t− = h̄k,t− , via
                           h                                i
                         Ê Yτ [a∗,t , na∗,t ] H̄t− = h̄k,t− = µD   D
                                                                ϕ (zk,τ , ak,τ ).                  (42)


5     N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS
Baselines: We now demonstrate the performance of our SCIP-Net against key neural baselines for
estimating CAPOs over time (see Table 1). Importantly, our choice of baselines and datasets is
consistent with prior literature (e.g., Bica et al., 2020; Lim et al., 2018; Melnychuk et al., 2022;
Seedat et al., 2022). Further, we report the performance of the CIP-Net ablation, where we directly
train the decoder with the unstabilized weights. This allows us to understand the performance gain
of our stabilized weights. Note that the CIP-Net ablation is still a new method (as no other neural
method performs proper adjustments for time-varying confounding in continuous time).
Datasets: We use a (i) synthetic dataset based on a tumor growth model (Geng et al., 2017), and
a (ii) semi-synthetic dataset based on the MIMIC-III dataset (Johnson et al., 2016). For both
datasets, the outcomes are simulated, so that we have access to the ground-truth potential outcomes,
which allows for comparing the performance in terms of root mean squared error (RMSE). We
report the mean ± the standard deviation over five runs with different seeds. We perform rigorous
hyperparameter tuning for all baselines to ensure a fair comparison (see Supp. G).
Tumor growth data: Tumor growth models are widely used for estimating CAPOs over time. It is a
model for the evolution of lung cancer Yt under radio therapy treatment Act and chemo therapy treat-
ment Art (details in Supp. E.1). Here, we follow Vanderschueren et al. (2023), where observation


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


times are at arbitrary, irregular timestamps. However, our setup has two differences: (i) We are not
primarily interested in informative sampling times. Instead, we consider a scenario with observation
times completely at random. Hence, observation times follow a Hawkes process with constant inten-
sity. (ii) Further, we do not consider an RCT setting. Instead, treatment assignments are confounded
via Act , Art ∼ Ber((γ/Dmax (D̄15 (Ȳt−1 − D̄max /2)), where γ controls the confounding strength, and
Dmax and D̄15 are the maximum and average tumor diameter over the last 15 days, respectively. For
evaluation, we then generate ground truth potential outcomes under hard interventions that would
be unobserved in real-world data. For this, we randomly sample treatment sequences, irrespective
of the history, as is done in (Melnychuk et al., 2022). Below, we vary the prediction horizons (up to
three days ahead) and the confounding strength.We provide details in Supp. E.1.

                                        &7                                                                                                                &7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              &7
                                      &51                                                                                                              &51                                                                                                            &51

                                        5061                                                                                                            5061                                                                                                         5061
                                        * 1HW                                                                                                          * 1HW                                                                                                        * 1HW
 $YHUDJH 506(


                                                                                                                     $YHUDJH 506(


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         $YHUDJH 506(

                                        7(&'(                                                                                                         7(&'(                                                                                                        7(&'(
                                        &,3 1HW  RXUV                                                                                         &,3 1HW  RXUV                                                                                      &,3 1HW  RXUV
                                       6&,3 1HW  RXUV                                                                                       6&,3 1HW  RXUV                                                                                     6&,3 1HW  RXUV


                                                   &RQIRXQGLQJ VWUHQJWK                                                                         &RQIRXQGLQJ VWUHQJWK                                                                       &RQIRXQGLQJ VWUHQJWK

                             (a) One day ahead prediction                                                                                       (b) Two days ahead prediction                                                                     (c) Three days ahead prediction
Figure 3: Performance for the tumor growth model. We compare different forecast horizons and
different confound strengths. Shown is the average RMSE of the potential outcomes under hard
interventions over five seeds. Our proposed SCIP-Net performs best, followed by our CIP-Net.
The results are in Fig. 3. We make the following observations: (1) Our proposed SCIP-Net per-
forms best. The performance gains become especially obvious for increasing levels of time-varying
confounding because ours is the first method to perform proper adjustments in continuous time.
(2) Our proposed SCIP-Net performs more robust than the CIP-Net ablation, which demonstrates
the effectiveness of our stabilized weights over the unstabilized weights. The stabilized weights
help estimating more accurately especially for larger prediction horizons and strong confounding.
(3) Nevertheless, our CIP-Net, has a competitive performance. (4) The only baseline designed for
continuous time is TE-CDE (shown in green), which we outperform by a large margin. (5) All other
neural baselines are instead designed for discrete time (shown in gray) and are outperformed clearly.
MIMIC-III data: Our experiments are based on the MIMIC-III extract from Wang et al. (2020).
Here, we use real-world covariates at irregular measurement timestamps, and then simulate treat-
ments and outcomes, respectively. This is done analogous to (Melnychuk et al., 2022), such that we
have access to the ground-truth potential outcomes. For the outcome variable, we additionally apply
a random observation mask in order to mimic observations at arbitrary, irregular timestamps. We
provide more details in Supp. E.2.
 Prediction window                                                       CT                               CRN                                   RMSNs                                G-Net                               TE-CDE       CIP-Net (ours)                                  SCIP-Net (ours)                              Rel. improvement
 (τ − t) = 1 hours                                               1.052 ± 0.069                       1.049 ± 0.065   1.075 ± 0.074                                      1.021 ± 0.069                            0.915 ± 0.025        0.876 ± 0.041                                    0.877 ± 0.044                                            +4.1%
 (τ − t) = 2 hours                                               1.196 ± 0.272                       1.088 ± 0.374   1.130 ± 0.274                                      1.095 ± 0.335                            0.784 ± 0.145         0.785 ± 0.117                                  0.634 ± 0.148                                             +19.1%
 (τ − t) = 3 hours                                               1.444 ± 0.232                       1.262 ± 0.355   1.300 ± 0.304                                      1.330 ± 0.198                            1.240 ± 0.242         1.291 ± 0.400                                  1.089 ± 0.322                                             +12.2%

Table 2: Performance for MIMIC-III. Reported is the average RMSE of the potential outcomes
under hard interventions over five seeds. We highlight the relative improvement of our SCIP-Net
over existing baselines. Again, our proposed SCIP-Net performs best.
Table 2 shows the results for different prediction windows. (1) Our SCIP-Net has the lowest error
among all methods and performs thus again best. (2) Our CIP-Net ablation, which is a new method
in itself, again has highly competitive performance. (3) Yet, the ablation shows that using stabi-
lized weights as in SCIP-Net (as opposed to the unstabilized weights as in CIP-Net) makes a large
contribution to the overall performance.
Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, SCIP-Net is the first neural method for estimating con-
ditional average potential outcomes through proper adjustments for time-varying confounding in
continuous time. For this, we first derive a tractable expression for inverse propensity weighting in
continuous time. Then, we propose stabilized weights in continuous time to stabilize the training
objective. Our experiments show that our SCIP-Net has clear benefits over existing baselines when
observation times and treatment times take place at arbitrary, irregular timestamps.


                                                                                                                                                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (Grant:
01IS24082).

R EFERENCES
Ahmed Allam, Stefan Feuerriegel, Michael Rebhan, and Michael Krauthammer. Analyzing patient
  trajectories with artificial intelligence. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 23(12):e29812,
  2021.
Heejung Bang and James M. Robins. Doubly robust estimation in missing data and causal inference
  models. Biometrics, 61(4):962–973, 2005.
Agamirza E. Bashirov, Emine Mısırlı, Yücel Tandoğdu, and Ali Özyapıcı. On modeling with multi-
  plicative differential equations. Applied Mathematics - A Journal of Chinese Universities, 26:425
  – 438, 2011.
Samuel L. Battalio, David E. Conroy, Walter Dempsey, Peng Liao, Marianne Menictas, Susan Mur-
  phy, Inbal Nahum-Shani, Tianchen Qian, Santosh Kumar, and Bonnie Spring. Sense2Stop: A
  micro-randomized trial using wearable sensors to optimize a just-in-time-adaptive stress manage-
  ment intervention for smoking relapse prevention. Contemporary Clinical Trials, 109:106534,
  2021.
Inci Baytas, Cao Xiao, Xi Zhang, Fei Wang, Anil Jain, and Jiayu Zhou. Patient subtyping via
  time-aware lstm networks. In KDD, 2017.
Ioana Bica, Ahmed M. Alaa, James Jordon, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Estimating counterfactual
  treatment outcomes over time through adversarially balanced representations. In ICLR, 2020.
Ioana Bica, Ahmed M. Alaa, Craig Lambert, and Mihaela van der Schaar. From real-world patient
  data to individualized treatment effects using machine learning: Current and future methods to
  address underlying challenges. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 109(1):87–100, 2021.
Edward De Brouwer, Jaak Simm, Adam Arany, and Yves Moreau. GRU-ODE-Bayes: Continuous
  modeling of sporadically-observed time series. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Zhengping Che, Sanjay Purushotham, KyungHyun Cho, David Sontag, and Yan Liu. Recurrent
  neural networks for multivariate time series with missing values. Scientific Reports, 8(1):6085,
  2018.
Ricky T. Q. Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David Duvenaud. Neural ordinary dif-
  ferential equations. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Yuqi Chen, Kan Ren, Yansen Wang, Yuchen Fang, Weiwei Sun, and Dongsheng Li. Contiformer:
  Continuous-time transformer for irregular time series modeling. In NeurIPS, volume 36, 2023.
Alicia Curth and Mihaela van der Schaar. Nonparametric estimation of heterogeneous treatment
  effects: From theory to learning algorithms. In AISTATS, 2021.
Nan Du, Hanjun Dai, Rakshit Trivedi, Utkarsh Upadhyay, Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez, and Le Song.
  Recurrent marked temporal point processes: Embedding event history to vector. In KDD, 2016.
Stefan Feuerriegel, Dennis Frauen, Valentyn Melnychuk, Jonas Schweisthal, Konstantin Hess, Ali-
  cia Curth, Stefan Bauer, Niki Kilbertus, Isaac S. Kohane, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Causal
  machine learning for predicting treatment outcomes. Nature Medicine, 30:958–968, 2024.
Dennis Frauen, Tobias Hatt, Valentyn Melnychuk, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Estimating average causal
  effects from patient trajectories. In AAAI, 2023.
Dennis Frauen, Konstantin Hess, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Model-agnostic meta-learners for estimat-
  ing heterogeneous treatment effects over time. In ICLR, 2025.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Crispin W. Gardiner. Handbook of stochastic methods for physics, chemistry and the natural sci-
  ences. Springer-Verlag, Berlin; Heidelberg, 1985. ISBN 3540156070.
Changran Geng, Harald Paganetti, and Clemens Grassberger. Prediction of treatment response
  for combined chemo- and radiation therapy for non-small cell lung cancer patients using a bio-
  mathematical model. Scientific Reports, 7(1):13542, 2017.
Richard D. Gill and Soren Johansen. A survey of product-integration with a view toward application
  in survival analysis. Annals of Statistics, 18(4), 1990.
Eldad Haber and Lars Ruthotto. Stable architectures for deep neural networks. Inverse Problems,
  34(1):014004, 2018.
Tobias Hatt and Stefan Feuerriegel. Sequential deconfounding for causal inference with unobserved
  confounders. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2104.09323, 2021a.
Tobias Hatt and Stefan Feuerriegel. Estimating average treatment effects via orthogonal regulariza-
  tion. In CIKM, 2021b.
Konstantin Hess, Dennis Frauen, Valentyn Melnychuk, and Stefan Feuerriegel. G-transformer for
  estimating conditional average potential outcomes over time. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2405.21012,
  2024a.
Konstantin Hess, Valentyn Melnychuk, Dennis Frauen, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Bayesian neural
  controlled differential equations for treatment effect estimation. In ICLR, 2024b.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.
Çağlar Hızlı, ST John, Anne Juuti, Tuure Saarinen, Kirsi Pietiläinen, and Pekka Marttinen. Causal
   modeling of policy interventions from sequences of treatments and outcomes. In ICML, 2023.
Guido W. Imbens and Donald B. Rubin. Causal inference for statistics, social, and biomedical sci-
  ences: An introduction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2015. ISBN 9781139025751.
Fredrik D. Johansson, Uri Shalit, and David Sonntag. Learning representations for counterfactual
  inference. In ICML, 2016.
Alistair E. W. Johnson, Tom J. Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H. Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G. Mark. MIMIC-III,
  a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific Data, 3(1):160035, 2016.
Nathan Kallus, Xiaojie Mao, and Angela Zhou. Interval estimation of individual-level causal effects
  under unobserved confounding. In AISTATS, 2019.
Patrick Kidger, James Morrill, James Foster, and Terry Lyons. Neural controlled differential equa-
  tions for irregular time series. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Patrick Kidger, James Foster, Xuechen Li, Harald Oberhauser, and Terry Lyons. Neural SDEs as
  Infinite-Dimensional GANs. In ICML, 2021.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
Milan Kuzmanovic, Tobias Hatt, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Deconfounding temporal autoencoder:
 Estimating treatment effects over time using noisy proxies. In ML4H, 2021.
Rui Li, Stephanie Hu, Mingyu Lu, Yuria Utsumi, Prithwish Chakraborty, Daby M. Sow, Piyush
  Madan, Jun Li, Mohamed Ghalwash, Zach Shahn, and Li-wei Lehman. G-Net: A recurrent net-
  work approach to G-computation for counterfactual prediction under a dynamic treatment regime.
  In ML4H, 2021.
Bryan Lim, Ahmed M. Alaa, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Forecasting treatment responses over
  time using recurrent marginal structural networks. In NeurIPS, 2018.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Judith J. Lok. Statistical modeling of causal effects in continuous time. Annals of Statistics, 36(3),
  2008.
Yiping Lu, Aoxiao Zhong, Quanzheng Li, and Bin Dong. Beyond finite layer neural networks:
  Bridging deep architectures and numerical differential equations. In ICML, 2018.
Yuchen Ma, Valentyn Melnychuk, Jonas Schweisthal, and Stefan Feuerriegel. DiffPO: A causal
  diffusion model for learning distributions of potential outcomes. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Farokh Marvasti. Nonuniform sampling. Springer US, 2001, 2001. ISBN 9781461512295.
Valentyn Melnychuk, Dennis Frauen, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Causal transformer for estimating
  counterfactual outcomes. In ICML, 2022.
Valentyn Melnychuk, Dennis Frauen, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Bounds on representation-induced
  confounding bias for treatment effect estimation. In ICLR, 2024.
James Morrill, Patrick Kidger, Lingyi Yang, and Terry Lyons. Neural controlled differential equa-
  tions for online prediction tasks. arXiv preprint, 2106.11028, 2021.
Elizabeth Murray, Eric B. Hekler, Gerhard Andersson, Linda M. Collins, Aiden Doherty, Chris Hol-
  lis, Daniel E. Rivera, Robert West, and Jeremy C. Wyatt. Evaluating Digital Health Interventions:
  Key Questions and Approaches. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 51(5):843–851, 2016.
Jerzy Neyman. On the application of probability theory to agricultural experiments. Annals of
   Agricultural Sciences, 10:1–51, 1923.
Yilmazcan Özyurt, Mathias Kraus, Tobias Hatt, and Stefan Feuerriegel. AttDMM: An attentive deep
  Markov model for risk scoring in intensive care units. In KDD. 2021.
James M. Robins. A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with a sustained exposure
  period: Application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect. Mathematical Modelling, 7:
  1393–1512, 1986.
James M. Robins. Robust estimation in sequentially ignorable missing data and causal inference
  models. Proceedings of the American Statistical Association on Bayesian Statistical Science, pp.
  6–10, 1999.
James M. Robins and Miguel A. Hernán. Estimation of the causal effects of time-varying exposures.
  Chapman & Hall/CRC handbooks of modern statistical methods. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2009.
Kjetil Røysland. A martingale approach to continuous-time marginal structural models. Bernoulli,
  17(3):895 – 915, 2011.
Donald B. Rubin. Inference and missing data. Biometrika, 63(3):581, 1976.
Donald B. Rubin. Bayesian inference for causal effects: The role of randomization. Annals of
  Statistics, 6(1):34–58, 1978.
Helene C. Rytgaard, Thomas A. Gerds, and Mark J. van der Laan. Continuous-time targeted min-
  imum loss-based estimation of intervention-specific mean outcomes. The Annals of Statistics,
  2022.
Helene C. Rytgaard, Frank Eriksson, and Mark J van der Laan. Estimation of time-specific interven-
  tion effects on continuously distributed time-to-event outcomes by targeted maximum likelihood
  estimation. Biometrics, 79(4):3038–3049, 2023.
Maresa Schröder, Dennis Frauen, Jonas Schweisthal, Konstantin Hess, Valentyn Melnychuk, and
 Stefan Feuerriegel. Conformal prediction for causal effects of continuous treatments. arXiv
 preprint, arXiv:2407.03094, 2024.
Peter Schulam and Suchi Saria. Reliable decision support using counterfactual models. In NeurIPS,
  2017.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nabeel Seedat, Fergus Imrie, Alexis Bellot, Zhaozhi Qian, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Continuous-
  time modeling of counterfactual outcomes using neural controlled differential equations. In
  ICML, 2022.
Uri Shalit, Fredrik D. Johansson, and David Sontag. Estimating individual treatment effect: Gener-
  alization bounds and algorithms. In ICML, 2017.
Oleksandr Shchur, Ali Caner Türkmen, Tim Januschowski, and Stephan Günnemann. Neural tem-
  poral point processes: A review. In IJCAI, 2021.
Yi Shirakawa, Toru; Li, Yulun Wu, Sky Qiu, Yuxuan Li, Mingduo Zhao, Hiroyasu Iso, and Mark
  van der Laan. Longitudinal targeted minimum loss-based estimation with temporal-difference
  heterogeneous transformer. In ICML, 2024.
Hossein Soleimani, Adarsh Subbaswamy, and Suchi Saria. Treatment-response models for counter-
  factual reasoning with continuous-time, continuous-valued interventions. In UAI, 2017.
Mark J. van der Laan and Susan Gruber. Targeted minimum loss based estimation of causal effects
 of multiple time point interventions. The International Journal of Biostatistics, 8(1):Article 9,
 2012.
Toon Vanderschueren, Alicia Curth, Wouter Verbeke, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Accounting for
  informative sampling when learning to forecast treatment outcomes over time. In ICML, 2023.
Shirly Wang, Matthew B.A. McDermott, Geeticka Chauhan, Marzyeh Ghassemi, Michael C.
  Hughes, and Tristan Naumann. MIMIC-extract: A data extraction, preprocessing, and repre-
  sentation pipeline for MIMIC-III. In CHIL, 2020.
Yanbo Xu, Yanxun Xu, and Suchi Saria. A non-parametric bayesian approach for estimating
  treatment-response curves from sparse time series. In ML4H, 2016.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    E XTENDED RELATED WORK
Irregular time series: Outside of the causal literature, stochastic processes in continuous time
and irregular time series are a heavily studied area of research, in particular in terms of stochastic
processes (Gardiner, 1985). Directly related to the continuous time literature are non-uniformly
spaced observations and their impact on inference (Marvasti, 2001). Irregular observation times
can also be seen as a special case of missing data (Rubin, 1976). More recently, neural network
architectures handling irregularity involve explicit incorporation of time gaps into recurrent units
(Baytas et al., 2017), or otherwise handling missing values in recurrent neural networks (Che et al.,
2018; Brouwer et al., 2019). Further, transformers have been adapted for irregular time series (Chen
et al., 2023) and neural point processes Du et al. (2016); Shchur et al. (2021). Finally, and directly
related to our work, neural controlled differential equations (Kidger et al., 2020; 2021; Morrill et al.,
2021) can directly handle irregular time series by design. However, these works focus on traditional
estimation and not causal inference tasks. In other words, the above methods solve a different task
and would be biased in our setting.
Conditional average potential outcomes in the static setting: A large body of research focuses
on methods for estimating conditional average potential outcomes in the static setting (e.g., Curth
& van der Schaar, 2021; Hatt & Feuerriegel, 2021b; Johansson et al., 2016; Kallus et al., 2019; Ma
et al., 2024; Schröder et al., 2024; Shalit et al., 2017). However, they cannot adequately address
the complexities of time-varying data, which are crucial in healthcare applications where patient
conditions evolve over time (e.g., EHRs (Allam et al., 2021; Bica et al., 2021), wearable devices
(Battalio et al., 2021; Murray et al., 2016)).
Nonparametric methods in continuous time: Some nonparametric methods have been proposed
(Hatt & Feuerriegel, 2021a; Hızlı et al., 2023; Schulam & Saria, 2017; Soleimani et al., 2017; Xu
et al., 2016), but they suffer from scalability issues. Further, some struggle with static and high-
dimensional covariates, complex outcome distributions, or impose additional identifiability assump-
tions. As a result, we focus on neural methods for their flexibility and scalability.
Additional research directions: Hess et al. (2024b) propose a neural method for uncertainty quan-
tification of conditional average potential outcomes in continuous time. Further, Vanderschueren
et al. (2023) develop a framework to account for bias due to informative observation times. Both
approaches are orthogonal to our work and do not focus on time-varying confounding. Further,
additional research directions in discrete time consider nonparametric learners (Frauen et al., 2025)
and robust estimation of the G-computation formula (Hess et al., 2024a). Other works focus on
learning treatment effects from noisy proxies (Kuzmanovic et al., 2021). Finally, there are efforts to
leverage neural methods for estimating average potential outcomes (Frauen et al., 2023; Shirakawa
et al., 2024). However, these methods are not applicable to our setting, as the do not operate in
continuous time and do not focus on estimating CAPOs.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    P RODUCT INTEGRATION

Product integration is a useful tool for describing stochastic processes and their joint likelihoods in
continuous time (e.g., in survival analysis; see Gill & Johansen, 1990; Rytgaard et al., 2022; 2023).
In the following, we provide a brief introduction to product integration. Importantly, the type that
we refer to is also known as the geometric integral or the multiplicative integral (Bashirov et al.,
2011).
The product integral P can intuitively be thought of as the infinitesimal limitR of the product operator
Π, or, equivalently, as the multiplicative version of the Riemann-integral . That is, the standard
Riemann-integral is defined as

                                  Z                                    X
                                         f (x) dx = lim                       f (x̄i )∆x,                         (43)
                                                            ∆x→0
                                                                          i
                                 [a,b]


                                                                                  S
where ∆x = xi+1 − xi and x̄ ∈ (xi , xi+1 ) for a partition                            i [xi , xi+1 ] of [a, b].

The product-integral is analogously defined as

                                                                       Y
                                           f (x)dx = lim                      f (x̄i )∆x .                        (44)
                                  T                         ∆x→0
                                                                          i
                                   [a,b]



For the proofs in Supp. D, we make use of the identity

                                                                   Z
                                       f (x)dx = exp                      log f (x) dx ,                          (45)
                               T
                               [a,b]                              [a,b]



which holds since

                                                                              Y
                                               f (x)dx = lim                      f (x̄)∆x                        (46)
                                       T                         ∆x→0
                                                                              i
                                       [a,b]
                                                Y
                                  = lim exp log   f (x̄i )∆x                                                      (47)
                                       ∆x→0
                                                                  i
                                                         X
                                  = lim exp                       log f (x̄i )∆x                                  (48)
                                       ∆x→0
                                                             i
                                                           X
                                  = exp            lim            log f (x̄i )∆x                                  (49)
                                                   ∆x→0
                                                             i
                                                 Z
                                  = exp                 log f (x) dx .                                            (50)
                                                [a,b]


                                                  R
Similar to the additivity of the standard integral , the product integral P is multiplicative. That is,
we have that for a < b < c


                                       f (x)dx =                 f (x)dx                f (x)dx ,                 (51)
                              T                         T                     T
                               [a,c]                     [a,b]                [b,c]



                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which can be shown with the above exp-log identity
                                                 Z
                                f (x)dx = exp         log f (x) dx                 (52)
                         T
                          [a,c]                 [a,c]
                                  Z                   Z
                       = exp         log f (x) dx +      log f (x) dx              (53)
                                      [a,b]                      [b,c]
                                       Z                        Z
                         = exp                log f (x) dx exp    log f (x) dx     (54)
                                      [a,b]                              [b,c]

                         =           f (x)dx            f (x)dx .                  (55)
                             T                  T
                             [a,b]              [b,c]


                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    N EURAL D IFFERENTIAL E QUATIONS
We provide a brief summary of neural ordinary differential equations and neural controlled differ-
ential equations, similar to that in (Hess et al., 2024b).
Neural ODEs: Neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs) (Chen et al., 2018; Haber & Ruthotto,
2018; Lu et al., 2018) integrate neural networks with ordinary differential equations. In a neural
ODE, the neural network fϕ (·) defines the vector field of the initial value problem
                                      Z t
                                Zt =      fϕ (Zs , s) ds, Z0 = X.                             (56)
                                           0

Thereby, a neural ODE captures the continuous evolution of hidden states Zt over a time scale.
Thereby, it learns a continuous flow of transformations, where the input X = Z0 is passed through
an ODE solver to obtain the output Ŷ = Zτ (possibly, after another output transformation).
While neural ODEs are generally suitable for describing a continuous time evolution, they have an
important limitation: all data need to be captured in the initial value. Hence, they are not capable
of updating their hidden states as new data becomes available over time, as is the case for, e.g.,
electronic health records.
Neural CDEs: Neural controlled differential equations (CDEs) (Kidger et al., 2020) overcome the
above limitation. Put simply, one can think of them as a continuous-time counterpart to recurrent
neural networks. Given a path of data Xt ∈ Rdx , t ∈ [0, τ ], a neural CDE consists of an embedding
network νϕ (·), a readout network µϕ (·), and a neural vector field fϕ . Then, the neural CDE is
defined as
                                Z t
          Ŷ = µϕ (Zτ ), Zt =       fϕ (Zs , s) d[Xs ], t ∈ (0, τ ] with Z0 = νϕ (X0 ),        (57)
                                     0

where Zt ∈ R and fϕ (Zt , t) ∈ Rdz ×dx . The integral here is a Riemann-Stieltjes integral, where
                dz

fϕ (Zs , s) d[Xs ] corresponds to matrix multiplication. In this context, the neural differential equation
is controlled by the process [Xs ]. Importantly, one can rewrite it (under some regularity conditions)
as
                                     Z t
                                                     dXs
                               Zt =      fϕ (Zs , s)     ds, t ∈ (0, T̄ ].                            (58)
                                      0               ds
Calculating the time derivative requires a C 1 -representation of the data Xt for all t ∈ [0, τ ]. As a
result, irregularly sampled observations ((t0 , X0 ), (t1 , X1 ), . . . , (tn , Xn ) must be interpolated over
time, producing a continuous representation Xt . Here, we can use any interpolation scheme such as
linear interpolation (Morrill et al., 2021) as in TE-CDE (Seedat et al., 2022). Then, the neural CDE
essentially reduces to a neural ODE for optimization.
The key difference to neural ODEs is, however, that the neural vector field is controlled by se-
quentially incoming data and, therefore, updates the hidden states as data becomes available over
time. This is a clear advantage over ODEs, which require capturing all data in the initial value and
because of which neural ODEs are not suitable.


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D           P ROOFS OF PROPOSITIONS
Proposition 1. Under assumptions (i)–(iii), we can estimate the conditional average potential out-
come from observational data (i.e., from data sampled under dP0 ) via inverse propensity weighting,
that is,
      h                            i    h                                                     i
   E Yτ [a∗,t , na∗,t ] H̄t− = h̄t− = E Yτ       Ws (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗, ), H̄t− = h̄t− , (59)
                                            T
                                                                 s≥t

where the inverse propensity weights for s ≥ t are defined as
                                                                            dG∗,s (H̄s )
                                                    Ws ≡ ws (H̄s ) =                     .                                   (60)
                                                                            dG0,s (H̄s )

Proof. The proof follows similar ideas as in (Rytgaard et al., 2022):
  h                                 i
 E Yτ [a∗,t , na∗,t ] | H̄t− = h̄t−                                                                                          (61)
      Z
 = yτ [a∗,t , na∗,t ]          dQ0,s (h̄s ) dG0,s (h̄s )                                                                     (62)
                          T
                          s≥t
      Z
                     a
 = yτ [a∗,t , n∗,t ]           dQ0,s (h̄s ) dG∗,s (h̄s )                                                                     (63)
                          T
                          s≥t
        Z
  =       yτ [a∗,t , na∗,t ]     dQ0,s (h̄s | (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t )) dG∗,s (h̄s | (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ))   (64)
 |{z}
  (iii)
                             T
                             s≥t
        Z
  =       yτ         dQ0,s (h̄s | (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t )) dG∗,s (h̄s | (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ))               (65)
 |{z}
   (i)
              T
                       s≥t

                             dG∗,s (h̄s | (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ))
             Z
     =            yτ                               a               a
    |{z}
     (ii)
                       T dG0,s (h̄s | (At , N t ) = (a∗,t , n∗,t ))
                       s≥t


    ×             dQ0,s (h̄s | (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t )) dG0,s (h̄s | (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ))                  (66)
        T
            s≥t
       h                                                                                                          i
    = E Yτ                ws (H̄s | (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t )) (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t−              (67)
                   T
                    s≥t
       h                                                                          i
    = E Yτ                ws (H̄s ) (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t−                                              (68)
                   T
                    s≥t
       h                                                                i
    = E Yτ                Ws (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t− ,                                                   (69)
                   T
                    s≥t

where Equation 66 uses the multiplicativity of the product integral.


                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 2. Let ta∗,0 = t for notational convenience. The unstabilized weights in Equation 12
satisfy

                                                                      J
                                                                      Y
       Ws     (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t− =                  Wta∗,j    (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t− ,
T                                                                     j=1
s≥t
                                                                                                                               (70)

where

                                                                             λa0 (s | H̄s− ) ds
                                                   R
                                                exp s∈[ta            a
                                                             ∗,j−1 ,t∗,j )
                                Wta∗,j =                                                                .                      (71)
                                            λa0 (ta∗,j | H̄ta∗,j − ) π0,ta∗,j (a∗,ta∗,j | H̄ta∗,j − )


Proof. The inverse propensity weight in Equation 12 is by definition given by
                                                                                N a (ds)                                1−N a (ds)
                                    dΛa∗ (s | H̄s− )π∗,s (As | H̄s− )                           1 − dΛa∗ (s | H̄s− )

  dG∗,s (H̄s )
               =                                                                                                                     .
T dG0,s (H̄s ) T                    dΛa0 (s | H̄s− )π0,s (As | H̄s− )                           1 − dΛa0 (s | H̄s− )
s≥t                       s≥t
                                                                                                                               (72)

We simplify the first part via
                                                                               N a (ds)
                                    dΛa∗ (s | H̄s− )π∗,s (As | H̄s− )

                                                                                                                               (73)
                         T          dΛa0 (s | H̄s− )π0,s (As | H̄s− )
                         s≥t
                                                                                 N a (ds)
                                    λa∗ (s | H̄s− )π∗,s (As | H̄s− ) ds

                     =                                                                                                         (74)
                       T            λa0 (s | H̄s− )π0,s (As | H̄s− ) ds
                        s≥t
                             Z          a
                                        λ∗ (s | H̄s− )π∗,s (As | H̄s− )         a
                     = exp        log                                         N (ds)                                           (75)
                              s≥t       λa0 (s | H̄s− )π0,s (As | H̄s− )
                                                                                            !
                                 X              λa∗ (Tja | H̄Tja − )π∗,Tja (ATja | H̄Tja − )
                     = exp             log                                                                                   (76)
                               a   a  a
                                                λa0 (Tja | H̄Tja − )π0,Tja (ATja | H̄Tja − )
                                 Tj ∈Tτ \Tt

                             Y           λa∗ (Tja | H̄Tja − )π∗,Tja (ATja | H̄Tja − )
                     =                                                                      .                                  (77)
                                         λa0 (Tja | H̄Tja − )π0,Tja (ATja | H̄Tja − )
                         Tja ∈Tτa \Tta


Now, since we condition on N at = na∗,t , we know that the jumping times are given by

                                                   Tτa \ Tta = {ta∗,j }Jj=1 .                                                  (78)

Hence, we have that

    Y λa∗ (Tja | H̄Tja − )π∗,Tja (ATja | H̄Tja − )
                                                                 a              a
                                                      | (A t , N t ) = (a∗,t , n∗,t ), H̄ t− = h̄t−                            (79)
          λa (Tja | H̄Tja − )π0,Tja (ATja | H̄Tja − )
  T a ∈T a 0
   j     τ

        J
       Y  λa∗ (ta∗,j | H̄ta∗,j − )π∗,ta∗,j (a∗,ta∗,j | H̄ta∗,j − )
  =         a    a
                                                                  | (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t−                (80)
          λ (t | H̄ta∗,j − )π0,ta∗,j (a∗,ta∗,j | H̄ta∗,j − )
       j=1 0 ∗,j
       J
       Y                                                              −1
  =          λa0 (ta∗,j | H̄ta∗,j − )π0,ta∗,j (a∗,ta∗,j | H̄ta∗,j − )   | (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t− .
       j=1
                                                                                                                               (81)


                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Further, we can simplify the second part via
                                                 1−N a (ds)
                           1 − dΛa∗ (s | H̄s− )

                                  a
                                                                                                                          (82)
                   T 1 − dΛ0 (s | H̄s− )
                             s≥t
                                                                            1−N a (ds)
                                         1 − P∗ (N a (ds) = 1 | H̄s− )

                         =                                                                                                (83)
                             T           1 − P0 (N a (ds) = 1 | H̄s− )
                             s≥t
                                                                                             a
                                      K                                         1−N ([tk ,tk+1 ))
                                      Y   P∗ (N a ([tk , tk+1 )) = 0 | H̄t − )   k
                         = lim                                                                                            (84)
                             K→∞     P0 (N a ([tk , tk+1 )) = 0 | H̄tk − )
                                      k=1
                               h  Z                      i      h Z                          i
                                         a
                         = exp −        λ∗ (s | H̄s− ) ds / exp −          λa0 (s | H̄s− ) ds                             (85)
                                   s≥t                                 s≥t
                               hZ                         Z                      i
                         = exp      λa0 (s | H̄s− ) ds −      λa∗ (s | H̄s− ) ds ,                                        (86)
                                         s≥t                     s≥t
        SK
where k=1 [tk , tk+1 ) is a disjoint partition of [t, τ ] with limK→∞ maxk≤K (tk+1 − tk ) = 0. Fi-
nally, again by conditioning on N at = na∗,t , we have that
     Z                                        Z
           λa∗ (s | H̄s− ) ds N a∗,t = na∗,t =         1{ta∗,j }Jj=1 (s) ds N a∗,t = na∗,t = 0, (87)
         s≥t                                                  s≥t

which leaves
                                          1−N a (ds)
                   1 − dΛa∗ (s | H̄s− )

                                                                 a               a
                          a
                                                        (A t , N t ) = (a∗,t , n ∗,t ), H̄ t− = h̄t−                      (88)
               T 1 − dΛ0 (s | H̄s− )
               s≥t
                         hZ                        i
                   = exp         λa0 (s | H̄s− ) ds    (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t− .                      (89)
                                      s≥t

Combining Equation 81 with Equation 89, the unstabilized weights are then given by

       Ws     (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t−                                                                 (90)
  T
     s≥t

         dG∗,s (H̄s )
 =                       (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t−                                                      (91)
   T dG0,s (H̄s )
    s≥t
        hZ                      i
 = exp        λa0 (s | H̄s− ) ds
               s≥t
         J
         Y                                                               −1
     ×          λa0 (ta∗,j | H̄ta∗,j − )π0,ta∗,j (a∗,ta∗,j | H̄ta∗,j − )      (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t−
         j=1
                                                                                                                          (92)
                                          λa (s | H̄s− ) ds
                  R
     J
     Y         exp s∈[ta             ,ta ) 0

 =                           ∗,j−1    ∗,j
                                                                        (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t−       (93)
        λa (ta | H̄ta∗,j − )π0,ta∗,j (a∗,ta∗,j | H̄ta∗,j − )
     j=1 0 ∗,j
     J
     Y
 =         Wta∗,j        (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t− .                                                    (94)
     j=1


                                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 1. For s ≥ t, let the scaling factor Ξs be given by the ratio of the marginal transition
probabilities of treatment, that is,
                                                                                 dG0,s (Ās , N̄sa )
                                                Ξs ≡ ξs (Ās , N̄sa ) =                              .                                      (95)
                                                                                 dG∗,s (Ās , N̄sa )

We define the stabilized weights W
                                 fs as

                                                                   W
                                                                   fs = Ξs Ws .                                                             (96)

Proposition 3. The optimal parameters ϕ̂ in Equation 14 can equivalently be obtained by
                              "                                                                                              #
                                                                      2
   ϕ̂ = arg min EP0                Yτ − mϕ (At , N at , H̄t− )                              a              a
                                                                                 Ws (At , N t ) = (a∗,t , n∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t− .
                                                                                 f                                                          (97)
             ϕ                                                             T
                                                                           s≥t


Proof. The scaling factor is a constant conditionally on the future and past treatment propensity and
frequency, i.e.,
                                    Ξs | (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t−                                                        (98)
                                 =Ξs | (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (At− , N̄t−
                                                                                a
                                                                                   ) = (āt− , n̄at− )                                      (99)
                                 =ξs ([ā∗,s , āt− ], [n̄a∗,s , n̄at− ])                                                                  (100)
                                 ≡const.,                                                                                                  (101)
where we use
                           [                [                                                         [              [
  [ā∗,s , āt− ] =                  a∗,r ∪  ar                     and       [na∗,s , na∗,t− ] =            na∗,r ∪  nar (102)
                          t≤r≤t                      r<t                                             t≤r≤t                 r<t

for the concatenation of interventional and observational treatments at time s ≥ t. Hence, with
Ξs ∈ R+ , we can use linearity of the expectation and multiplicativity of the product integral, such
that
                         h                                                                                                         i
    arg min EP0               (Yτ − mϕ (At , N at , H̄t− ))2                W
                                                                            fs       (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t−           (103)
         ϕ                                                          T
                                                                     s≥t
                         h                                                                                                             i
  = arg min EP0               (Yτ − mϕ (At , N at , H̄t− ))2                Ξ s Ws       (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t−       (104)
         ϕ                                                          T
                                                                     s≥t
                 (

  = arg min                     ξs ([ā∗,s , āt− ], [n̄a∗,s , n̄at− ])                                                                    (105)
         ϕ               T
                         s≥t
                                                                                                                               )
          h                                                                                                               i
     × EP0 (Yτ − mϕ (At , N at , H̄t− ))2                          Ws       (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t−                    (106)
                                                            T
                                                             s≥t
               h                                                                                                               i
  = arg min EP0 (Yτ − mϕ (At , N at , H̄t− ))2                             Ws (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), H̄t− = h̄t−                  (107)
         ϕ                                                         T
                                                                   s≥t

  =ϕ̂.                                                                                                                                     (108)


                                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 4. Let ta∗,0 = t for notational convenience. The scaling factor Ξs from Equation 17
then satisfies

                       Ξs    (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t−
                                                                       a
                                                                          ) = (āt− , n̄at− )   (109)
                T
                             s≥t
                             J
                             Y
                        =          Ξta∗,j           (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t−
                                                                                              a
                                                                                                 ) = (āt− , n̄at− ) ,                            (110)
                             j=1

where
                                            λa0 (ta∗,j | Āta∗,j − , N̄taa∗,j − ) π0,ta∗,j (ata∗,j | Āta∗,j − , N̄taa∗,j − )
                          Ξta∗,j =                          R                                                                 .                   (111)
                                                       exp s∈[ta ,ta ) λa0 (s | Ās− , N̄s−            a ) ds
                                                                    ∗,j−1    ∗,j



Proof. For the proof, we follow the steps as in the proof of Proposition 2.
By definition, Ξs satisfies
                       dG0,s (Ās , N̄sa )
             Ξs =                                                                                                                                  (112)
     T               T dG∗,s (Ās , N̄sa ))
      s≥t              s≥t
                                                                                N a (ds)                                             1−N a (ds)
                 dΛa0 (s | Ās− , N̄s−
                                    a                        a
                                                                                                  1 − dΛa0 (s | Ās− , N̄s−
                                                                                                                         a

                                       ))π0,s (As | Ās− , N̄s− )                                                           )
 =                  a                a                       a                                           a               a
                                                                                                                                                   (113)
     T           dΛ∗ (s | Ās− , N̄s− )π∗,s (As | Ās− , N̄s− )                                   1 − dΛ∗ (s | Ās− , N̄s−  )
      s≥t

First, we simplify
                                                                                                  N a (ds)
                                  dΛa0 (s | Ās− , N̄s−
                                                     a                       a

                                                        )π0,s (As | Ās− , N̄s− )
                                                                                                                                                   (114)
                       T          dΛa∗ (s | Ās− , N̄s−
                                                     a                       a
                                                        )π∗,s (As | Ās− , N̄s− )
                       s≥t
                                                                                                    N a (ds)
                                  λa0 (s | Ās− , N̄s−
                                                    a                       a

                                                       )π0,s (As | Ās− , N̄s− ) ds
                   =               a                a                       a
                                                                                                                                                   (115)
                     T            λ∗ (s | Ās− , N̄s− )π∗,s (As | Ās− , N̄s−  ) ds
                     s≥t

                                                   λa0 (s | Ās− , N̄s−
                                                                     a                       a
                          Z
                                                                        )π0,s (As | Ās− , N̄s− )
                   = exp                log         a                a                       a
                                                                                                                 N a (ds)                          (116)
                                  s≥t              λ∗ (s | Ās− , N̄s− )π∗,s (As | Ās− , N̄s− )
                                                                                                                            !
                                     X                    λa0 (Tja | ĀTja − , N̄Taja − )π0,Tja (ATja | ĀTja − , N̄Taja − )
                   = exp                          log                                                                                            (117)
                                 Tja ∈Tτa \Tta
                                                          λa∗ (Tja | ĀTja − , N̄Ta a − )π∗,Tja (ATja | ĀTja − , N̄Ta a − )
                                                                                       j                                        j


                             Y          λa0 (Tja | ĀTja − , N̄Taja − )π0,Tja (ATja | ĀTja − , N̄Taja − )
                   =                                                                                                 .                             (118)
                       Tja ∈Tτa \Tta
                                        λa∗ (Tja | ĀTja − , N̄Ta a − )π∗,Tja (ATja | ĀTja − , N̄Ta a − )
                                                                    j                                            j


Conditionally on N at = na∗,t , the jumping times are fixed, i.e.,

                                                               Tτa \ Tta = {ta∗,j }Jj=1 .                                                          (119)
Therefore, it follows that
  Y        λa0 (Tja | ĀTja − , N̄Taja − )π0,Tja (ATja | ĀTja − , N̄Taja − )
                                                                                                 (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t−
                                                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                                              ) = (āt− , n̄at− )
        λa (Tja | ĀTja − , N̄Ta a − )π∗,Tja (ATja | ĀTja − , N̄Ta a − )
T a ∈T a ∗
 j     τ                                j                                          j

                                                                                                                                                   (120)
     J λa (ta | Ā a         a
                                           (a∗,ta∗,j | Āta∗,j − , N̄taa∗,j − )
     Y  0 ∗,j     t∗,j − , N̄ta − )π0,ta
                                       ∗,j

                                                                                                          (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t−
                                                                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                                                                       ) = (āt− , n̄at− )
                              ∗,j
=
     j=1
           λa∗ (ta∗,j | Āta∗,j − , N̄taa − )π∗,ta∗,j (a∗,ta∗,j | Āta∗,j − , N̄taa − )
                                         ∗,j                                               ∗,j
                                                                                                                                         (121)
     J
     Y
=          λa0 (ta∗,j | Āta∗,j − , N̄taa∗,j − )π0,ta∗,j (a∗,ta∗,j | Āta∗,j − , N̄taa∗,j − )  (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t−
                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                                            ) = (āt− , n̄at− ) .
     j=1
                                                                                                                                                   (122)


                                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For the second part, we also follow the steps as in Proposition 2, that is,
                                                                         1−N a (ds)
                                        1 − dΛa0 (s | Ās− , N̄s−
                                                               a

                                                                  )
                                                                                                                                                  (123)
                             T          1 − dΛa∗ (s | Ās− , N̄s−
                                                               a
                                                                  )
                             s≥t
                                                                                      1−N a (ds)
                                        1 − P0 (N a (ds) = 1 | Ās− , N̄s− )

                         =                                                                                                                        (124)
                             T          1 − P∗ (N a (ds) = 1 | Ās− , N̄s− )
                             s≥t
                                      K                                                 1−N ([tk ,tk+1 ))        a
                                      Y   P0 (N a ([tk , tk+1 )) = 0 | Āt − , N̄t − )
                                                                                     k       k
                         = lim                                                                                                                    (125)
                             K→∞     P∗ (N a ([tk , tk+1 )) = 0 | Ātk − , N̄tk − )
                                      k=1
                               h Z                              i      h Z                                   i
                         = exp −       λa0 (s | Ās− , N̄s−
                                                         a
                                                            ) ds / exp −            λa∗ (s | Ās− , N̄s−
                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                         ) ds                                     (126)
                                   s≥t                                        s≥t
                               hZ                               Z                               i
                                     a                a                a                 a
                         = exp      λ∗ (s | Ās− , N̄s− ) ds −       λ0 (s | Ās− , N̄s−    ) ds ,                                                (127)
                                        s≥t                                    s≥t
        SK
 where k=1 [tk , tk+1 ) is a disjoint partition of [t, τ ] with limK→∞ maxk≤K (tk+1 − tk ) = 0. Fi-
nally, again by conditioning on N at = na∗,t , we have that
          Z                                                             Z
                                                                                    1{ta∗,j }Jj=1 (s) ds

                   λa∗ (s | Ās− , N̄s− ) ds              N at = na∗,t =                                           N at = na∗,t = 0,              (128)
            s≥t                                                               s≥t

which leaves
                                                     1−N a (ds)
              1 − dΛa0 (s | Ās− , N̄s− )

                                                                                                                 a
                                                                       (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t− ) = (āt− , n̄at− )           (129)
 T            1 − dΛa∗ (s | Ās− , N̄s− )
    s≥t
             h Z                                            i
        = exp −                    λa0 (s | Ās− , N̄s− ) ds                                             a
                                                               (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t− ) = (āt− , n̄at− ) . (130)
                             s≥t


Finally, we combine equation 122 with equation 130. Hence, the scaling factors satisfy

           Ξs                                                 a
                    (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t− ) = (āt− , n̄at− )                                                              (131)
    T
    s≥t

      dG0,s (Ās , N̄sa )
=                                                                                  a
                                         (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t− ) = (āt− , n̄at− )                                         (132)
    T dG∗,s (Ās , N̄sa )
    s≥t
     h Z                                           i
= exp −                   λa0 (s | Ās− , N̄s−
                                            a
                                               ) ds
                   s≥t
        J
        Y
    ×         λa0 (ta∗,j | Āta∗,j − , N̄taa∗,j − )π0,ta∗,j (a∗,ta∗,j | Āta∗,j − , N̄taa∗,j − )           (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t−
                                                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                                                        ) = (āt− , n̄at− )
        j=1
                                                                                                                                                  (133)
   J λa (ta | Ā a         a
                                          (a∗,ta∗,j | Āta∗,j − , N̄ta∗,j − )
  Y   0 ∗,j     t∗,j − , N̄ta − )π0,ta∗,j

                                                                                                       (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t−
                                                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                                                    ) = (āt− , n̄at− )
                            ∗,j
=                 R
  j=1
             exp s∈[ta               λa (s | Ās− , N̄s−
                                ,ta ) 0
                                                       a
                                                           ) ds
                                      ∗,j−1   ∗,j
                                                                                                                                                  (134)
    J
    Y
=         Ξta∗,j         (At , N at ) = (a∗,t , na∗,t ), (Āt− , N̄t−
                                                                   a
                                                                      ) = (āt− , n̄at− ) .                                                       (135)
    j=1


                                                                            24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     DATA GENERATION
E.1   T UMOR GROWTH DATA

The tumor data used in Sec. 5 was simulated based on the lung cancer model proposed by Geng
et al. (2017), which has been previously used in several works (Lim et al., 2018; Bica et al., 2020;
Li et al., 2021; Melnychuk et al., 2022; Seedat et al., 2022; Vanderschueren et al., 2023).
Specifically, we adopt the simulation framework introduced by Vanderschueren et al. (2023), which
includes irregularly spaced observations. However, different to their work, we explicitly add con-
founding bias to the treatment assignment (that is, both treatment times and treatment choice).
The tumor volume is the outcome variable. It evolves over time according to the ordinary differential
equation
                                                                             

                               K                                     
              dYt = 1 + ρ log     − αc ct − (αr dt + βr d2t ) + ϵt  Yt dt,                            (136)
                                                                     
                               Yt   |{z}    |      {z       } |{z}
                         | {z } Chemotherapy   Radiotherapy     Noise
                              Tumor growth
where ρ is the tumor growth rate, K represents the carrying capacity, and αc , αr , and βr control
the effects of chemotherapy and radiotherapy, respectively. The term ϵt introduces randomness into
the dynamics. The parameters were drawn following the distributions as in Geng et al. (2017),
with details provided in Table 3. The variables ct and dt represent chemotherapy and radiotherapy
treatments, respectively, and follow previous works (Lim et al., 2018; Bica et al., 2020; Seedat et al.,
2022). Time t is measured in days.

                       Variable              Parameter    Distribution   Value (µ, σ 2 )
                       Growth parameter         ρ         Normal         (7.00 × 10−5 , 7.23 × 10−3 )
      Tumor growth
                       Carrying capacity        K         Constant       30
                       Radio cell kill          αr        Normal         (0.0398, 0.168)
      Radiotherapy
                       Radio cell kill          βr        –              Set to βr = 10 × αr
      Chemotherapy     Chemo cell kill          αc        Normal         (0.028, 7.00 × 10−4 )
      Noise            –                        ϵt        Normal         (0, 0.012 )

                Table 3: Parameter details for the synthetic data generating process.

The radiation dosage dt and chemotherapy drug concentration ct are applied with probabilities The
treatments are administered according to the following, history dependent treatment probabilities

                          c  r                γ
                       At , At ∼ Ber σ            (D̄15 (Ȳt−1 − D̄max /2   ,                 (137)
                                           Dmax
where γ controls the confounding strength, Dmax is the maximum tumor volume, D̄15 the average
tumor diameter of the last 15 time steps, and γ controls the confounding strength. For test data,
we want to evaluate the potential outcomes under hard interventions. Hence, uniformly sample a
random treatment sequence and apply it to the outcome, irrespective of the history, as is done in
(Melnychuk et al., 2022).
Importantly, this treatment assignment process is only used for training and validation. For testing,
we randomly sample hard interventions as described in Sec. 3. Thereby, we can directly investigate
how all baselines perform under time-varying confounding.
We add an observation process that randomly masks away observations of the outcome variable.
Hence, at some days, the tumor diameter remains unobserved. Irregular observations times are the
domain that continuous time methods are tailored for.
For this, our setup is consistent with Vanderschueren et al. (2023), who define the observation pro-
cess as a Hawkes process with intensity λy0 (t) given by

                                  y                     D̄t    1
                                 λ0 (t) = sigmoid ω          −       ,                         (138)
                                                       Dref    2


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where ω determines the informativeness of the sampling, Dref = 13 cm represents the reference
tumor diameter, and D̄t is the average tumor diameter over the past 15 days. In this work, however,
our main focus is not informative sampling, which is an orthogonal research direction. Therefore,
we opted for setting the informativeness parameter to ω = 0. Thereby, we are in the setting that is
known as sampling completely a random.
Following Kidger et al. (2020), we added a multivariate counting variable that counts the number of
observations up to each day, respectively. We normalized this counting variable with the maximum
time scale τ .
Finally, consistent with (Lim et al., 2018; Bica et al., 2020; Seedat et al., 2022; Vanderschueren
et al., 2023), we introduced patient heterogeneity by modeling distinct subgroups. Each subgroup
differs in their average treatment response, characterized by the mean of the normal distributions.
Specifically, for subgroup A, we increased the mean of αr by 10%, and for subgroup B, we increased
the mean of αc by 10%.
The observed time window for training, validation, and testing is set to τ = 30 days. We generate
1000 observations for training, validation, and testing, respectively.


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2   M IMIC -III DATA

For our semi-synthetic experiments in Sec. 5, we upon the MIMIC-extract dataset (Wang et al.,
2020), which is based on the MIMIC-III database (Johnson et al., 2016) and widely used in research
(e.g., Özyurt et al., 2021). Importantly, measurements in this dataset have irregular timestamps for
different covariates. Therefore, we can directly use this missingness without artificially introduces
any masking process for covariates.
In our setup, we use 9 time-varying covariates (i.e., vital signs) alongside the static covariates gen-
der, ethnicity, and age. As we are interested in conditional average potential outcomes, we need to
introduce a synthetic data outcome generation process. For this, we simulate a two-dimensional out-
come variable for training and validation purposes and generate interventional outcomes for testing.
As defined in Sec. 3, we add past observed outcomes to the list of covariates. Hence, have have a
dx = 14-dimensional covariate space. The outcome-generation process follows (Melnychuk et al.,
2022):
Simulating untreated outcomes: We first simulate two untreated outcomes Ỹtj for j = 1, 2 as fol-
lows:
                         Ỹtj = αsj B-spline(t) + αgj g j (t) + αfj fYj (Xt ) + ϵt ,             (139)

where αsj , αgj , and αfj are weight parameters. Here, B-spline(t) is drawn from a mixture of three
cubic splines, and fYj (·) is a random function approximated using random Fourier features from a
Gaussian process.
Simulating treatment assignments: We simulate da = 3 synthetic treatments Alt for l = 1, 2, 3
according to:

                                                    A,l
                     Alt ∼ Ber(plt ), plt = σ γYl Yt−1     l l
                                                        + γX fY (Xt ) + bl ,          (140)

where γYl and γX   l
                     are parameters that control the influence of past treatments and covariates on
treatment assignment. YtA,l represents a summary of previously treated outcomes, bl is a bias term,
and fYl (·) is another random function sampled using a random Fourier features approximation of a
Gaussian process. For test data, we want to evaluate the potential outcomes under hard interventions.
Hence, uniformly sample a random treatment sequence and apply it to the outcome, irrespective of
the history, as is done in (Melnychuk et al., 2022).
Applying treatments to outcomes: Finally, for training and validation, treatments are applied to the
untreated outcomes Ỹ tj using:
                                            t
                                            X minl=1,...,da 1Ali =1 pli β l,j
                           Ytj = Ỹ tj +                                         ,               (141)
                                                            (ω l − i)2
                                           i=t−ω l

where ω l defines the duration of the treatment effect window, and β l,j determines the maximum
effect of treatment Al on outcome Ytj . Importantly, we do not follow this treatment assignment
mechanism for testing. Instead, as we are interested in estimating conditional average potential
outcomes, we randomly assign hard interventions as in Sec. 3.
Masking the outcome: Finally, we add an observation mask to the outcome variable Ytj . For this,
we randomly mask away the outcome variable with observation probability p = 0.15
In our experiments in Sec. 5, we used 1000 samples for training, validation and testing, respectively.
For testing, we simulate 50 different intervention sequences per patient. The time window was set
between 30 ≤ T ≤ 50.


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F      A DDITIONAL RESULTS
F.1     VARIATION OF OBSERVATION INTENSITIES

In the following, we evaluate the stability of our SCIP-Net for different sampling intensities. For
this, we use the tumor growth model as in Section 5. In our main study, observation times follow
a history-dependent intensity process as informed by prior literature (Vanderschueren et al., 2023).
Here, the observation probabilities λy0 (t) are given by

                                                         D̄t    1
                                λy0 (t) = sigmoid ω           −      ,                         (142)
                                                         Dref   2
where ω determines the informativeness of the sampling, Dref = 13 cm represents the reference
tumor diameter, and D̄t is the average tumor diameter over the past 15 days. More details are
provided in Supplement E.1.
In our main study in Section 5, we focused on the sampling completely at random setting, where we
set the informativeness parameter ω = 0. In the following, we increase the informativeness param-
eter up to ω = 0.5. Tables 4 and 5 show the performance of our SCIP-Net against the baselines. We
find that our SCIP-Net has very robust performance and consistently outperforms the baselines.

Informativeness of   Prediction window        G-Net                   CT                    RMSNs                  CRN                  TE-CDE              SCIP-Net
 observation times        in days        (Li et al., 2021)   (Melnychuk et al., 2022)   (Lim et al., 2018)   (Bica et al., 2020)   (Seedat et al., 2022)     (ours)
                            1              5.69 ± 1.09             6.45 ± 0.95            7.01 ± 1.29           8.31 ± 1.23            7.86 ± 0.80         4.33 ± 0.89
      ω = 0.0               2              5.10 ± 1.64             7.30 ± 2.18            5.87 ± 1.45           7.32 ± 1.59            7.21 ± 0.88         4.24 ± 0.44
                            3              4.51 ± 1.20             6.19 ± 1.72            4.86 ± 1.36           5.97 ± 1.21            6.10 ± 0.77         4.15 ± 1.20
                            1              6.65 ± 0.86             6.64 ± 0.82            7.88 ± 1.12           8.15 ± 0.68            7.95 ± 1.90         5.63 ± 2.15
      ω = 0.1               2              6.19 ± 1.44             6.09 ± 1.43            6.37 ± 1.19           7.73 ± 1.66            7.69 ± 1.56         4.57 ± 0.82
                            3              5.26 ± 1.20             5.24 ± 1.09            5.16 ± 0.97           6.31 ± 1.29            6.57 ± 1.29         4.18 ± 0.53
                            1              6.57 ± 0.87             6.33 ± 0.51            7.21 ± 1.16           8.56 ± 1.70            7.83 ± 0.49         5.47 ± 1.72
      ω = 0.2               2              6.14 ± 1.49             5.86 ± 1.26            6.67 ± 1.41           7.91 ± 1.37            7.65 ± 1.56         4.69 ± 0.41
                            3              5.22 ± 1.23             5.05 ± 0.99            5.43 ± 1.11           6.45 ± 1.11            6.48 ± 1.24         4.30 ± 0.42
                            1              6.40 ± 1.05             6.26 ± 0.73            7.01 ± 1.37           7.54 ± 0.59            8.65 ± 1.31         5.48 ± 2.12
      ω = 0.3               2              6.05 ± 1.64             5.71 ± 1.31            6.69 ± 1.72           7.76 ± 1.29            7.61 ± 1.66         4.74 ± 0.27
                            3              5.13 ± 1.33             4.91 ± 0.99            5.39 ± 1.34           6.32 ± 1.07            6.49 ± 1.44         4.25 ± 0.45
                            1              6.35 ± 0.39             6.27 ± 0.81            6.86 ± 0.77           8.51 ± 0.75            7.66 ± 0.98         5.97 ± 1.76
      ω = 0.4               2              6.02 ± 1.20             5.79 ± 1.37            6.57 ± 1.53           8.12 ± 1.66            7.48 ± 1.92         4.73 ± 0.63
                            3              5.12 ± 0.97             4.98 ± 1.04            5.38 ± 1.22           6.51 ± 1.31            6.34 ± 1.62         4.28 ± 0.66
                            1             5.97 ± 0.39              5.98 ± 0.83            7.07 ± 0.45           9.29 ± 1.03            8.56 ± 1.24          6.39 ± 1.52
      ω = 0.5               2              5.64 ± 1.10             5.51 ± 1.37            6.57 ± 1.34           7.96 ± 1.61            7.68 ± 1.98         4.77 ± 0.89
                            3              4.82 ± 0.91             4.81 ± 1.07            5.38 ± 1.09           6.50 ± 1.29            6.46 ± 1.46         4.29 ± 0.69


Table 4: Informative sampling: Performance for the tumor growth model with irregular sampling
times and confounding strength γ = 8. We vary the informative sampling parameter ω. Our
SCIP-Net has robust performance and consistently outperforms the baselines.

Informativeness of   Prediction window        G-Net                   CT                    RMSNs                  CRN                  TE-CDE              SCIP-Net
 observation times        in days        (Li et al., 2021)   (Melnychuk et al., 2022)   (Lim et al., 2018)   (Bica et al., 2020)   (Seedat et al., 2022)     (ours)
                            1              8.74 ± 0.49             8.85 ± 1.39            9.52 ± 0.98          12.15 ± 0.71           10.02 ± 1.22         5.13 ± 0.44
      ω = 0.0               2              6.48 ± 1.23             8.41 ± 0.75            6.98 ± 1.16           8.35 ± 0.91           8.09 ± 0.99          4.91 ± 0.31
                            3              5.39 ± 0.98             7.05 ± 0.58            5.61 ± 0.93           6.74 ± 0.80           6.73 ± 0.95          4.47 ± 0.39
                            1              9.16 ± 0.32             8.71 ± 0.73            10.08 ± 0.60         11.11 ± 1.06           11.15 ± 0.65         4.99 ± 0.74
      ω = 0.1               2              7.45 ± 1.08             6.77 ± 0.64             7.35 ± 1.04         8.91 ± 1.11            8.42 ± 1.25          4.84 ± 0.81
                            3              6.17 ± 0.95             5.75 ± 0.71             5.91 ± 0.85         7.14 ± 0.89            6.95 ± 1.09          4.53 ± 0.90
                            1              8.99 ± 0.32             8.84 ± 0.99            9.34 ± 0.83          11.30 ± 0.98           10.92 ± 0.11         5.37 ± 1.47
      ω = 0.2               2              7.32 ± 1.11             6.99 ± 0.32            7.69 ± 1.03           8.99 ± 1.02           8.53 ± 0.95          5.03 ± 0.50
                            3              6.08 ± 0.98             5.89 ± 0.45            6.18 ± 0.87           7.20 ± 0.85           6.99 ± 0.84          4.59 ± 0.47
                            1              8.81 ± 0.43             8.65 ± 0.99            9.42 ± 0.72          11.28 ± 0.90           10.91 ± 0.71         6.33 ± 2.31
      ω = 0.3               2              7.25 ± 1.14             6.84 ± 0.41            7.89 ± 1.05           9.00 ± 0.99           8.74 ± 0.83          6.04 ± 2.14
                            3              6.02 ± 0.99            5.80 ± 0.57             6.33 ± 0.92           7.19 ± 0.79           7.23 ± 0.74           5.98 ± 2.10
                            1              8.59 ± 0.32             8.42 ± 1.60            8.74 ± 1.02          11.46 ± 0.39           11.30 ± 1.04         4.50 ± 0.38
      ω = 0.4               2              7.08 ± 1.03             6.63 ± 0.62            7.08 ± 0.69           8.84 ± 0.97           8.47 ± 1.19          4.79 ± 0.71
                            3              5.86 ± 0.88             5.65 ± 0.42            5.73 ± 0.64           7.10 ± 0.78           6.91 ± 0.82          4.62 ± 0.88
                            1              8.11 ± 0.42             8.19 ± 1.43            8.65 ± 1.25          11.96 ± 0.37           11.38 ± 0.64         4.80 ± 0.72
      ω = 0.5               2              6.73 ± 1.11             6.51 ± 0.77            7.29 ± 0.49           9.02 ± 1.00           8.60 ± 1.10          4.94 ± 0.59
                            3              5.60 ± 0.95             5.57 ± 0.55            5.89 ± 0.51           7.22 ± 0.83           7.07 ± 0.92          4.72 ± 0.73


Table 5: Informative sampling: Performance for the tumor growth model with irregular sampling
times and confounding strength γ = 6. As in Table 4, we vary the informative sampling parameter
ω. Our SCIP-Net again demonstrates superior performance and outperforms all baselines.


                                                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2     A BLATION STUDY: SDIP-N ET FOR DISCRETE TIME

Confounding strength   Prediction window in days   G-Net (Li et al., 2021)   CT (Melnychuk et al., 2022)   RMSNs (Lim et al., 2018)   CRN (Bica et al., 2020)   SDIP-Net (ours)
                                  1                     1.86 ± 0.15                  2.44 ± 0.24                 1.73 ± 0.17               2.44 ± 0.22           1.53 ± 0.12
       γ=4                        2                     2.17 ± 0.51                 2.11 ± 0.52                  2.62 ± 0.65               2.78 ± 0.68            3.40 ± 0.80
                                  3                     2.22 ± 0.49                 1.97 ± 0.47                  2.32 ± 0.57               2.55 ± 0.64            2.74 ± 0.68
                                  1                     2.27 ± 0.35                  2.88 ± 0.31                 2.10 ± 0.26               3.37 ± 0.54           1.86 ± 0.18
       γ=5                        2                    2.90 ± 0.39                   2.93 ± 0.44                 3.74 ± 0.41               4.03 ± 0.33            4.78 ± 0.36
                                  3                     2.91 ± 0.37                 2.79 ± 0.47                  3.30 ± 0.36               3.68 ± 0.35            3.87 ± 0.32
                                  1                     2.59 ± 0.40                  3.37 ± 0.46                 2.60 ± 0.42               4.14 ± 0.62           1.93 ± 0.28
       γ=6                        2                    3.31 ± 0.41                   3.36 ± 0.58                 4.43 ± 0.66               4.97 ± 0.89            5.58 ± 1.14
                                  3                     3.31 ± 0.41                 3.15 ± 0.58                  3.87 ± 0.59               4.39 ± 0.76            4.48 ± 0.84
                                  1                     3.06 ± 0.63                 4.13 ± 0.43                  3.14 ± 0.52               5.04 ± 0.58           2.23 ± 0.49
       γ=7                        2                    3.61 ± 0.54                  3.89 ± 0.91                  5.11 ± 1.07               5.48 ± 1.18            5.96 ± 1.39
                                  3                    3.51 ± 0.57                  3.75 ± 1.17                  4.31 ± 0.93               4.79 ± 1.08            4.70 ± 1.06
                                  1                     3.37 ± 0.77                 4.39 ± 0.62                  3.61 ± 0.65               5.80 ± 0.87           2.42 ± 0.53
       γ=8                        2                    3.74 ± 0.58                  3.86 ± 0.63                  5.56 ± 0.77               5.95 ± 0.99            6.14 ± 0.94
                                  3                    3.68 ± 0.46                  3.79 ± 0.71                  4.64 ± 0.61               5.15 ± 0.72            4.92 ± 0.78
                                  1                     3.52 ± 0.71                 4.72 ± 0.57                  3.88 ± 0.69               6.34 ± 0.81           2.58 ± 0.64
       γ=9                        2                    4.41 ± 1.13                  4.78 ± 1.16                  7.00 ± 1.50               6.87 ± 1.46            7.17 ± 1.47
                                  3                    4.28 ± 1.07                  4.80 ± 1.48                  5.70 ± 1.22               5.90 ± 1.30            5.72 ± 1.21
                                  1                     3.81 ± 0.86                 5.23 ± 0.58                  4.23 ± 1.00               6.61 ± 1.02           2.74 ± 0.67
      γ = 10                      2                    4.72 ± 0.53                  5.07 ± 1.09                  8.32 ± 1.22               7.47 ± 1.10            7.52 ± 1.16
                                  3                    3.54 ± 0.42                  4.69 ± 0.86                  6.35 ± 0.89               6.25 ± 0.82            5.94 ± 0.79


Table 6: Ablation study: Performance for the tumor growth model with regular sampling times.
Our SDIP-Net ablation has comparable performance to the state-of-the-art baselines for estimating
CAPOs in discrete time.

We perform an ablation study, where we use our stabilized inverse propensity weights in the discrete-
time setting. For this, we use the tumor growth data as in Section 5. However, we do not apply an
observation mask. Instead, all timestamps are observed.
Here, we use an LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) as the neural backbone in order to
demonstrate that our approach is also applicable to other neural backbones. Our stabilized discrete
time inverse propensity network (SDIP-Net) has comparable performance to the baselines. Table 6
shows the results, which thus confirm the effectiveness of our approach. Nevertheless, we empha-
size that our approach is tailored for the continuous time setting, and not for the more unrealistic
discrete-time setting.


                                                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    H YPERPARAMETER TUNING
In order to ensure a fair comparison of all methods, we close follow hyperparameter tuning as in
(Melnychuk et al., 2022) and (Hess et al., 2024a). In particular, we performed a random grid search.
Below, we report the tuning grid for each method. Importantly, all methods are only tuned on
factual data. For optimization, we use Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015). Both TE-CDE (Seedat et al.,
2022) and our SCIP-Net used a simple Euler quadrature and linear interpolation for the Neural CDE
control path (Morrill et al., 2021). For the neural CDE of both methods and the integrated intensity
in our SCIP-Net, we did not tune the grid size of the solver. Further, we emphasize that different
quadrature schemes may impact training time. Fortunately, we did not encounter large differences
in performance between schemes of different orders and, hence, opted for Euler integration.
Runtime: All methods were trained on 1× NVIDIA A100-PCIE-40GB. On average, training our
SCIP-Net took 29.4 minutes on tumor growth data and approximately 1.7 hours on MIMIC-III data,
which is comparable to the baselines.
                    Method                         Component       Hyperparameter                                       Tuning range
                                                                   LSTM layers (J)                                      1
                                                                   Learning rate (η)                                    0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
                                                                   Minibatch size                                       64, 128, 256
                                                                   LSTM hidden units (dh )                              0.5dyxa , 1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                                                    Encoder
                                                                   Balanced representation size (dz )                   0.5dyxa , 1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                                                                   FC hidden units (nFC )                               0.5dz , 1dz , 2dz , 3dz , 4dz
                                                                   LSTM dropout rate (p)                                0.1, 0.2
                                                                   Number of epochs (ne )                               50
                    CRN (Bica et al., 2020)
                                                                   LSTM layers (J)                                      1
                                                                   Learning rate (η)                                    0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
                                                                   Minibatch size                                       256, 512, 1024
                                                                   LSTM hidden units (dh )                              Balanced representation size of encoder
                                                    Decoder
                                                                   Balanced representation size (dz )                   0.5dyxa , 1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                                                                   FC hidden units (nFF )                               0.5dz , 1dz , 2dz , 3dz , 4dz
                                                                   LSTM dropout rate (p)                                0.1, 0.2
                                                                   Number of epochs (ne )                               50
                                                                   Transformer blocks (J)                               1,2
                                                                   Learning rate (η)                                    0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
                                                                   Minibatch size                                       64, 128, 256
                                                                   Attention heads (nh )                                1
                                                                   Transformer units (dh )                              1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                    CT (Melnychuk et al., 2022)     (end-to-end)
                                                                   Balanced representation size (dz )                   0.5dyxa , 1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                                                                   Feed-forward hidden units (nFF )                     0.5dz , 1dz , 2dz , 3dz , 4dz
                                                                   Sequential dropout rate (p)                          0.1, 0.2
                                                                   Max positional encoding (lmax )                      15
                                                                   Number of epochs (ne )                               50
                                                                   LSTM layers (J)                                      1
                                                                   Learning rate (η)                                    0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
                                                    Propensity     Minibatch size                                       64, 128, 256
                                                    treatment      LSTM hidden units (dh )                              0.5dyxa , 1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                                                    network        LSTM dropout rate (p)                                0.1, 0.2
                                                                   Max gradient norm                                    0.5, 1.0, 2.0
                                                                   Number of epochs (ne )                               50
                                                                   LSTM layers (J)                                      1
                                                    Propensity     Learning rate (η)                                    0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
                                                    history        Minibatch size                                       64, 128, 256
                    RMSNs (Lim et al., 2018)
                                                    network        LSTM hidden units (dh )                              0.5dyxa , 1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                                                                   LSTM dropout rate (p)                                0.1, 0.2
                                                    Encoder        Max gradient norm                                    0.5, 1.0, 2.0
                                                                   Number of epochs (ne )                               50
                                                                   LSTM layers (J)                                      1
                                                                   Learning rate (η)                                    0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
                                                                   Minibatch size                                       256, 512, 1024
                                                    Decoder        LSTM hidden units (dh )                              1dyxa , 2dyxa , 4dyxa , 8dyxa , 16dyxa
                                                                   LSTM dropout rate (p)                                0.1, 0.2
                                                                   Max gradient norm                                    0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0
                                                                   Number of epochs (ne )                               50
                                                                   LSTM layers (J)                                      1
                                                                   Learning rate (η)                                    0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
                                                                   Minibatch size                                       64, 128, 256
                                                                   LSTM hidden units (dh )                              0.5dyxa , 1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                    G-Net (Li et al., 2021)         (end-to-end)
                                                                   LSTM output size (dz )                               0.5dyxa , 1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                                                                   Feed-forward hidden units (nFF )                     0.5dz , 1dz , 2dz , 3dz , 4dz
                                                                   LSTM dropout rate (p)                                0.1, 0.2
                                                                   Number of epochs (ne )                               50
                                                                   Neural CDE (Kidger et al., 2020) hidden layers (J)   1
                                                                   Learning rate (η)                                    0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
                                                                   Minibatch size                                       64, 128, 256
                                                                   Neural CDE hidden units (dh )                        0.5dyxa , 1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                                                    Encoder
                                                                   Balanced representation size (dz )                   0.5dyxa , 1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                                                                   Feed-forward hidden units (nFF )                     0.5dz , 1dz , 2dz , 3dz , 4dz
                                                                   Neural CDE dropout rate (p)                          0.1, 0.2
                                                                   Number of epochs (ne )                               50
                    TE-CDE (Seedat et al., 2022)
                                                                   Neural CDE hidden layers (J)                         1
                                                                   Learning rate (η)                                    0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
                                                                   Minibatch size                                       256, 512, 1024
                                                                   Neural CDE hidden units (dh )                        Balanced representation size of encoder
                                                    Decoder
                                                                   Balanced representation size (dz )                   0.5dyxa , 1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                                                                   Feed-forward hidden units (nFF )                     0.5dz , 1dz , 2dz , 3dz , 4dz
                                                                   Neural CDE dropout rate (p)                          0.1, 0.2
                                                                   Number of epochs (ne )                               50
                                                                   Neural CDE (Kidger et al., 2020) hidden layers (J)   1
                                                                   Learning rate (η)                                    0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
                                                                   Minibatch size                                       64, 128, 256
                                                    Weight
                                                                   Neural CDE hidden units (dh )                        0.5dyxa , 1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                                                    network
                                                                   Neural CDE dropout rate (p)                          0.1, 0.2
                                                                   Max gradient norm                                    0.5, 1.0, 2.0
                                                                   Number of epochs (ne )                               50
                                                                   Neural CDE hidden layers (J)                         1
                                                                   Learning rate (η)                                    0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
                                                    Treatment      Minibatch size                                       64, 128, 256
                    SCIP-Net (ours)                 network        Neural CDE hidden units (dh )                        0.5dyxa , 1dyxa , 2dyxa , 3dyxa , 4dyxa
                                                    Encoder        Neural CDE dropout rate (p)                          0.1, 0.2
                                                                   Max gradient norm                                    0.5, 1.0, 2.0
                                                                   Number of epochs (ne )                               50
                                                                   Neural CDE hidden layers (J)                         1
                                                                   Learning rate (η)                                    0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
                                                                   Minibatch size                                       256, 512, 1024
                                                    Decoder        Neural CDE hidden units (dh )                        1dyxa , 2dyxa , 4dyxa , 8dyxa , 16dyxa
                                                                   Neural CDE dropout rate (p)                          0.1, 0.2
                                                                   Max gradient norm                                    0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0
                                                                   Number of epochs (ne )                               50



Table 7: Following (Melnychuk et al., 2022), we let dyxa = dy + dx + da be the overall input size.
Further, dz is the hidden representation size of our SCIP-Net, and corresponds to the balanced
representation size of TE-CDE (Seedat et al., 2022), CRN (Bica et al., 2020), and CT (Melnychuk
et al., 2022), and the LSTM output size of G-Net (Li et al., 2021).

                                                                                     30
