Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G ROUP - ROBUST S AMPLE R EWEIGHTING FOR S UBPOP -
ULATION S HIFTS VIA I NFLUENCE F UNCTIONS

 Rui Qiao1 2 † Zhaoxuan Wu2 Jingtan Wang1 3 Pang Wei Koh4 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1 2
 1
   National University of Singapore 2 Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology
 3
   Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) 4 University of Washington
 {rui.qiao,jingtan.w}@u.nus.edu                 zhaoxuan.wu@smart.mit.edu
 pangwei@cs.washington.edu               lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg



                                                 A BSTRACT

           Machine learning models often have uneven performance among subpopulations
           (a.k.a., groups) in the data distributions. This poses a significant challenge for the
           models to generalize when the proportions of the groups shift during deployment.
           To improve robustness to such shifts, existing approaches have developed strategies
           that train models or perform hyperparameter tuning using the group-labeled data
           to minimize the worst-case loss over groups. However, a non-trivial amount of
           high-quality labels is often required to obtain noticeable improvements. Given
           the costliness of the labels, we propose to adopt a different paradigm to enhance
           group label efficiency: utilizing the group-labeled data as a target set to optimize
           the weights of other group-unlabeled data. We introduce Group-robust Sample
           Reweighting (GSR), a two-stage approach that first learns the representations from
           group-unlabeled data, and then tinkers the model by iteratively retraining its last
           layer on the reweighted data using influence functions. Our GSR is theoretically
           sound, practically lightweight, and effective in improving the robustness to sub-
           population shifts. In particular, GSR outperforms the previous state-of-the-art
           approaches that require the same amount or even more group labels. Our code is
           available at https://github.com/qiaoruiyt/GSR.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Subpopulation shift refers to the change in the proportion of groups (as defined by the class, attributes,
or both) in data distribution between the training and deployment phases (Koh et al., 2021; Yang
et al., 2023). Due to the nature of subpopulations or the selection bias (Dwork et al., 2012; Zadrozny,
2004), the training data is often composed of majority and minority groups that are overrepresented
and underrepresented, respectively. Common examples include photos of waterbirds frequently being
taken with a water background instead of a land background (Sagawa et al., 2019) and people are
more likely to be holding a vacuum than fixing it (Nan et al., 2021). Such group imbalance can
cause some features from the majority group to be spuriously correlated with the labels, leading to
possible undesirable shortcuts in training deep neural networks (Geirhos et al., 2020; Hermann et al.,
2024; Shah et al., 2020). As a result, standard training with empirical risk minimization (ERM) often
overly relies on such shortcuts and fails to attend to the minority groups, leading to worsened model
generalization under subpopulation shifts, especially when the proportion of the minority groups
increases (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Nagarajan et al., 2020; Sagawa et al., 2020). Thus, it is important to
develop algorithms that are group-robust to subpopulation shifts, experiencing minimal performance
degradation as measured by the worst-group accuracy.
The group labels can be used to construct balanced groups or minimize the worst-group loss during
training (Idrissi et al., 2022; Sagawa et al., 2019). These techniques often lead to improved group
robustness compared to ERM. However, group labels can be expensive to obtain, necessitating
approaches that maximize the gain in group robustness from limited data. Given a group-labeled
dataset DL , the two mainstream categories are either using DL for model selection (Liu et al., 2021;
    †
        Partial work done while the author was a visiting scholar at the University of Washington.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhang et al., 2022), or using DL to directly train the model parameters (Kirichenko et al., 2022).
However, these strategies may not always be the best way to exploit the group information, since they
either underutilize the group labels, or restrict the most crucial part of the training to only DL while
neglecting the potential of the more accessible data without group labels. Therefore, we advocate an
in-between training paradigm: instead of using DL to train the model parameters directly, we use
them to iteratively optimize the weights of a group-unlabeled dataset DU , which are more realistic to
obtain. Then, the model parameters are trained using a weighted ERM objective on these data.
Optimizing the sample weights is an established idea that necessitates solving a bilevel optimization
problem (Ren et al., 2018). The inner loop of the bilevel optimization performs standard model
training on a weighted objective, while the outer loop optimizes the sample weights. The two main
challenges hindering its wider adoption include: (1) the unavoidable trade-off between computational
cost and accuracy, and (2) the effectiveness when the model is overparameterized. For (1), calculating
the outer loop gradient requires backpropagating through the entire training process, which is compu-
tationally prohibitive for deep neural networks. Conventional approaches use a one-step truncated
backpropagation that relies only on the last-step gradient of the model training for computational
feasibility (Shaban et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2022). However, this approximation can be imprecise as
it fails to account for the curvature of the loss landscape and the training dynamics of the model. For
(2), training a weighted objective with overparameterized neural networks is likely to converge to the
same solution as with ERM (Sagawa et al., 2019; Zhai et al., 2022). Regularization techniques need
to be applied such that training with weighted objectives leads to meaningfully different solutions
than training with ERM (Byrd & Lipton, 2019; Sagawa et al., 2019; Zhai et al., 2022).
To address the two challenges, we propose a two-stage method named Group-robust Sample
Reweighting (GSR), which iteratively reweights individual training samples to improve group robust-
ness. We utilize last-layer retraining (LLR), a lightweight method that retrains the last linear layer
of neural network (Kang et al., 2020; Kirichenko et al., 2022). LLR simplifies the inner loop of the
bilevel optimization into a convex optimization problem. Importantly, it facilitates our application of
the influence function, a technique that can be derived from implicit differentiation (Koh & Liang,
2017; Krantz & Parks, 2002), to utilize the Hessian to accurately estimate the gradient of sample
weight updates without backpropagating through the entire training trajectory. In contrast to methods
that rely on one-step truncated backpropagation approximations (Zhou et al., 2022), our approach
leverages the fact that LLR is both inexpensive even with Hessian computation and effective for
enhancing group robustness. To perform GSR, we split the group-unlabeled dataset DU into a held-out
set DU-h and a remaining set DU-r . The first stage performs unweighted representation learning on
DU-r . The second stage utilizes the influence function to iteratively optimize the weights of DU-h
for the worst-group loss in DL achieved through LLR. Our method outperforms the state-of-the-art
method that uses the same amount of group labels and even outperforms methods that require more
group labels.
The specific contributions of this work include the following:
• We propose to better leverage the high-quality group-labeled data for group robustness with an
  alternative paradigm by using them to reweight other samples instead of directly training on them.
• We devise an efficient strategy based on implicit differentiation for group-robust sample reweighting,
  which becomes accurate and computationally feasible via the synergy with last-layer retraining.
• We empirically demonstrate the performance advantages of our lightweight approach on improving
  the group robustness for both vision and natural language tasks.

2    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION AND P RELIMINARIES
Let (X , Y, G) denote the space of input, class label, and groups of subpopulation respectively. Denote
a dataset by D = {z1 , . . . , zn }, where each data point zi := (xi , yi , gi ) ∈ X × Y × G is sampled
i.i.d. from a data distribution P. For g ∈ G, define Dg := {zi ∈ D|gi = g} as the subset of data from
groupP   g, sampled from the group data distribution QgP  . We assume that P can be decomposed into
P = g∈G πg Qg where the mixing ratio πg ∈ [0, 1], g∈G πg = 1. As a result, any subpopulation
shifts can be represented by adjusting πg . Depending on the group-label availability, datasets can
be categorized as DL , DU for group-labeled, group-unlabeled datasets. Meanwhile, depending on
the functionality, datasets can be categorized as Dtr , Dv , Dtar , denoting the training, validation, target
sets, respectively. The target set Dtar guides the sample weight updates and we reserve the notion of


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


validation set Dv only for hyperparameter and model selection. Let N = {1, . . . , n} be the indices
of the training set. We use d for the total derivative and use ∂ or ∇ for the partial derivative.
ERM optimizes the model parameters θ with R̂(Dtr ; θ) = i∈N n1 ℓ(xi , yi ; θ) where ℓ is the loss
                                                               P
function. Let w ∈ Rn be the weight vector for all training samples. A weighted training objective
assigns different importance to the training data points, R̂(Dtr ; w, θ) = i∈N wi ℓ(xi , yi ; θ). Since
                                                                           P
the change of π is not known at test time, we evaluate the robustness to distribution shifts of a model
with parameters θ using the worst-group risk (Sagawa et al., 2019):
                                     R̂WG (D; θ) = max R̂(Dg ; θ) .
                                                       g∈G

To minimize the worst-group risk, existing methods (Kirichenko et al., 2022; Sagawa et al., 2019)
have focused on directly training on group-annotated dataset DL using the objective R̂WG (DL ; θ).
However, they require having a sufficient amount of data for each group. Alternatively, we can
assume the availability of some group-unlabeled data DU (e.g., standard training set). By viewing the
sample weights of DU as another set of parameters and optimizing it jointly with θ w.r.t. the target
set Dtar ⊆ DL , we arrive at a bilevel formulation of the minimax problem (Zhou et al., 2022):
                                         min max R̂(Dgtar ; θ̂∗ )
                                         w∈S g∈G
                                                                                                         (1)
                                    s.t. θ̂∗ = arg min R̂(Dtr ; w, θ) ,
                                                      θ
                                              n
                                                                    P
where S = {w = [w1 , w2 , · · · , wn ] ∈ R |wi ≥ 0 ∀i ∈ N, and i∈N wi = 1}. The inner loop
performs standard model training on the weighted objective with variants of gradient descent. To
optimize the sample weights of the training set in the outer loop, we can similarly perform gradient
descent using its total derivative:
                                  dR̂(Dtar ; θ̂∗ )                      dθ̂∗
                                                   = ∇θ R̂(Dtar ; θ̂∗ )      .
                                      dw                                dw
                                                                             ∗
Since θ̂∗ is typically obtained via gradient descent, calculating ddw
                                                                    θ̂
                                                                       involves unrolling the entire
training trajectory and backpropagating through it, which is overly expensive to compute especially
                                                                                                 θ̂ ∗
when the model is an overparameterized deep neural network. To efficiently approximate ddw            ,
MAPLE (Zhou et al., 2022) adopts one-step truncated backpropagation (Shaban et al., 2019):
                            dθ̂∗ one-step              ∂ 2 R̂(Dtr ; w, θT −1 )
                                   ≈ ∇w θT = −η                                ,                          (2)
                            dw                                 ∂θ∂w
where η is the learning rate. Subsequently, w is updated with projected gradient descent. This
approximation essentially relies on the last-step gradient w.r.t. each training instance zi , i.e., ∇wi θT =
−η∇θ R̂(zi ; θT −1 ) ≈ −η∇θ R̂(zi ; θT ), derived in Appendix A.2. After dropping η, we can rewrite:
                         dR̂(Dtar ; θ̂∗ ) MAPLE
                                           ≈ −∇θ R̂(Dtar ; θT )⊤ ∇θ R̂(zi ; θT ) .                       (3)
                             dwi
To interpret, MAPLE essentially updates sample weights according to the inner product between
the gradient of the target loss and the gradient of the unweighted training loss for each sample upon
convergence. Performing bilevel optimization with this approximation is reasonable because it tends
to upweight training points that share similar gradient directions with the target sets. However, it is
also imprecise, as it neither accounts for the curvature of the loss landscape w.r.t. the current model
nor fully captures the training dynamics, where wi could significantly affect the batch gradient and
optimization trajectory. Reweighting data points based solely on last-step gradients is shortsighted
and can lead to suboptimal convergence.

3    G ROUP - ROBUST S AMPLE R EWEIGHTING VIA I MPLICIT D IFFERENTIATION
Our goal is to develop a technique that updates the sample weights more accurately and efficiently to
optimize the bilevel minimax objective in Equation 1. In this section, we first establish the connection
between reweighting samples via implicit differentiation and the influence function (Koh & Liang,
2017) from the perspective of bilevel optimization. Then, we present an effective integration of the


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


influence function and adaptive aggregation (Sagawa et al., 2019) over the groups to optimize the
minimax objective in the outer loop.
Implicit differentiation can be used to calculate the gradient w.r.t. the sample weights without
backpropagating through the inner loop of the objective according to the implicit function theorem
(IFT) (Krantz & Parks, 2002). Assuming an unconstrained and strictly convex inner objective, it
implies that (1) the gradient w.r.t. the model parameters θ diminishes to zero upon convergence to
the inner loop optimum, i.e., ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ ) = 0, and (2) the Hessian of the weighted training
objective evaluated at θ = θ̂∗ , Hθ̂∗ ,w := ∇2θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ ), is invertible (Boyd & Vandenberghe,
2004). This satisfies two of the conditions required to apply the IFT. In addition, IFT further requires
the inner objective to be twice continuously differentiable. We formally state the assumptions below.
Assumption 3.1. The inner objective R̂(Dtr ; w, θ) is unconstrained, strictly convex, and twice
continuously differentiable with respect to θ, ∀w ∈ S (Equation 1).
Although appearing as restrictive, these assumptions can be easily satisfied through last-layer retrain-
ing, as detailed in Section 4. Under Assumption 3.1, as ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ ) = 0, the outer gradient
        h ∗                     i⊤
dθ̂ ∗    dθ̂  dθ̂ ∗       dθ̂ ∗
 dw   =  dw1 dw2    · · · dwn      ∈ Rn×1 can be calculated exactly via implicit differentiation as:

                          dθ̂∗
                               = −Hθ̂−1∗ ,w
                                            ∇w ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ ) ,                                  (4)
                          dw
                          dθ̂∗
                               = −Hθ̂−1∗ ,w
                                            ∇θ R̂(zi ; θ̂∗ ) = −Hθ̂−1
                                                                    ∗ ,w
                                                                         ∇θ ℓ(zi ; θ̂∗ ) .             (5)
                          dwi
The derivation is in Appendix A.3. To highlight, Equation 5 uses the first-order gradient of the
unweighted ERM loss which is independent of wi . Hence, the magnitude of wi does not directly
affect the scale of its gradient, even if |wi | → 0. Instead, wi indirectly affects the gradients through
the trained model parameters θ̂∗ and the Hessian Hθ̂∗ ,w . The total derivative of R̂ w.r.t. wi is thus:
                        dR̂(Dtar ; θ̂∗ )
                                         = −∇θ R̂(Dtar ; θ̂∗ )⊤ Hθ̂−1
                                                                    ∗ ,w
                                                                         ∇θ R̂(zi ; θ̂∗ ) .          (6)
                            dwi
In comparison to Equation 3, the key difference lies in the presence of the inverse Hessian term
between the two gradients. The Hessian Hθ̂∗ ,w describes the loss landscape of θ̂∗ w.r.t. the training
dataset Dtr and their sample weights w. A more detailed discussion on the role of Hessian is available
in Appendix C. We will show later in Section 5 that without the Hessian, the last-step approximated
gradient (Equation 3) of the outer objective function is inaccurate, often leading to suboptimal results.
The derived form in Equation 6 via implicit differentiation exactly matches the influence function,
which estimates the change in model parameters if a training data point zi is upweighted infinitesimally
(Cook & Weisberg, 1982; Koh & Liang, 2017). Since the influence function is well-defined for
weighted objectives, we slightly generalize the notation by incorporating w into the expressions.
Given a model θ̂∗ trained on weighted samples, the influence of upweighting zi ∈ Dtr on the loss of
model predicting a target instance z ′ ∈ Dtar (or a target set Dtar ) is
                         I(zi , z ′ ; θ̂∗ , w) := −∇θ R̂(z ′ ; θ̂∗ )⊤ Hθ̂−1
                                                                          ∗ ,w
                                                                               ∇θ R̂(zi ; θ̂∗ ) .                 (7)
Thus, we can use the influence function to represent the gradient derived from implicit differentia-
tion. For completeness, we define the per-sample influence of a dataset to be I(D             e tr , z ′ ; θ̂∗ , w) :=
h                                                                        i⊤
  I(z1 , z ′ ; θ̂∗ , w) I(z2 , z ′ ; θ̂∗ , w) · · · I(zn , z ′ ; θ̂∗ , w) ∈ Rn×1 . Then, we can calculate the sam-
ple weight update based on the per-sample influence in Dtr on each group g ∈ G in Dtar :
                       e tr , Dtar ; θ̂∗ , w) = 1
                                                     X
                       I(D                                 e tr , z ′ ; θ̂∗ , w) .
                                                           I(D                                                    (8)
                                g                tar
                                               |Dg | ′ tar
                                                                z ∈Dg

To optimize the minimax objective in the outer loop, the gradient of the worst-group risk w.r.t. the
sample weights can be calculated via its corresponding influence scores:
                  dR̂WG (Dtar ; θ̂∗ )   e tr , Dtar∗ ; θ̂∗ , w),
                                      = I(D     g                     g ∗ = arg max R̂(Dgtar ; θ̂∗ ) .            (9)
                       dw                                                          g∈G



                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


However, only optimizing for the worst group in one step according to Equation 9 can be inefficient,
especially when multiple groups have high error rates. To obtain a more efficient and smoother
optimization trajectory, we utilize an adaptive aggregation (Sagawa et al., 2019) of the influence
scores across groups. The aggregation weights are updated multiplicatively based on group error
rates to better optimize the sample weights, illustrated in lines 7-14 of Algorithm 1.

4     E XACT G ROUP - ROBUST S AMPLE R EWEIGHTING WITH L AST- LAYER
      R ETRAINING

In this section, we introduce the Group-robust Sample Reweighting with last-layer retraining (GSR)
algorithm. The algorithm is built on the observation that last-layer retraining (LLR) (Kang et al., 2020;
Kirichenko et al., 2022) can lead to a strongly convex (a subset of strictly convex) inner objective that
satisfies the assumptions required for implicit differentiation. Next, we delineate the benefits of LLR
and its integration into our GSR algorithm.

4.1   S YNERGY WITH L AST- LAYER R ETRAINING

LLR is a lightweight method designed to mitigate spurious correlations and improve group robust-
ness (Kirichenko et al., 2022; LaBonte et al., 2024; Qiu et al., 2023). In essence, it performs deep
representation learning with ERM, followed by retraining only the last layer on a separate group-
balanced dataset while freezing the remaining model parameters. Empirical evidence has shown that
the initial ERM model has learned sufficient representations for all groups, including minority groups,
and over-reliance on spurious correlations can be significantly reduced by simply fine-tuning the last
linear classification layer of the model (Izmailov et al., 2022; Rosenfeld et al., 2022). As a result,
despite being lightweight, last-layer retraining while freezing the ERM-learned representation has
become the state-of-the-art approach for improving group robustness across various settings.
Notably, LLR synergies well with our proposed sample reweighting via implicit differentiation
(Section 3), offering three significant benefits. Firstly, employing LLR with cross-entropy loss and
a positive coefficient λ for ℓ2 regularization creates a strongly convex objective that satisfies the
Assumption 3.1 (proofs are in Appendix A.4). This allows the exact calculation of the gradients
w.r.t. the sample weights via Equation 9. Secondly, calculating the Hessian inverse in Equation 6
is no longer overly expensive, because the only free model parameters are in the last layer instead
of the entire deep neural network. Thirdly, LLR acts as a regularizer by limiting the capacity of the
model parameters, which counterintuitively facilitates the training with weighted objectives. This is
because weighted objectives do not necessarily yield different predictors compared to ERM when
training overparameterized models as shown in Zhai et al. (2022). Sufficient regularization is usually
needed for the reweighting scheme to be practically meaningful (Byrd & Lipton, 2019; Sagawa et al.,
2019). Therefore, regularized LLR ensures that the theoretical soundness of our method translates
into practical benefits without violating assumptions or conducting extensive approximations.

4.2   O UR GSR A LGORITHM

A comprehensive overview of GSR is presented in Algorithm 1. For simplicity, we omit certain
details such as regularization and gradient clipping. Specifically, it contains two stages:
(Stage 1) Representation learning. We take out a random subset (e.g., 10%) from the training set as
a held-out set Dtr-h . Then, train the entire model θ on the remaining training set Dtr-r with ERM until
convergence without early stopping. This ensures that the model fits the “remaining” training set Dtr-r
well. Reserving a held-out set Dtr-h that the model has not encountered during training is a crucial
step, as it prevents overfitting to the data that will be later used for sample reweighting. Otherwise,
changing the sample weights will not make a meaningful difference to the last-layer classifier (Zhai
et al., 2022). Note that neither group labels nor sample weights are required at this stage.
(Stage 2) Group-robust sample reweighting with last-layer retraining. Denote the model param-
eters as θ = (ϕ, ψ) where ϕ is the feature extractor and ψ is the last-layer linear classifier. In this
stage, we keep the feature extractor ϕ fixed, and jointly train the last layer ψ and the sample weights
w using the held-out set Dtr-h (as a training set) and the target set Dtar . Subsequently, we perform
model selection with the validation set Dv . We create Dtar and Dv with equal size, by splitting the


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Group-robust Sample Reweighting with last-layer retraining (GSR)
Require: Training set Dtr of size n, validation set Dv , target set Dtar with m groups, held-out set
    fraction α, outer loop steps T , outer learning rate β, scaling temperature τ .
 1: Obtain the held-out set D tr-h with size αn and the remaining set D tr-r with size (1 − α)n
    Stage 1:
 2: (ϕ∗ , ψ ∗ ) ← arg minθ=(ϕ,ψ) R̂(D tr-r ; θ)
    Stage 2:
                                                            1
 3: Initialize held-out sample weights w(1) ← αn               · 1αn
                                                                      1
 4: Initialize adaptive influence score weights γ (0) ← m               · 1m
 5: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 6:     ψ (t) ← arg minψ R̂(Dtr-h ; w(t) , (ϕ∗ , ψ))                                     ▷ Last-layer retraining
 7:     for g = 1, . . . , m do
                (t)     (t−1)
 8:          γg ← γg          exp R̂(Dgtar ; (ϕ∗ , ψ (t) ))/τ                    ▷ Update aggregation weights
 9:     end for
10:     γ (t) ← γ (t) /∥γ (t) ∥1
11:     ξ (t) ← 0αn
12:     for g = 1, . . . , m do
                               (t) e
13:          ξ (t) = ξ (t) + γg I(D   tr-h
                                           , Dgtar ; (ϕ∗ , ψ (t) ), w) ▷ Adaptive aggregation of the influence
14:     end for
15:     w(t+1) ← max{w(t) − βξ (t) , 0αn }                     ▷ Projected gradient descent (element-wise max)
16:     w(t+1) ← w(t+1) /∥w(t+1) ∥1                                                     ▷ Weight normalization
17:     if R̂WG (Dv ; (ϕ∗ , ψ (t) )) ≤ R̂WG (Dv ; (ϕ∗ , ψ ∗ )) then
18:          ψ ∗ ← ψ (t)                                                                      ▷ Model selection
19:     end if
20: end for
21: return θ ∗ ← (ϕ∗ , ψ ∗ )



initial “standard” validation set (as DL ) in half (see remark below for the reason). The inner loop,
which fits a linear classifier ψ on the weighted cross-entropy objective with ℓ2 regularization, is
optimized via L-BFGS (Liu & Nocedal, 1989) for efficiency. The outer loop performs projected
gradient descent with learning rate β. The gradient is calculated using adaptive aggregation of the
influence scores (Equation 9), projected to {w|wi ≥ 0 ∀i}. The Hessian of the inner objective is
updated as Hψ(t) ,w(t) = ∇2ψ R̂(Dtr−h ; w(t) , ψ (t) ) in each iteration. In addition, the gradient of the
sample weights can become spiky when high loss values are encountered on the validation set. We
employ gradient clipping by norm and weights normalization for better training stability.
Remark. The target set and the validation set cannot be the same. Although the target data is only used
to update the weights of the held-out training data and does not directly affect the training of the model
parameters, overfitting to the target can still occur as a result of the representer theorem (Schölkopf
et al., 2001). Thus, it is essential to create different splits for the target and validation set to prevent
overfitting during sample reweighting, which we illustrate later in Figure 4d.

5    E XPERIMENTS
Datasets. We evaluate the effectiveness of algorithms on 4 commonly used datasets. Waterbirds (Wah
et al., 2011) is a binary object recognition dataset for bird types (i.e., waterbird, landbird), which are
spuriously correlated with the background (i.e., water, land). CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) is a binary
object recognition dataset for hair color blondness prediction. There exists a spurious correlation
between the man gender attribute and non-blondness. MultiNLI (Williams et al., 2017) is a multi-class
natural language inference dataset. The three classes (i.e., entailment, neutral, contradiction) describe
the relationship between a pair of sentences. The spurious correlation exists between contradiction
and the presence of negation words. CivilComments (WILDS) (Borkan et al., 2019; Koh et al., 2021)
is a binary text toxicity detection dataset. There are 8 types of identities mentioned in the text, such
as male and female. Grouping the samples by the identity and the class results in 16 overlapping
groups. Although there are no obvious spurious correlations, the data is extremely imbalanced among


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Performance comparison. We report the worst-group accuracy on four benchmark datasets.
For the group label column, ✗ indicates no group label g is used; ✓ indicates g is required; ✓✓
indicates a proportion of g from the validation set is re-purposed beyond hyperparameter tuning, such
as training sample weights or model parameters. The row sections are ranked in descending order of
the total amount of group label information required. We report the mean ± standard deviation over
5 random seeds. We use “−” to indicate missing evaluation results from the original paper.

                      Group label                Worst-group accuracy (%)
          Method                                                                           Average
                      Train / Val   Waterbirds    CelebA    MultiNLI CivilComments
        Group DRO       ✓/ ✓        91.4±1.1     88.9±2.3   77.7±1.4      70.0±2.0          82.0
          RWG           ✓/ ✓        87.6±1.6     84.3±1.8   69.6±1.0      72.0±1.9          78.4
           JTT           ✗/ ✓         86.7         81.1        72.6         69.3            77.4
           CnC           ✗/ ✓       88.5±0.3     88.8±0.9       −         68.9±2.1           −
           SSA          ✗/ ✓✓       89.0±0.6     89.8±1.3   76.6±0.7      69.9±2.0          81.3
         MAPLE          ✗/ ✓✓         91.7         88.0        72.7         64.1            79.1
           DFR          ✗/ ✓✓       92.9±0.2     88.3±1.1   74.7±0.7      70.1±0.8          81.5
         GSR-HF         ✗/ ✓✓       87.5±0.1     86.3±0.4   74.7±0.0      68.9±0.2          79.4
           GSR          ✗/ ✓✓       92.9±0.0     87.0±0.4   78.5±0.3      71.7±0.6          82.5
           ERM           ✗/ ✗       74.9±2.4     46.9±2.8   65.9±0.3      55.6±0.6          60.8
          SELF           ✗/ ✗       93.0±0.3     83.9±0.9   70.7±2.5         −               −



these groups, especially on text that mentions other religions and is classified as non-toxic. Overall,
we follow the standard train, validation, and test splits for all datasets. We randomly create target and
validation sets by equally splitting the original validation.
Baselines. We compare our approach against baselines in three categories according to the amount
of group labels required. (1) Group labels for both training and validation: Group DRO (Sagawa
et al., 2019) optimizes the worst-group training loss by dynamically adjusting the group weights;
RWG (Idrissi et al., 2022) balances the sampling probability of each group according to their sizes.
(2) Group labels for validation: JTT (Liu et al., 2021) upweights the high-loss training points that
are more likely to be from minority groups. CnC (Zhang et al., 2022) in addition uses contrastive
learning to align the representations of the same-class samples. SSA (Nam et al., 2022) infers the
pseudo group labels of the training set by training a predictor on the validation set. DFR (Kirichenko
et al., 2022) performs group-balanced last-layer retraining on the validation set. MAPLE1 (Zhou
et al., 2022) is the most similar to ours that uses the validation set to jointly reweight the training
samples and retrain the entire model. (3) No group labels: SELF (LaBonte et al., 2024) constructs
an approximately group-balanced dataset based on the disagreement from an auxiliary model, then
performs class-balanced last-layer retraining. We choose the best-performing ES disagreement SELF.
Setup. For GSR, at stage 1, we use the suggested hyperparameter configuration and data augmentation
strategies from DFR on all datasets (with minor modifications for MultiNLI and CivilComments). At
stage 2, we drop data augmentation and perform a randomized search of hyperparameters using the
valuation set Dv . The details are documented in Appendix B.2.

5.1      I MPROVEMENT IN G ROUP ROBUSTNESS

The main results are in Table 1. Our approach GSR achieves consistent and competitive results
compared to the baseline methods in terms of group robustness, which is measured by the worst-
group accuracy. Specifically, GSR has the state-of-the-art (SoTA) performance for both the MultiNLI
and CivilComments datasets, and close-to-SoTA worst-group accuracy on the Waterbirds and CelebA
datasets. Moreover, GSR demonstrated the highest consistency across all four datasets. It achieves
an average improvement of 1.0% in absolute worst-group accuracy compared to DFR (the SoTA
method which uses the same amount of group labels as ours), because GSR allows more fine-grained
reweighting over the training data. GSR even outperforms Group DRO which requires more group
labels, indicating that training the full network with weighted data may not always be necessary. The
detailed results including the average accuracy of the methods are in Appendix B.5.
   1
       We re-implemented MAPLE with better efficiency and support for MultiNLI and CivilComments.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.12
                                    landbirds on land
                                                                                      0.4                                                                  0.35
                                    landbirds in water (minority)
                 0.60                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.10
                                    waterbirds on land (minority)                                                                                          0.30
                                    waterbirds in water                                                                                                                       contradiction, no neg
                 0.50                                                                 0.3                                                                                                                                      0.08

 Group weights


                                                                      Group weights


                                                                                                                                           Group weights


                                                                                                                                                                                                               Group weights
                                                                                                                                                           0.25               contradiction, neg
                 0.40                                                                                                                                                         entailment, no neg
                                                                                                                                                           0.20                                                                0.06
                                                                                      0.2                                                                                     entailment, neg (minority)
                 0.30                                                                                                                                      0.15               neutral, no neg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.04
                                                                                                                 non-blond, female                                            neutral, neg (minority)
                 0.20                                                                                                                                      0.10
                                                                                      0.1                        non-blond, male
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.02
                 0.10                                                                                            blond, female                             0.05
                                                                                                                 blond, male (minority)
                 0.00                                                                 0.0                                                                  0.00                                                                0.00
                        0      20       40      60      80      100                          0      20         40      60     80     100                          0     10      20      30       40       50                          0     20    40      60      80     100
                                          Steps                                                                  Steps                                                            Steps                                                             Steps



                            (a) Waterbirds                                                          (b) CelebA                                                          (c) MNLI                                                  (d) CivilComments

Figure 1: The change in the sum of sample weights across different groups throughout the training.
The minority groups are upweighted and the majority groups are generally downweighted. However,
different groups do not have equal sums of weights.

                                                                                              1e4                                                                 1e4                                                                 1e4
                        1e2                                                           1.00                                                                 2.50                                                                3.00
                 5.00
                                                                                                                non-blond, female                                            contradiction, no neg                                               Other 15 groups
                                landbirds on land
                                landbirds in water (minority)                                                   non-blond, male                                              contradiction, neg                                2.50              non-toxic, other religions
                 4.00                                                                 0.80                                                                 2.00                                                                                  (minority)
                                waterbirds on land (minority)                                                   blond, female                                                entailment, no neg
                                waterbirds in water                                                             blond, male (minority)                                       entailment, neg (minority)                        2.00
                 3.00                                                                 0.60                                                                 1.50              neutral, no neg
                                                                          Density


                                                                                                                                               Density


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Density
     Density


                                                                                                                                                                             neutral, neg (minority)                           1.50

                 2.00                                                                 0.40                                                                 1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.00

                 1.00                                                                 0.20                                                                 0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.50


                 0.00                                                                 0.00                                                                 0.00                                                                0.00
                        0.00   0.01       0.02       0.03     0.04                           0.0         0.5      1.0        1.5                                  0      2        4          6          8                         0.0000     0.0002    0.0004       0.0006
                                         Weights                                                                Weights            1e−3                                         Weights               1e−4                                         Weights



                            (a) Waterbirds                                                          (b) CelebA                                                          (c) MNLI                                                  (d) CivilComments

Figure 2: The distribution of sample weights for each group that are used to train the best models. The
minority groups have the weight distribution stretched out towards high values, while the majority-
group weights are generally skewed towards 0.


Besides, as an ablation study, we include the Hessian-free version of our method, GSR-HF, which
uses a simplified sample weight update from MAPLE (Equation 3) during the last-layer retraining.
As shown in Table 1, GSR-HF performs consistently worse than GSR, validating our analysis in
Section 2. This highlights the importance of incorporating the Hessian matrix in Equation 6 to ensure
the correctness of the gradient when optimizing the sample weights.

5.2                      A C LOSER L OOK AT S AMPLE W EIGHTS

Varying weights across groups. Figure 1 illustrates the variation in the sum of sample weights across
different groups through the training process of the best-performing model reported in Table 1. In
general, all the minority-group weights increase, and the majority groups with spurious correlations
generally have decreased weights. For example, the weights for minority groups (e.g., landbirds in
water in Figure 1a) increase as optimization progresses. In contrast, the weights for certain majority
groups with clear spurious correlations (e.g., landbirds on land in Figure 1a) decrease over the
optimization steps. Note that not all majority groups necessarily experience a decrease in their sum
of sample weights. Another key message here is that the better-performing models are not necessarily
trained with equally weighted groups. In all cases, the worst-group performance is better optimized
even though the groups are weighted differently, which effectively mitigates the spurious correlations
with still “imbalanced” data. These results obtained from directly optimizing the sample weights
align well with the similar findings in Qiu et al. (2023); Sagawa et al. (2019).
Varying weights within groups. We visualize the distribution of the sample weights that are used
to train the best models in Figure 2 (where the distributions are smoothed using kernel density
estimation). The samples from the majority groups are consistently assigned with lower weights after
reweighting, especially for Waterbirds and CelebA in Figures 2a, 2b. On the other hand, the minority
groups are consistently upweighted with their sample weights stretched out to larger values across
all datasets. We can also clearly see that our best-performing models are trained on samples with
diverse weights, even if they are from the same group. This implies that not all samples need to be
upweighted or downweighted for group-balanced training. Having more fine-grained adjustments
over the sample weights offers more flexibility in improving the robustness to subpopulation shifts.


                                                                                                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Visualizing high-weight samples. In addition, we visualize the held-out samples with the highest
weight from Waterbirds in Figure 3. These high-weight samples also tend to be consistent across
different runs. All of these images are from the minority groups (waterbirds on land, landbirds in
water). As highlighted by the red box, the image has an ambiguous background that blends features
of both land and water. Hence, it should be considered as a minority. Since the group labels for the
held-out sets are not used for retraining, GSR is not affected by the annotation errors for group labels
and correctly assigns high weights to these samples, since they are supposedly helpful in improving
the worst-group performance on the target set. However, other group-balanced baselines that directly
train on these group labels do not offer such a benefit. We will subsequently show that GSR is robust
to class-label errors in the training data in Section 5.3.
Class: landbird Class: waterbird Class: waterbird Class: landbird Class: landbird                                                                  Class: landbird Class: landbird Class: landbird Class: waterbird Class: landbird
   BG: water       BG: land         BG: water        BG: water       BG: water                                                                        BG: land        BG: land        BG: land        BG: water        BG: land


                                         (a) The most weighted instances.                                                                                          (b) The least weighted instances.

Figure 3: We illustrate the selected images with their class label and background label from the
held-out split in Waterbirds according to the sample weights. In 3a, the top-5 most weighted instances
are all from the minority groups with differing bird types and backgrounds. As highlighted in the red
box in (a), the background of the waterbird is ambiguous as it blends features of both land and water
and hence should be categorized as a minority. GSR correctly identifies it despite the suboptimal
annotation. In 3b, the top-5 least weighted instances are all from the majority groups where the
background is spuriously correlated with the bird type.


5.3                                 ROBUSTNESS TO L ABEL N OISE

The real-world data often have annotation errors (Beyer et al., 2020; Gururangan et al., 2018). If
not addressed properly, the errors can substantially degrade the model’s group robustness when the
spurious correlation is strong in the training set (Qiao & Low, 2024). Assuming efforts are invested
into the quality of the group-labeled dataset DL , the other training data without group labels in DU
may have unaddressed errors such as mislabeled classes. To evaluate the resilience of GSR on training
data with different quality, we simulate the variation of data quality by adding class label noise. In
particular, we randomly flip up to 40% of the class labels in the held-out set to incorrect classes, and
leave the target and validation sets unchanged. As shown in Figure 4a, the worst-group performance
of GSR has minimal performance degradation. This is because using high-quality targets for training
sample reweighting allows more fine-grained control over the training data. To further understand
why, we plot the learned weight distribution of the held-out data in Waterbirds. Compared to that
of the clean data in Figure 4b, the weight distribution of the noisy data is more skewed towards 0
as shown in Figure 4c. In particular, almost all minority instances with noisy labels have close-to-0

                                                                                                                        Minority                                                Minority
                                                                                     80                                                                                                                                0.9
                                                                                                                            False                 80                                False
 Worst-group test accuracy


                             90
                                                                                                                            True                                                    True
                                                                                                                                                                                                worst-group accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.8

                                        Waterbirds                                   60                                                           60
                             85                                                                                                                                                                                        0.7
                                                                           Density


                                                                                                                                        Density


                                        CelebA
                                        MultiNLI                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                     40                                                           40
                             80         CivilComments                                                                                                                                                                                 wg acc val (val = target)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      wg acc test (val = target)
                             75                                                      20                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4            wg acc val (val ≠ target)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      wg acc test (val ≠ target)
                                                                                      0                                                            0                                                                   0.3
                                  0.0    0.1       0.2       0.3     0.4                  0.000   0.002   0.004 0.006   0.008   0.010               0.0000 0.0025 0.0050 0.0075 0.0100 0.0125                                0   20      40          60   80   100
                                        Held-out label noise level                                          Weights                                                  Weights                                                                  step


  (a) Label noise robustness                                                         (b) Clean data weights                                       (c) Noisy data weights                                                     (d) Val vs. test acc

Figure 4: In-depth study of our algorithm. In 4a, the worst-group test accuracy degrades slightly even
when up to 40% of the held-out set labels are corrupted. In 4b, most of the uncorrupted minority
samples received higher weight assignments than non-minority examples. In contrast, in 4c, the
corrupted minority instances are correctly assigned with close-to-0 weights. 4d shows the relationship
between validation and test worst-group accuracy on the CelebA dataset. It is important to have
separate target and validation sets. Otherwise, overfitting can easily occur.


                                                                                                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


weights, equivalent to being removed from the training set. Therefore, the efficacy of GSR can
be attributed to the property of automatically cleaning the training data via sample reweighting,
achieving a similar effect as other noisy label detection and removal approaches (Ghorbani & Zou,
2019; Wang et al., 2024b). GSR being robust to class label corruption has an important implication:
to improve the robustness to distribution shifts under a limited annotation budget, more efforts should
be dedicated to ensuring the quality of the target set.


6    R ELATED W ORK

Subpopulation shifts. Group labels are essential for training and evaluating machine learning
models under subpopulation shifts. Various approaches have been proposed to handle scenarios with
different levels of availability of group labels: fully known for all data splits (Deng et al., 2024;
Idrissi et al., 2022; Sagawa et al., 2019), partially known (Kirichenko et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021;
2022; Nam et al., 2022; Qiu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022), or completely
unknown (Han & Zou, 2024; LaBonte et al., 2024). In addition, Yang et al. (2023) comprehensively
studied the effectiveness of these approaches on a variety of benchmarks with unknown group labels
and demonstrated that optimizing for the worst class can be surprisingly effective for improving the
worst-group performance. Our approach falls into the category of learning with partial group labels
(from the validation set) and differs from most of the approaches by using group-labeled data for
sample reweighting instead of direct training.
Sample reweighting and implicit differentiation. Importance weighting is a classic paradigm
for learning under distribution shifts (Chen et al., 2025; Fang et al., 2020; 2023). The idea can
be further expanded to bilevel optimization of the sample weights and the model parameters (Ren
et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2022). These works on bilevel optimization focus on using truncated
backpropagation to circumvent the challenge of differentiating through the unrolled training trajectory.
Implicit differentiation is an alternative solution to the problem and has been applied to areas such
as hyperparameter optimization (Foo et al., 2007; Lorraine et al., 2020; Pedregosa, 2016), meta-
learning (Lee et al., 2019; Rajeswaran et al., 2019), generative modeling (Domke, 2012; Samuel &
Tappen, 2009), and fairness (Shui et al., 2022). In addition, Li & Liu (2022); Wang et al. (2024a) have
explored one-step (i.e., not iterative) sample reweighting via the influence function for algorithmic
fairness. Bae et al. (2022) shows an alternative derivation of the influence function via implicit
differentiation on the training set. In contrast to these works, we show the connection between the
influence function and bilevel optimization via implicit differentiation and devise an efficient scheme
to rigorously apply it iteratively for addressing subpopulation shifts.


7    C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

Motivated from the bilevel minimax objective, GSR utilizes the group-labeled data for fine-grained
reweighting of the training samples via a soft aggregation of the influence functions. It seamlessly
integrates with last-layer retraining, resulting in a lightweight and effective strategy for improving
group robustness. GSR also has the ability to automatically clean and guide the training of potentially
noisy datasets via sample reweighting. Our empirical analysis further supports the alternative training
paradigm that emphasizes the use of high-quality, group-labeled instances as the target set.
We identify several future research directions to further improve our method. Despite GSR achieving
competitive worst-group performance, it results in a decrease in mean performance. This trade-off
is common in efforts to improve group robustness (Chen et al., 2022). Additionally, our work is
based on the hypothesis that standard ERM learns sufficiently high-quality representations. Although
GSR test the limit of last-layer retraining, it does not directly improve the representation learning. To
mitigate the trade-off between the worst-group performance and the mean performance, enhancing
the quality of representations is still a critical step (Izmailov et al., 2022). To answer the question of
whether sample reweighting can improve the representation learning for the group robustness, it is
necessary to retrain more components of the model after obtaining the sample weights. Developing
more efficient strategies that jointly optimize the sample weights and deep model parameters may
offer more insights and advancements in tackling subpopulation shifts and beyond.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research/project is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore under its AI
Singapore Programme (AISG Award No: AISG2-PhD/2021-08-017[T]). This research is supported
by the National Research Foundation Singapore and the Singapore Ministry of Digital Development
and Innovation, National AI Group under the AI Visiting Professorship Programme (award number
AIVP-2024-001). This research is supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF), Prime
Minister’s Office, Singapore under its Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise
(CREATE) programme. The Mens, Manus, and Machina (M3S) is an interdisciplinary research
group (IRG) of the Singapore MIT Alliance for Research and Technology (SMART) centre. Jingtan
Wang is supported by the Institute for Infocomm Research of Agency for Science, Technology and
Research (A*STAR). We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and AC for the constructive
and helpful feedback.

R EFERENCES
Naman Agarwal, Brian Bullins, and Elad Hazan. Second-order stochastic optimization for machine
  learning in linear time. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(116):1–40, 2017.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Juhan Bae, Nathan Ng, Alston Lo, Marzyeh Ghassemi, and Roger B Grosse. If influence functions
  are the answer, then what is the question? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:17953–17967, 2022.
Lucas Beyer, Olivier J Hénaff, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiaohua Zhai, and Aäron van den Oord. Are
  we done with imagenet? arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07159, 2020.
Daniel Borkan, Lucas Dixon, Jeffrey Sorensen, Nithum Thain, and Lucy Vasserman. Nuanced metrics
  for measuring unintended bias with real data for text classification. In Companion Proceedings of
  the 2019 World Wide Web Conference, pp. 491–500, 2019.
Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Jonathon Byrd and Zachary Lipton. What is the effect of importance weighting in deep learning? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 872–881, 2019.
Yongqiang Chen, Kaiwen Zhou, Yatao Bian, Binghui Xie, Bingzhe Wu, Yonggang Zhang, Kaili Ma,
  Han Yang, Peilin Zhao, Bo Han, et al. Pareto invariant risk minimization: Towards mitigating
  the optimization dilemma in out-of-distribution generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07766,
  2022.
Zhiliang Chen, Gregory Kang Ruey Lau, Chuan-Sheng Foo, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Duet:
  Optimizing training data mixtures via feedback from unseen evaluation tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2502.00270, 2025.
R Dennis Cook and Sanford Weisberg. Residuals and influence in regression, 1982.
Yihe Deng, Yu Yang, Baharan Mirzasoleiman, and Quanquan Gu. Robust learning with progressive
  data expansion against spurious correlation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 36, 2024.
Justin Domke. Generic methods for optimization-based modeling. In International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 318–326. PMLR, 2012.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness through
  awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference, pp.
  214–226, 2012.
Tongtong Fang, Nan Lu, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Rethinking importance weighting for
  deep learning under distribution shift. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  11996–12007, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tongtong Fang, Nan Lu, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Generalizing importance weighting
  to a universal solver for distribution shift problems. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36:24171–24190, 2023.
Chuan-sheng Foo, Chuong B., and Andrew Ng. Efficient multiple hyperparameter learning for
  log-linear models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 20, 2007.
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel, Matthias
  Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature Machine
  Intelligence, 2(11):665–673, 2020.
Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2242–2251. PMLR, 2019.
Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel R Bowman,
  and Noah A Smith. Annotation artifacts in natural language inference data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.02324, 2018.
Yujin Han and Difan Zou. Improving group robustness on spurious correlation requires preciser
  group inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13815, 2024.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 770–778, 2016.
Katherine L Hermann, Hossein Mobahi, Thomas Fel, and Michael C Mozer. On the foundations of
  shortcut learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Badr Youbi Idrissi, Martin Arjovsky, Mohammad Pezeshki, and David Lopez-Paz. Simple data
  balancing achieves competitive worst-group-accuracy. In Conference on Causal Learning and
  Reasoning, pp. 336–351. PMLR, 2022.
Pavel Izmailov, Polina Kirichenko, Nate Gruver, and Andrew G Wilson. On feature learning in the
  presence of spurious correlations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  38516–38532, 2022.
Bingyi Kang, Saining Xie, Marcus Rohrbach, Zhicheng Yan, Albert Gordo, Jiashi Feng, and Yannis
  Kalantidis. Decoupling representation and classifier for long-tailed recognition. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Polina Kirichenko, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Last layer re-training is sufficient
  for robustness to spurious correlations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02937, 2022.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1885–1894. PMLR, 2017.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5637–5664, 2021.
Steven George Krantz and Harold R Parks. The implicit function theorem: history, theory, and
  applications. Springer Science & Business Media, 2002.
Tyler LaBonte, Vidya Muthukumar, and Abhishek Kumar. Towards last-layer retraining for group
  robustness with fewer annotations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 36, 2024.
Kwonjoon Lee, Subhransu Maji, Avinash Ravichandran, and Stefano Soatto. Meta-learning with
 differentiable convex optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10657–10665, 2019.
Peizhao Li and Hongfu Liu. Achieving fairness at no utility cost via data reweighing with influence.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12917–12930. PMLR, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Weixin Liang and James Zou. Metashift: A dataset of datasets for evaluating contextual distribution
 shifts and training conflicts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06523, 2022.
Dong C Liu and Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory bfgs method for large scale optimization.
 Mathematical programming, 45(1):503–528, 1989.
Evan Z Liu, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie S Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa,
  Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Just train twice: Improving group robustness without training
  group information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6781–6792, 2021.
Sheng Liu, Xu Zhang, Nitesh Sekhar, Yue Wu, Prateek Singhal, and Carlos Fernandez-Granda.
  Avoiding spurious correlations via logit correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.01433, 2022.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3730–3738, 2015.
Jonathan Lorraine, Paul Vicol, and David Duvenaud. Optimizing millions of hyperparameters by
  implicit differentiation. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  1540–1552. PMLR, 2020.
Vaishnavh Nagarajan, Anders Andreassen, and Behnam Neyshabur. Understanding the failure modes
  of out-of-distribution generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15775, 2020.
Junhyun Nam, Jaehyung Kim, Jaeho Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Spread spurious attribute: Improving
  worst-group accuracy with spurious attribute estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02070, 2022.
Guoshun Nan, Rui Qiao, Yao Xiao, Jun Liu, Sicong Leng, Hao Zhang, and Wei Lu. Interventional
 video grounding with dual contrastive learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2765–2775, 2021.
Fabian Pedregosa. Hyperparameter optimization with approximate gradient. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 737–746. PMLR, 2016.
Rui Qiao and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Understanding domain generalization: A noise robustness
  perspective. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Shikai Qiu, Andres Potapczynski, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Simple and fast group
  robustness by automatic feature reweighting. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 28448–28467. PMLR, 2023.
Aravind Rajeswaran, Chelsea Finn, Sham M Kakade, and Sergey Levine. Meta-learning with implicit
  gradients. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Mengye Ren, Wenyuan Zeng, Bin Yang, and Raquel Urtasun. Learning to reweight examples for
 robust deep learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4334–4343. PMLR,
 2018.
Elan Rosenfeld, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Andrej Risteski. Domain-adjusted regression or: ERM
  may already learn features sufficient for out-of-distribution generalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.06856, 2022.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08731, 2019.
Shiori Sagawa, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang. An investigation of why
  overparameterization exacerbates spurious correlations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04345, 2020.
Kegan G. G. Samuel and Marshall F. Tappen. Learning optimized MAP estimates in continuously-
  valued mrf models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 477–484, 2009.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Ralf Herbrich, and Alex J Smola. A generalized representer theorem. In
  International Conference on Computational Learning Theory, pp. 416–426. Springer, 2001.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Amirreza Shaban, Ching-An Cheng, Nathan Hatch, and Byron Boots. Truncated back-propagation
 for bilevel optimization. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
 1723–1732. PMLR, 2019.
Harshay Shah, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. The
  pitfalls of simplicity bias in neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 9573–9585, 2020.
Changjian Shui, Qi Chen, Jiaqi Li, Boyu Wang, and Christian Gagné. Fair representation learning
  through implicit path alignment. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 20156–
  20175. PMLR, 2022.
C. Wah, S.Branson, P. Welinder, P. Perona, and S. Belongie. The caltech-ucsd birds-200-2011 dataset.
  California Institute of Technology, 2011.
Haonan Wang, Ziwei Wu, and Jingrui He. Fairif: Boosting fairness in deep learning via influ-
  ence functions with validation set sensitive attributes. In Proceedings of the ACM International
  Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 721–730, 2024a.
Jingtan Wang, Xiaoqiang Lin, Rui Qiao, Chuan-Sheng Foo, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Helpful
   or harmful data? fine-tuning-free shapley attribution for explaining language model predictions.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04606, 2024b.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for
  sentence understanding through inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.05426, 2017.
Yuzhe Yang, Haoran Zhang, Dina Katabi, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Change is hard: A closer look at
  subpopulation shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Bianca Zadrozny. Learning and evaluating classifiers under sample selection bias. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 114, 2004.
Runtian Zhai, Chen Dan, Zico Kolter, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Understanding why generalized
  reweighting does not improve over ERM. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12293, 2022.
Michael Zhang, Nimit S Sohoni, Hongyang R Zhang, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher Ré. Correct-n-
 contrast: A contrastive approach for improving robustness to spurious correlations. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2203.01517, 2022.
Xiao Zhou, Yong Lin, Renjie Pi, Weizhong Zhang, Renzhe Xu, Peng Cui, and Tong Zhang. Model
  agnostic sample reweighting for out-of-distribution learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 27203–27221. PMLR, 2022.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     D ERIVATIONS AND P ROOFS
A.1    D ERIVATION OF THE JACOBIAN OF THE G RADIENT W. R . T. THE S AMPLE W EIGHTS

The derivative of ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ) w.r.t. individual sample weights wi is:
                                                           X
                      ∇wi ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ) = ∇wi ∇θ             wj ℓ(xtrj , yjtr ; θ)
                                                               j∈1,...,|D tr |
                                                               X
                                                 = ∇w i                     wj ∇θ ℓ(xtrj , yjtr ; θ)
                                                          j∈1,...,|D tr |

                                                 = ∇θ ℓ(xtri , yitr ; θ)
                                                 = ∇θ R̂(zi ; θT ) .                                                   (10)

A.2    D ERIVATION OF L AST- STEP G RADIENT (MAPLE (Z HOU ET AL ., 2022))

According to MAPLE’s one-step truncated backpropagation, the gradient descent updates before
θT −1 are truncated, so that θT −1 is a “constant” and is independent of w. Thus, it is true that
∇wi θT −1 = 0, but not for ∇wi θT . Recall that for simplicity, we use the notation ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θT )
for ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ)          . We show that Equation 2 can be derived as follows:
                        θ=θT

        ∇wi θ̂∗ ≈ ∇wi θT

                ≈ ∇wi θT −1 − η∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θT −1 )                                                  (One-step truncation)

                ≈ ∇wi θT −1 − η∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θT )
                               (θT ≈ θT −1 on convergence, so ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θT ) ≈ ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θT −1 ))
                = 0 − η∇wi ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θT )                (∇wi θT −1 = 0 because of one-step truncation)
                = −η∇θ R̂(zi ; θT ) .                                                                  (Apply Equation 10)

A.3    D ERIVATION OF M ETA - GRADIENT U PDATE

We utilize the technique of implicit differentiation. Upon convergence to an optimal solution, the
inner problem has the property of ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ ) = 0. By first differentiating w.r.t. w on both sides
of the equation, then followed by the chain rule, we have the following derivations:
                   d0   d∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ )
                      =
                   dw          dw
                        d∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ )
                     0=
                               dw
                        ∂∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ ) ∂∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ ) dθ̂∗
                     0=                       +                                                                (Chain-rule)
                               ∂w                   ∂ θ̂∗           dw
                                                                                   dθ̂∗
                        0 = ∇w ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ ) + ∇2θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ )
                                                                                   dw
                   dθ̂∗                           −1
                        = − ∇2θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ )     ∇w ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ )
                   dw
                   dθ̂∗
                        = −Hθ̂−1
                               ∗ ,w
                                    ∇w ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ ) .
                   dw
For each sample weight wi :
                                    dθ̂∗
                                         = −Hθ̂−1
                                                ∗ ,w
                                                     ∇wi ∇θ R̂(Dtr ; w, θ̂∗ )
                                    dwi
                                         = −Hθ̂−1
                                                ∗ ,w
                                                     R̂(zi ; θT ) .                                    (Apply Equation 10)


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4    P ROOF OF THE S TRONG C ONVEXITY OF L INEAR C LASSIFICATION WITH
       C ROSS - ENTROPY L OSS AND ℓ2 -R EGULARIZATION

In this section, we add the complete proof for the established result of the strong convexity (a subset
of strict convexity) of linear classification with cross-entropy loss and ℓ2 -regularization. Before
introducing the complete proof, a shortcut intuitive proof for this consists of the following steps:

1. Linear classification with cross-entropy loss is convex, and its Hessian H is positive semi-definite,
   implying H ⪰ 0.
2. Adding ℓ2 -regularization with a positive regularization strength λ > 0 produces a new Hessian
   H ′ = H + λI ⪰ λI, which meets the definition of strong convexity (Definition A.1).

We now present a complete proof of the result of the strong convexity by directly showing the H ′ in
Theorem A.6.
Definition A.1 (µ-Strong convexity (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004)). For µ > 0, a differentiable
function f is µ-strongly convex if for some µ > 0, ∇2 f (x) ⪰ µI.
Definition A.2 (One-hot Vector). For a dimension d, u(i) ∈ {0, 1}d , u(i) = 1 is the one-hot
                                                                       P
vector with i-th dimension u(i)i = 1. We omit d in the following context for simplicity.
Definition A.3 (Softmax). Given the input x ∈ Rd , define the softmax function σ : Rd → Rd as:
                                                     exi
                                            σ(x)i = P xi .
                                                      ie


Its derivative ∇x σ(x) ∈ Rd×d has the form:

                                 ∇x σ(x) = diag(σ(x)) − σ(x)σ(x)⊤ .                                  (11)
In addition,
                                     ∇x σ(x)i = σ(x)i (u(i) − σ(x)) ,                                (12)
                     d
                         P
where u(i) ∈ {0, 1} ,        u(i) = 1 is the one-hot vector with i-th dimension u(i)i = 1.
Proposition A.4. The first-order derivative matrix ∇x σ(x) of the softmax function is positive
semidefinite.

Proof.PFirst σ(x) defines a probability distribution. Hence, it has the property that σ(x)i ≥
0 ∀i, i σ(x)i = 1. Then according to the definition of positive semidefiniteness: ∀z ∈ Rd , z ̸= 0:

                          z ⊤ ∇x σ(x)z = z ⊤ (diag(σ(x)) − σ(x)σ(x)⊤ )z
                                         = z ⊤ diag(σ(x))z − z ⊤ σ(x)σ(x)⊤ z
                                           X                  X
                                         =      σ(x)i zi2 − (   σ(x)i zi )2
                                             i                 i
                                         ≥0.                                         (Cauchy-Schwartz)



Definition A.5 (Cross-entropy). Given the input z ∈ Rd , y ∈ {1, . . . , K} for a K-way classification
problem, define the cross entropy loss L:
                                                  K
                                                  X
                                   CE(z, y) = −         I[y = k] log zi ,
                                                    k

where I is the indicator function.
Theorem A.6 (Strong convexity of cross-entropy loss with ℓ2 -regularization). For multi-class linear
classification with cross-entropy loss, if ℓ2 -regularization with positive coefficient λ is applied, then
the objective is λ-strongly convex.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Let x ∈ R, y ∈ {1, . . . , K} denote the input, label of a K-way classification task. Let
ψ ∈ Rd×K denote the linear model parameters. Let u(y) denote the one-hot representation of y. The
objective function using cross-entropy loss and ℓ2 -regularization is:
                                                          λ
                       L(x, y; ψ) = CE(σ(ψ ⊤ x), y) +       ∥ψ∥22
                                                          2
                                        K
                                        X                              λ
                                   =−          I[y = k] log σ(ψ ⊤ x)k + ∥ψ∥22
                                                                       2
                                           k
                                                      λ
                                   = − log σ(ψ ⊤ x)y + ∥ψ∥22 .
                                                      2
The first-order derivative:
                                    1                                ⊤
          ∇ψ L(x, y; ψ) = −x               σ(ψ ⊤ x)y u(y) − σ(ψ ⊤ x) + λψ                (Equation 12)
                               σ(ψ ⊤ x)y
                         = x(σ(ψ ⊤ x) − u(y))⊤ + λψ .

The second-order derivative (Hessian):
              H = ∇2ψ L(x, y; ψ)
                  ∂x(σ(ψ ⊤ x) − u(y))⊤
                 =                      + λId×k
                            ∂ψ
                    ∂σ(ψ ⊤ x)⊤
                 =x            + λId×k
                       ∂ψ
                    ∂σ(ψ ⊤ x)⊤ ∂ψ ⊤ x
                 =x                   + λId×k
                     ∂(ψ ⊤ x)   ∂ψ
                 = x[x(diag(σ(ψ ⊤ x)) − σ(ψ ⊤ x)σ(ψ ⊤ x)⊤ )]⊤ + λId×k                    (Equation 11)
                 = x diag(σ(ψ ⊤ x)) − σ(ψ ⊤ x)σ(ψ ⊤ x)⊤ x⊤ + λId×k .



Then we show that the Hessian of L meets the requirement of λ-strong convexity, i.e., H − λI ⪰ 0,
∀z ∈ Rd×k , z ̸= 0:
  z ⊤ (H − λId×k )z = z ⊤ x diag(σ(ψ ⊤ x)) − σ(ψ ⊤ x)σ(ψ ⊤ x)⊤ x⊤ z + z ⊤ (λId×k − λId×k )z


                    = z ⊤ x diag(σ(ψ ⊤ x)) − σ(ψ ⊤ x)σ(ψ ⊤ x)⊤ x⊤ z


                      ≥0.                                                            (Proposition A.4)


Hence, L is strongly convex according to Definition A.1.


B     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
B.1   S ETUP

For model architectures and initialization, we use ImageNet-pretrained ResNet-50 (V1) (He et al.,
2016) for Waterbirds and CelebA datasets, and use BERT (HuggingFace) for MultiNLI and Civil-
Comments. The MNLI dataset is preprocessed according to the setup in https://github.com/
kohpangwei/group_DROBertTokenizer. The CivilComment dataset is tokenized with Bert-
Tokenizer with max_seq_length=300. For all experiments, we perform 5 independent runs on seed [1,
2, 3, 4, 5] to obtain the mean and the standard deviations.

B.2   H YPERPARAMETERS

For all experiments, we fix the held-out fraction α as 10% and fix the resulting partition splits (i.e.,
the held-out set and the remaining set) of the training set Dtr , which are generated by setting the


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


numpy random seed to 1. Although additionally tuning the held-out fraction α and changing the
split can most likely improve the worst-group performance by balancing the data for representation
learning and sample reweighting, we do not alter these splits for better consistency and only focus on
the second sample reweighting stage of the training.
For stage 1, we use almost the same hyperparameters as used by DFR (some are slightly altered for
better consistency and simplicity by heuristics without any tuning) and record them in Table 2.
For stage 2, there are two sets of hyperparameters for the inner and the outer loops. We perform
a non-exhaustive search by randomly sampling the combination of hyperparameters from the grid.
We select the best-performing model checkpoints and hyperparameter configurations based on the
worst-group validation accuracy. The selected hyperparameter configurations are documented in
Tables 3 and 4 for the outer loop and the inner loop respectively. Besides, we consistently apply
weight normalization (to ensure the sum of weights equals one) and a step learning rate scheduler
(StepLR), which decays the outer learning rate by a factor of 10 every 30 steps. This facilitates a
better convergence for the bilevel optimization.

Table 2: Hyperparameters for base model training. For Waterbirds and CelebA, we use almost
the same hyperparameters as used by DFR. We slightly change the hyperparameters on MNLI and
CivilComments (without any tuning) so that no learning rate scheduler is used. Momentum is set as
0.9 for SGD.

          Dataset        optimizer      lr       scheduler    batch size   weight decay    epochs
        Waterbirds         SGD         1e-3      Constant         32           1e-3         100
          CelebA           SGD         1e-3      Constant        128           1e-4          50
         MultiNLI        AdamW         2e-5      Constant         32           1e-4           4
      CivilComments      AdamW         2e-5      Constant         32           1e-4          4


Table 3: Hyperparameters for sample weight updates (outer loop). For the step learning rate scheduler
(StepLR), we simply decay the learning rate by a factor of 10 every 30 steps.

                Dataset           optimizer      lr    scheduler   grad clip     τ     steps
              Waterbirds             GD          1      StepLR        1         0.1     100
                CelebA               GD          1      StepLR       1e-2      0.01     100
               MultiNLI              GD         0.1     StepLR       1e-2        1       50
            CivilComments            GD          1      StepLR       1e-1       0.1      50


                   Table 4: Hyperparameters for last-layer retraining (inner loop)

      Dataset         optimizer      lr       scheduler    batch size   weight decay     line search
    Waterbirds        L-BFGS        1e-4      Constant        full          1e-1        Strong Wolfe
      CelebA          L-BFGS        1e-4      Constant        full          1e-2        Strong Wolfe
     MultiNLI         L-BFGS        1e-4      Constant        full          1e-2        Strong Wolfe
  CivilComments       L-BFGS        1e-1      Constant        full          1e-3        Strong Wolfe


B.3   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Let d denote the dimension of θ. Let the size of the held-out training set be n here. To efficiently
compute the influence scores of the samples for last-layer retraining, we adopt the following strategy:

      1. Calculate the Hessian inverse Hθ̂−1
                                           ∗ ,w
                                                of the weighted objective w.r.t. θ = θ̂∗ . The Hessian
         has a dimension of d × d.
      2. Calculate the per-sample gradient of the unweighted objective w.r.t. θ = θ̂∗ for the training
         set. This results in a n × d matrix.
      3. Calculate the per-group gradient of the unweighted objective w.r.t. θ = θ̂∗ for the target set.
         This results in a m × d matrix, where m is the number of groups.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By combining these three matrices, we obtain the group-wise influence scores as a n × m matrix,
which can then be aggregated as in Algorithm 1 and become an n × 1 gradient vector.

B.4    RUNNING T IME C OMPARISON

Hardware. For all experiments, we run on machines with NVIDIA RTX 3080 (10GB) / RTX A5000
(24GB) GPU and AMD EPYC 7543 CPU.
Running time. We record the detailed running time for both the inner and the outer loop for different
datasets in Table 5. The results are obtained from running a single job on one NVIDIA RTX 3080
GPU with two AMD EPYC 7543 CPUs.
                                   Table 5: Running time for GSR

                                     Dataset stats                        Running time (s)
       Dataset
                     Held-out size     Target size    # of steps   Outer loop Inner loop       Total
      Waterbirds         479               600           100         2.71         0.16          285
        CelebA          16277             9934           100         4.03         0.52          451
       MultiNLI         20617            46231            50         7.24         0.53          381
    CivilComments       26903            22590           50          8.21          0.7         882

Scalability. As we used Pytorch for our implementation and the last-layer retraining has very
few parameters, the per-sample gradient and the Hessian inverse calculation involves high CPU
usage, even though the tensors are on GPU. When the same processes are running in parallel, the
performance sometimes can be CPU-bound instead of GPU-bound. Thus, the running time is likely
to increase when the CPU-usage is high.

B.5    D ETAILED R ESULTS

In addition to the worst-group accuracy shown in the main paper, we also report the mean accuracy
for these datasets in Table 6 for reference. We would like to highlight that the worst-group accuracy
gain is usually at the expense of the mean accuracy. This implies that trade-offs generally need to
be made for better robustness to subpopulation shifts, since the mean accuracy corresponds to an
estimation of the model’s performance when there is no distribution shift.

C     U NDERSTANDING THE ROLE OF THE I NVERSE H ESSIAN
Koh & Liang (2017) analyzed that the inverse Hessian measures the robustness of the resultant
model to upweighting the training data. As Hessian is a symmetric matrix, according to the Spectral
Theorem, it guarantees the existence of an orthonormal basis of the eigenvectors. Hence, the gradient
can be written as a linear combination of eigenvectors. As the influence function utilizes the inverse
Hessian, which has the reciprocal of the eigenvalues of the Hessian, the influence score has a larger
magnitude when the gradient of the training and test points are similar and along the direction of the
eigenvectors with smaller magnitudes.
Having smaller eigenvalues can be interpreted as the first-order gradient changing relatively slowly.
From the optimization perspective (Newton’s method), this usually means we are allowed to take
larger gradient steps when the trajectory has less variation with a smoother curvature. On the other
hand, the allowed step size becomes smaller when the curvature changes more quickly, indicating a
more complex loss landscape.
If the Hessian is dropped in between the inner product of the gradient as in Equation 2 (used by
MAPLE), then we fail to account for the variations of step sizes in different directions specified by
the eigenvectors. Thus, the outer loop gradient becomes incorrect and the optimization will be less
reliable.

D     V ISUALIZATION OF THE S PURIOUS C ORRELATIONS
We show an illustration of the spurious correlations for the Waterbirds dataset in Figure 5.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Performance comparison in detail. We report the worst-group accuracy on four benchmark
datasets. For the group label column, ✗ indicates no group label g is used; ✓ indicates g is required


                                 –
for training or validation; ✓ indicates g is partially used; ✓✓ indicates a proportion of g from the
validation set is re-purposed beyond hyperparameter tuning, such as training sample weights or model
parameters. The row sections are ranked in descending order of the total amount of group label
information required.

             Group Label        Waterbirds                            CelebA                   MultiNLI           CivilComments
    Method
              Train / Val   Worst(%) Mean(%)                    Worst(%) Mean(%)          Worst(%) Mean(%)      Worst(%) Mean(%)
   RWG          ✓/ ✓        87.6±1.6                 −          84.3±1.8      −           69.6±1.0      −       72.0±1.9      −
 Group DRO      ✓/ ✓        91.4±1.1              93.5±0.3      88.9±2.3   92.9±0.2       77.7±1.4   81.4±0.1   70.0±2.0   89.9±0.5
    JTT         ✗/ ✓          86.7                  93.3          81.1       88.0           72.6       78.6       69.3       91.1
    CnC         ✗/ ✓        88.5±0.3              90.9±0.1      88.8±0.9   89.9±0.5          −          −       68.9±2.1   81.7±0.5
    SSA         ✗/ ✓✓       89.0±0.6              92.2±0.9      89.8±1.3   92.8±0.1       76.6±0.7   79.9±0.9   69.9±2.0   88.2±2.0
  MAPLE         ✗/ ✓✓         91.7                  92.9          88.0       89.0           72.7       77.2       64.1       89.7
    DFR         ✗/ ✓✓       92.9±0.2              94.2±0.4      88.3±1.1   91.3±0.3       74.7±0.7   82.1±0.2   70.1±0.8   87.2±0.3
  GSR-HF        ✗/ ✓✓       87.5±0.1              97.7±0.0      86.3±0.4   91.5±0.0       74.7±0.0   80.6±0.0   68.9±0.2   89.1±0.0
    GSR         ✗/ ✓✓       92.9±0.0              94.9±0.1      87.0±0.4   90.9±0.0       78.5±0.3   79.8±0.0   71.7±0.6   85.9±0.4
    ERM          ✗/ ✗       74.9±2.4              98.1±0.1      46.9±2.8   95.3±0.0       65.9±0.3   82.8±0.1   55.6±0.6   92.1±0.1
  ES SELF        ✗/ ✗       93.0±0.3              94.0±1.7      83.9±0.9   91.7±0.4       70.7±2.5   81.2±0.7      −          −


                                                                background
                                                         land             water
                                      landbird
                              class


                                                     3498 samples          184 samples
                                      waterbird


                                                      56 samples           1057 samples


Figure 5: An illustration of the Waterbirds dataset. A spurious correlation exists between the bird
class and the background. The majority groups are highlighted in orange. The minority groups are in
gray.


E     W HAT IF W E C AN R ETRAIN THE F ULL N ETWORK WITH GSR?
In this section, we use a simple setup to explore the potential of retraining the full network with GSR,
when the compute budget allows.
Setup. We conduct an ablation study on a small binary classification task customized from the
ColoredMNIST, where the digits are spuriously correlated with color. We use a tiny Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) with 3 layers and about 5000 parameters.
Dataset. ColoredMNIST-S. We modify the original ColoredMNIST dataset (Arjovsky et al., 2019) by
first taking only the first 6 digits out of all 10 digits, then assigning y < 3 as 0 and y ≥ 3 as 1. The
training, validation, and test splits have 10000, 2000, and 27375 instances, respectively. The spurious
correlation γ is created by associating most of the instances in class 0 with red color and class 1 with
green color. We set γ = 0.1 for the training split and set γ = 0.5 for the validation and test splits.
we do not introduce any label corruption. This setting is considered much simpler than the original
ColoredMNIST, primarily because we are studying with limited network capacity with a tiny CNN,
which could not fit the original 10-digit classification with more than 90% accuracy.
Baselines. We compare GSR, which is by default trained with last-layer retraining, with the full-
parameter retraining variants. GSR-HF discards the Hessian, which is equivalent to MAPLE+LLR.
GSR-F-EH retrains the entire network with the influence function and no approximation on the


                                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Table 7: Performance comparison on ColoredMNIST-S Dataset with TinyCNN.

                                     ColoredMNIST-S
                      Method                                  Wall-Clock Time
                                    Worst(%) Mean(%)
                    GSR-F-EH          94.1          96.0              400
                    GSR-F-AH          80.2          97.6               45
                    GSR-F-HF          91.9          96.9               42
                       GSR            91.2          95.4             4+0.8
                     GSR-HF           91.1          96.2             4+0.7
                      ERM             81.2          97.7               4

Table 8: Running time and memory consumption of full-parameter retraining on Waterbirds dataset
with ResNet-50.

                   Approach            Time (One-iteration)     VRAM Consumption
                Explicit Hessian              >18h                   2PB
               Conjugate Gradients             18h                   9GB
                     LiSSA                    3.6h                   9GB


Hessian. We use Conjugate Gradients to calculate the inverse Hessian-vector product (iHVP) instead
of explicitly calculating the Hessian to save the memory. GSR-F-AH approximates the Hessian
using LiSSA (Agarwal et al., 2017) with depth=1000 and repeat=1. This approximation calculates
the iHVP with 1000 samples from the training set. GSR-F-HF which discards the Hessian, and this
uses the sample gradients as MAPLE.
The results are shown in Table 7. we can observe that. Full-parameter retraining with Hessian (i.e.,
GSR-F-EH) is advantageous over all other approaches. However, approximating the Hessian with
low quality might hurt the performance, since GSR-F-AH underperforms other baselines. When
using a small neural network model, last-layer retraining (LLR) can experience slight performance
degradation compared to retraining the whole model on the entire dataset (since we have the capacity
to do so), but it is still significantly better than ERM. Overall, these results suggest that we should
consider full-parameter retraining when we have the capacity, and LLR is an efficient and effective
approximation to it.

E.1   C HALLENGES OF S CALING UP F ULL - PARAMETER R ETRAINING WITH GSR

When scaling up full-parameter retraining to more realistic datasets with larger networks, the com-
putational challenges for accurately calculating the sample weight gradients are indeed the major
obstacle here because of the Hessian. Let n be the number of data points and p be the number of
parameters. Directly calculating the Hessian for the whole network is both computationally expensive
O(np2 + p3 ) and memory bottlenecked O(p2 ). In particular, the Hessian of a simple neural network
with 1M parameters takes 4TB of memory, and ResNet-50 has 23M trainable parameters. Alterna-
tively, we can calculate the inverse Hessian-vector product (iHVP) to reduce the memory requirements
to O(p) and the time complexity to O(np2 ), but it is still time-consuming, unless we apply further
approximations. Table 8 shows the computational challenges of performing full-parameter retraining
with GSR on the Waterbirds dataset.
It will be extremely costly to perform the experiments that optimize the sample weights for a
few iterations (e.g., 50 iterations, as done with LLR). Besides, as shown in the previous ablation
study, training the full network with crudely approximated Hessian (using LiSSA) causes inaccurate
gradient estimation and may even hurt the performance. We believe these technical challenges require
extensive exploration in future works and are beyond the scope of this paper.

F     C OMPARISON WITH MAPLE

Although the difference seems to be only about the Hessian, GSR and MAPLE are based on two
distinct ways to solve the bilevel optimization problem.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Table 9: Performance comparison on MetaShift.

                                                  MetaShift
                                 Method
                                             Worst(%) Mean(%)
                                   GSR       78.2±4.0      87.9±4.1
                                   DFR       71.4±1.6      89.7±0.2
                                   ERM         69.2          90.3

Table 10: Performance comparison on modified datasets where the spurious correlations are extremely
strong so that the original minority groups no longer exist.

                                       Waterbirds-           MNLI-
                            GSR      87.8±0.1 (−5.1)     74.2±0.1 (−4.3)
                            DFR      89.1±0.5 (−3.8)     66.9±0.2 (−7.8)
                            ERM       32.6(−42.3)          9.0(−56.9)


      1. MAPLE directly approximates backpropagating through the training trajectory by one-step
         truncation, but GSR uses implicit differentiation that results in the Hessian. This calculation
         is exact when the objective is strongly convex.
      2. GSR also synergies with last-layer retraining, which was not considered by MAPLE.
      3. We use an adaptive aggregation of the influence scores from the groups as the gradient, but
         MAPLE does not explicitly design group-level aggregation for subpopulation shifts.
      4. MAPLE additionally uses coreset selection by training on a subset of all the training data
         in each step to speed up the training, while GSR utilizes the full training data without
         approximation.

G     A DDITIONAL DATASET FOR S UBPOPULATION S HIFT
To further demonstrate the advantage of GSR, we include an additional experiment with the
MetaShift (Liang & Zou, 2022) image classification dataset. We use the two-class version im-
plemented by Yang et al. (2023), where the spurious correlation exists between the class and the
background. In particular, cats are mostly indoors and dogs are mostly outdoors. We primarily
compare with DFR, which uses the same amount of group labels and the same ERM feature extractor
as ours. The ERM model is trained for 100 epochs without early stopping or hyperparameter tuning.
GSR outperforms DFR convincingly in this case as shown in Table 9.

H     A DDITIONAL E MPIRICAL S TUDY
H.1   W HAT IF THE ERM- LEARNED R EPRESENTATIONS ARE I NSUFFICIENT ?

To simulate the situation where ERM fails to learn sufficiently good representations, we deliberately
remove the minority groups from the training data that are used for representation learning, then
followed by GSR or DFR with LLR. We experimented with two modified datasets: Waterbirds-
and MNLI-, where the spurious correlations are more severe (≈ 1). We only compare with DFR,
because other baselines (such as JTT, Group DRO) will not work since they cannot use the minority-
group data from training. We report the change in performance in Table 10 (the number in brackets
indicates the performance change compared to learning the representations with the minority groups).
Clearly, when the representation quality degrades, the performance drops across different methods.
In particular, ERM performs much worse than random guesses for the worst group. Nonetheless,
some useful representations are still learned and can be efficiently utilized by last-layer retraining
guided by some minority data.


                                                  22
