Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ATOM S URF : S URFACE R EPRESENTATION FOR
L EARNING ON P ROTEIN S TRUCTURES

Vincent Mallet∗,1,2,3,4 , Souhaib Attaiki∗,1 , Yangyang Miao∗,5 , Bruno Correia5 , Maks Ovsjanikov1
                                         ∗
                                           Equal Contribution
                        1
                           LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IPP Paris, Paris, France
                    2
                      Mines Paris, PSL Research University, CBIO, Paris, France
                       3
                         Institut Curie, PSL Research University, Paris, France
                                   4
                                     INSERM, U900, Paris, France
 5
   Institute of Bioengineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
     vincent.mallet@minesparis.psl.eu maks@lix.polytechnique.fr



                                             A BSTRACT
         While there has been significant progress in evaluating and comparing different
         representations for learning on protein data, the role of surface-based learning
         approaches remains not well-understood. In particular, there is a lack of direct
         and fair benchmark comparison between the best available surface-based learning
         methods against alternative representations such as graphs. Moreover, the few
         existing surface-based approaches either use surface information in isolation or, at
         best, perform global pooling between surface and graph-based architectures.
         In this work, we fill this gap by first adapting a state-of-the-art surface encoder
         for protein learning tasks. We then perform a direct and fair comparison of the
         resulting method against alternative approaches within the Atom3D benchmark,
         highlighting the limitations of pure surface-based learning. Finally, we propose
         an integrated approach, which allows learned feature sharing between graphs and
         surface representations on the level of nodes and vertices across all layers.
         We demonstrate that the resulting architecture achieves state-of-the-art results on all
         tasks in the Atom3D benchmark, while adhering to the strict benchmark protocol, as
         well as more broadly on binding site identification and binding pocket classification.
         Furthermore, we use coarsened surfaces and optimize our approach for efficiency,
         making our tool competitive in training and inference time with existing techniques.
         Code can be found online: github.com/Vincentx15/atomsurf


1   I NTRODUCTION
Structural bioinformatics data is becoming available at an unprecedented pace. Advances in cryogenic
Electron Microscopy (cryo-EM) in particular, have led to the production of evermore experimentally
derived structures, as well as larger systems and better resolutions (Fontana et al., 2022). The
development of AlphaFold (Jumper et al., 2021) along with many subsequent works have made
protein structures abundantly available, with over a million high-quality predictions in the Protein
Data Bank (PDB) (Berman, 2000) and over 600 million in the ESM Metagenomic Atlas (ESMatlas)
(Lin et al., 2022). There is thus a growing demand for machine learning techniques which can
leverage this structural data to help advance the fields of structural bioinformatics and drug design.
Protein structures are complex objects characterized both by atomic coordinates as well as intricate
bio-chemical interactions between them that depend on their geometry. To be used in a learning
pipeline, an initial modeling step transforming protein structures into a well-defined mathematical
object is necessary. Different mathematical representations encode different structural and biological
priors. For instance, the point cloud representation disregards the connectivity induced by chemical
interactions, but allows for the most generic geometric description of the data. Protein surfaces
choose to trade fine-grained information of the interior of a protein for an accurate depiction of its
outer surface. This representation is thought to be of particular interest to study active interaction


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


sites that mostly depend on properties of the surface because of the screening effect. However, even
for interactions dominated by surface terms, the knowledge of the interior can encode the stability of
the surface. These different representations are illustrated in Supplementary Figure 1.
The choice of representation is particularly prominent in the context of learning-based methods, as
specialized architectures have been developed to process each type of data. The range of approaches
is studied within the field of geometric deep learning (Bronstein et al., 2017), and specialized methods
have been developed to process different data types from graphs (Bruna et al., 2013; Kipf & Welling,
2016), to point clouds (Qi et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019), surfaces (Masci et al., 2015; Monti et al.,
2017), equivariant methods that respect a group symmetry of the data (Cohen & Welling, 2016a;b),
equivariant message passing (Fuchs et al., 2020; Satorras et al., 2021) and more.
A few pioneering works have applied geometric deep learning to structural biology data representa-
tions, using 3D convolutional networks (Jiménez et al., 2017), equivariant convolutional networks
(Weiler et al., 2018), sequence (Rao et al., 2021), surfaces (Gainza et al., 2020), graphs (Aumentado-
Armstrong, 2018) and equivariant discrete networks (Jing et al., 2021; Stärk et al., 2022). They were
followed by several others, traditionally classified based on the mathematical representation they use
- see for instance Isert et al. (2023). In addition, some methods were developed ad-hock to handle
protein structure, where protein properties are baked into the network (Zhang et al., 2022; Hermosilla
et al., 2020; Fan et al., 2022).
In this context, the seminal work of Atom3d (Townshend et al., 2020) aims for a fair compari-
son across both different representations and learning approaches, within a well-defined protocol.
Specifically the benchmark includes a set of nine benchmark tasks for three-dimensional molecular
structures and establishes a consistent set of input features and parameter count to be used across all
tested methods. The authors also compare different representations by evaluating neural networks
based on 3D grids, graphs, and equivariant networks on the proposed tasks.
Beyond using a single representation for proteins, the simultaneous representation of a protein as
several mathematical objects holds promise. Indeed, different representations encode different biolog-
ical priors of the data and present different computational advantages. A well-studied combination
is the use of sequence information along with a graph representation of the structure. For instance,
in Hermosilla et al. (2020); Fan et al. (2022) the authors enrich the graph with additional edge
types that encode the sequence. Another way to include sequence information in a graph, is to use
sequence embeddings, especially ones derived from protein language models and hence benefiting
from the large amounts of available sequence data (Wu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). Finally, some
approaches include information derived from protein structures in the training of protein language
models (Bepler & Berger, 2019; Heinzinger et al., 2023; Su et al., 2023).



2    M OTIVATION AND C ONTRIBUTION

Despite this recent progress in comparing different representations for learning on protein data,
relatively less focus has been given to surface-based representations, even though they have shown
promising results in several applications (Gainza et al., 2020; Sverrisson et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2023). Approaches based on the surface representation have typically followed the initial MaSIF
paper validation (Gainza et al., 2020), and hence have never been directly compared to other
representations in the context of a single well-established benchmark. At the same time, powerful
surface-based encoders have recently been proposed in the geometry processing/computer graphics
literature, such as DiffusionNet (Sharp et al., 2022) significantly outperforming, in terms of both
robustness and accuracy, the early Geodesic-CNN based techniques (Masci et al., 2015; Monti et al.,
2017) which formed the basis of (Gainza et al., 2020). Unfortunately, it is not currently known how
the best currently available surface-based encoders compare to other learning-based paradigms in the
protein analysis tasks (e.g., on the Atom3d benchmark).
We fill this gap by first adapting the current state-of-the-art surface-based learning architecture to
protein analysis tasks. We then perform the first fair and comprehensive comparison of a pure
surface-based learning method, while adhering to the benchmark protocol, with fixed input features
and parameter count. A key finding of this analysis is that surface-based encoders are competitive,
but do not provide state-of-the-art results.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We then focus on exploring whether surface-based learning for protein analysis can provide comple-
mentary information to that of other representations. Related efforts have been made in the recent
literature; in Lee et al. (2023), the authors propose to use an implicit representation of the surface
as a pretraining objective. Somnath et al. (2021) proposed to first encode surface properties and
use them as initial embeddings for the graph nodes, while Pegoraro et al. (2024); Xu et al. (2024)
averaged the predictions made by a surface-based and a graph-based model. Nevertheless, those
efforts consider surface and other (e.g., graph-based) learning separately and only aggregate results
in a global manner (early or late fusion (Karpathy et al., 2014)). Instead, we show that by creating
an integrated approach, in which the features are shared and passed between a surface and graph
representation, even within the middle layers, allows to significantly boost performance and improve
results. Crucially, by exploiting the natural spatial relations based on proximity that exist between
graph nodes and surface vertices, we show that node-wise feature sharing creates a synergy between
the two representations. Furthermore, we demonstrate that by using embeddings from text encoders
as input features, coupled with careful and efficient architecture design, it is possible to achieve
unprecedented state-of-the-art results on a wide range of tasks.
To summarize, our key contributions include:

       • An adapted design of the recent state-of-the-art DiffusionNet architecture, which addresses
         some of its limitations (including instabilities and scale independence) in the context of
         protein analysis tasks.
       • The first comprehensive comparison of surface-based learning against alternative representa-
         tions such as graphs or grids within an established benchmark.
       • A novel integrated approach, which is based on node-wise feature-sharing across all learned
         layers, between surface and graph-based encoders that are learned jointly.
       • State-of-the-art results in a wide variety of challenging scenarios and enhanced computa-
         tional throughput by using residue graphs and coarsened meshes.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 3.1, we present the surface representation we
use and the specialized networks used to process it. Section 3.2 highlights a challenge for surface
networks learning on various scales and presents solutions to mitigate these issues. In Section 3.3,
we propose to synergistically integrate graph and surface information within a unified architecture,
harnessing the power of both representations. We provide the details regarding the chosen architecture
in Section 3.4 and analyze its computational aspects in Section 3.5.

3     M ETHODS

3.1   S URFACE R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

Our first objective is to study the utility of the best existing surface encoders for learning on protein
data. To generate the surface representation SP of the protein P, we rely on MSMS and on mesh
coarsening and cleaning steps, detailed in Appendix C.1. At the basis for our surface-based learning
method, we then employ the DiffusionNet approach (Sharp et al., 2022). This method has been
proven to be highly robust and effective across a diverse set shape analysis tasks (e.g., (Attaiki
et al., 2021; Cao & Bernard, 2022; Sun et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022) among others). In particular,
DiffusionNet avoids using local patch parametrizations, which can lead to instabilities across different
mesh structures and enables long range and multi-scale information propagation by using learned
diffusion for information sharing. The mathematical foundation of DiffusionNet is the heat equation,
which simulates the diffusion of heat, or, equivalently, the behavior of Brownian motion on a surface
over time. For a surface S, let ft : S → R be the function that defines the heat distribution over S at
time t and ∆S the Laplace-Beltrami operator (Meyer et al., 2003; Vallet & Levy, 2008) of the surface.
The heat equation is the linear differential equation below (equation 1), solved by diagonalizing the
Laplace-Beltrami. In practice, we store the k = 128 smallest eigenvalues of ∆S in a diagonal matrix
Λ ∈ Rk×k , with the corresponding eigenvectors in Φ ∈ Rn×k , and vertex area weights M ∈ Rn×n .
The spectrally truncated solution to the heat equation is given as ft = Φe−Λt (ΦT M )f0 .
                                             ∂f
                      (Heat equation)           = ∆S f .                                             (1)
                                             ∂t


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In DiffusionNet, this equation is used to perform information propagation on a surface using a feature
map as f0 and learning the diffusion time in a task-specific manner. This mechanism relies on
dense linear algebra operations, offering straightforward differentiation with respect to both f and
t. The diffusion layers are combined with features based on ft , their spatial gradients and standard,
point-wise MLPs. This leads to an architecture which can capture multi-scale geometric details of a
surface in a task-specific manner.

3.2   A DAPTING TO P ROTEIN S URFACES OF D IVERSE S CALES

As we demonstrate in Section 4 below, our first empirical observation is that applying the DiffusionNet
architecture directly to protein datasets, without modifications, yields relatively poor performance.
We attribute this primarily to the fact that the initial DiffusionNet architecture targeted applications
involving related near-isometric shapes (e.g., humans in different poses). A key technical issue is that
most existing approaches using DiffusionNet’s normalize all shapes to a uniform surface area. This
step ensures that shapes have the same global scale which stabilizes learning. Unfortunately, in the
context of protein analysis, tasks such as ligand-binding preference determination depend critically
on the relative sizes of proteins and ligands, making considerations on the scale of proteins essential,
and global scale normalization would lose this precious information.
On the other hand, the efficacy of DiffusionNet’s receptive field is contingent upon the diffusion times
learned within each diffusion layer. Without scale normalization variations in the sizes input shapes
can lead to discrepancies in the network’s learned receptive field. This is elucidated by the following
well-known proposition, whose proof is provided in the supplementary material for completeness:
Proposition 3.1. Let X be a shape and Y = αX its scaled version by a factor α > 0. Denoting by
E· (t, x) the expected geodesic distance
                                       for a Brownian motion starting from point x after time t, it
holds that: EY (t, x) = αEX αt2 , x .

Importantly, this result suggests that the time parameter of diffusion must be adapted depending
on the scale, whereas in DiffusionNet the learned time parameters are shape independent. We also
remark that in scenarios involving non-isometric surfaces, such as proteins that might have different
scales, learned diffusion, especially if it is learned without biological considerations, can generalize
poorly across highly diverse shapes, and lead to instabilities during training.
To address this issue, we enhance the original DiffusionNet framework in two ways. First, we enable
support for batch (the original model was limited to batch sizes of one) and incorporate a Batch
Normalization layer (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) after each diffusion layer to stabilize learning. Second,
we facilitate the optimization process by incorporating biological priors relevant to spatial scales.
Consequently, we determined that diffusion times around 10 resulted in receptive fields around 10 Å
(see Supplementary Figure 2), which aligns with the spatial scale of binding sites. Inspired by the
inherent multi-scale nature of protein structures, we opted to draw samples from a normal distribution
t ∼ N (10, 5), characterized by a relatively high variance. The absolute values of these samples were
then utilized as the initial values for our diffusion timescales. Both the large scale and the large
variance are retained during training, as illustrated in Supplementary Figure 3), enabling efficient
multi-scale and long-distance message passing. These enhancements to DiffusionNet implementation
mitigate the instabilities in the training process (as seen in Supplementary Figure 2) and are available
in the provided code repository and as a pip package.

3.3   H YBRID R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

As mentioned earlier, beyond assessing the efficacy of surface-based learning compared to other
representations for protein learning, we explore the benefits of integrating different representations
in a unified framework, harnessing their distinct strengths. Intuitively, surface representations can
capture the intricate geometric details critical for tasks involving protein interactions, while graph
representations detail the specific atomic interactions within a protein’s interior that indirectly
influence its surface dynamics and interaction capabilities. Furthermore, these representations
facilitate complementary approaches to learning: local message passing through graphs and global
information dissemination for surfaces via learned diffusion. Inspired by these considerations, we
propose a method that enables feature sharing between graph and surface-based representations. As


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


emphasized below, unlike previous related approaches (Somnath et al., 2021; Pegoraro et al., 2024),
we enable communication between the two representations across all learned layers of the network.
As a basis for our hybrid representation, in addition to the surface SP , we construct a graph repre-
sentation GP = (Vg , Eg ). We use either a graph whose nodes are atoms, which aligns with the one
used within the Atom3d benchmark, or one defined at the residue level. The residue-level graph is
enriched with ESM-650M (Rives et al., 2021) sequence embeddings used as node features.
To construct our hybrid approach, we then build a bipartite graph G = (V, E), where V = Vg ∪ Vs
represents graph nodes and surface vertices, respectively. For each vertex on the surface, we find its
16 nearest neighbors in the graph and add the corresponding bidirectional edges in the bipartite graph.
We provide a more detailed description of the construction and features of the atomic, residue and
bipartite graphs in Appendix C.1.
We now define block operations to encode a protein using SP , GP and G. Denote encoders on
surfaces and graphs as sθ and gθ , respectively, and the set of input features as X = {xn , n ∈ V}.
The corresponding encoded features are H = {hn , n ∈ V} with hn = sθ (xn ) for nodes n ∈ Vs
and hn = gθ (xn ) for nodes n ∈ Vg . Our general methodology incorporates message-passing neural
networks, denoted MPθ , over the bipartite graph G, such that at a layer l, we get X l+1 = MPlθ (Hl ).
By employing distinct sets, θsg and θgs , the architecture handles messages traversing from the surface
to the graph and vice versa. Those block operations can be stacked as shown in Figure 1. We
emphasize that our feature sharing occurs on the local (node) level and is enabled by the proximity
relations in 3D space. Moreover, our hybrid approach trains both representations jointly, while
enabling information sharing across all network layers, which is crucial to its success.


Figure 1: Illustration of our approach integrating surface and graph information. We ensure joint
learning across the two representations and enable information propagation across all layers of the
network. Our information sharing is based on the spatial proximity relations between individual
graph nodes and surface vertices (not shown here).

3.4   P ROPOSED ARCHITECTURES

Our framework incorporates surface encoding blocks, sθ , which consist of a diffusion operation
followed by a pointwise neural network with two hidden layers of a specified width. The first network
we propose, Surface Diff is only based only on those surface blocks. It is used to assess the
relevance of the surface representation used in isolation. Note that Surface Diff is based on
DiffusionNet but incorporates our modifications mentioned in Section 3.2. For all other methods that
use a hybrid approach, the widths for both encoding blocks sθ and gθ were consistently set to equal
values.
We introduce AtomSurf-bench, a model aimed at comparing representations in a fair way by
following the Atom3d benchmark protocol. Its graph encoder gθ consists of Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016), intertwined with Batch Normalization operations and
its message-passing over the bipartite graph is a Graph Attention Layer (Veličković et al., 2017).
Following the Atom3d benchmark standards, AtomSurf-bench has 200k learnable parameters
and does not use surface input features, only considering the atom type onto its atomic-level graph
representation.
In addition, we introduce AtomSurf that makes use of the aforementioned residue graph, along
with the recently-proposed ProNet (Wang et al., 2022a) encoder. Despite acting on residue graphs,
ProNet adds a featurization of the geometric conformation of the atoms composing each residue,


                                                  5
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


based on relative local coordinate systems that uniquely and equivariantly identify the conformation,
allowing for completeness (as introduced in ComeNet (Wang et al., 2022b)). Those features are then
embed using spherical harmonics, and ProNet relies on the message passing introduced in GraphConv
(Morris et al., 2019) to perform learning. In addition, we perform our message passing using the
aforementioned bipartite graph features and a GVP (Jing et al., 2021) encoder.
 Different bipartite message passing networks and organization are possible, encompassing as special
 cases several existing approaches. We provide the implementation details in Appendix C. We evaluate
 these configurations and conduct several ablation studies on our final model, in Section 4.5.

 3.5         C OMPUTATIONAL ENHANCEMENTS

Surface-methods are traditionally thought to be compute-expensive methods, motivating approaches
to side-step their intrinsic complexity (Sverrisson et al., 2021). Through a complexity analysis
presented in Appendix D.1, we found the number of vertices to be critical in DiffusionNet runtime,
which we addressed by coarsening our meshes. In this coarse surface regimen, the graph encoding
with ProNet is the computational bottleneck, which is smaller than when used in isolation. Hence,
we claim that our method is faster than this efficient graph encoder in the coarse surface regimen.
 From the storage and memory perspectives however, the memory footprint of the surface-related
 operations dominate the ones originating from the graphs, especially because of stochasticity. We did
 not find it to be limiting in terms of I/O, but rather in terms of batch size. We implemented a dynamic
 batching procedure, alleviating our memory issues. Further details are provided in Appendix D.2.
 Finding ways to reduce the memory footprint of surface networks remains an important direction.

 4         R ESULTS

 4.1         P ERFORMANCE OF S URFACE R EPRESENTATION

We start by validating our surface encoder on the RNA segmentation benchmark (Poulenard et al.,
2019) for surface methods. The task is to segment 5s ribosomal RNA molecules into functional
components. This dataset consists of 640 RNA surface meshes of about 15k vertices, and was already
used to compare modern surface encoders. We assess the impact of the proposed enhancements
to DiffusionNet by showing the learning curves of the enhanced models on the RNA segmentation
task (see Figure 2 and Appendix F.1 for a similar analysis on PSR). Moreover, we compare their
performance to other recent surface encoders, DGCNN (Wang et al., 2019) and DeltaConv (Wiersma
et al., 2022) and report results in Table 1. Our experiments show that our adjustments significantly
improve the DiffusionNet stability issues, and allow it to converge to a model with a test accuracy
of 84.1% instead of of 80.9%. This accuracy is significantly higher than DGCNN (74.7%) and
DeltaConv (78%).

     101
                                                      DiffusionNet
                                                      DiffusionNet (enhanced)      Method                    Accuracy
Loss


                                                                                   DGCNN                         74.7
     100                                                                           DeltaConv                       78
                                                                                   DiffusionNet (original)       80.9
           0.00   0.25   0.50   0.75   1.00    1.25    1.50     1.75       2.00    DiffusionNet (enhanced)       84.1
                                       Steps                                ×104

 Figure 2: Learning curve on the RNA segmentation using Table 1: Performance of Different Surface
 the original and our enhanced DiffusionNet models.     Encoders on the RNA Segmentation Task.

Then, to compare the performance of our surface encoder to the use of other representations, we turn
to the Atom3d benchmark, focusing on its three tasks exclusive to proteins. The Protein Interaction
Prediction (PIP) task aims to predict which part of a protein interacts with another, and holds about
120k examples. The Mutation Stability Prediction (MSP) task is to determine if a mutation enhances
the stability of protein-protein interaction (5k examples). Finally, the Protein Structure Ranking
(PSR) task aims to assign a quality score to predicted protein structures with around 10k proteins.


                                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A more detailed description of all our datasets is available in Appendix E.
We anticipate that the surface representation will excel in tasks involving interactions, like PIP, but
may underperform in the PSR task, which is heavily influenced by subtle internal changes in the
protein volume that might not affect the surface. The results are presented in Table 2.
Surprisingly, we observe that the surface
method Surface Diff, despite using Table 2: Comparison of different representations, includ-
a state-of-the-art surface encoder, con- ing surface performance. Dashes in the equivariant meth-
sistently falls short in its performance, ods’ column indicate that these methods could not be used
even on the protein-protein interaction due to memory constraints.
task. Such an observation challenges as-
sertions in previous purely surface-based                            PIP      MSP          PSR
methods, and highlights the importance                             Auroc Auroc          Rl     Rg
of direct benchmarking in general. De- 3DCNN                        0.844 0.574 0.431 0.789
spite promising modeling of protein in- ENN                           -      0.574       -       -
terfaces, which are intrinsically surface Graph                     0.669 0.609 0.411 0.75
objects, the network could not reach Surface Diff                   0.837      0.5     0.33 0.643
satisfactory test performance. We em- AtomSurf-bench 0.876 0.707 0.452 0.831
phasize that all networks are trained in
a vanilla setting, in particular, unlike
MaSIF, our input features are minimalistic. Surface networks may excel when supplemented
with richer information. However, when all input features are held constant, surface networks do not
emerge as top performers.


4.2   S YNERGY IN C OMBINED R EPRESENTATIONS

In this section, we assess the performance of our proposed hybrid methods, which have the particular-
ity of combining surface and graph representations. First, we use the same experimental setup and
compare our AtomSurf-bench to the previous models exclusively grounded in one representation.
Our results are reported in the last row of Table 2.
Our method outperforms single modalities in all three tasks, while adhering to the Atom3d bench-
mark protocol. This result highlights the synergy between the two representations. Achieving this is
noteworthy because, first, the input features remain minimal, and second, to maintain a consistent
parameter count, both the graph and surface encoders are considerably condensed. An interesting
result is that even in the case of PSR, where surfaces do not intuitively seem relevant, the mixed
model outperforms its graph counterpart with a comfortable margin. One possible interpretation for
this result is DiffusionNet’s ability to perform long-range message passing.
In addition, we compare to popular, state-of-the-art models outside of the benchmark constraints.
Namely, we compare against ProNet (Wang et al., 2022a) and GearNet (Zhang et al., 2023), which
are graph-based methods at the residue level, but encode the local geometry of residues as features;
and to the atomic-level extension of GVP (Jing et al., 2021). Finally, we include their extension
with features derived from protein language models (Zhang et al., 2023). Please note that differing
parameters and training procedures do not necessarily follow the protocol of the original benchmark.
For this reason, we also include the performance of our second proposed model, AtomSurf, which
uses all input features and more recent encoders. Out of fairness, we follow exactly the training
protocol and problem formulation for each considered task, and use externally reported performance
for all other methods. The results are presented in Table 3.
Our first result is that even AtomSurf-bench is competitive with more highly engineered ap-
proaches and outperforms them in two of the three evaluated tasks. It even outperforms pretrained
methods on the PIP task. The PSR task, which is aimed at detecting non-canonical protein structures,
appears to benefit methods that integrate explicit biological insights into protein geometry, such as
the computation of side-chain angles.
Moreover, AtomSurf successfully results in another performance boost on this benchmark, setting
a new clear state-of-the-art performance on the PIP and MSP tasks, and closing the gap on PSR.
Importantly, our method does not rely on pretraining and uses less than half the number of parameters
than any other method.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Performance of our hybrid approach on benchmark tasks, compared to state-of-the-art
models. Best result in bold, second best underlined.
                                       PLM      Params              PIP        MSP          PSR
                                                                   Auroc       Auroc       Rl  Rg
             ProNet                                 2M               87.1              -   63.2     84.9
             GVP                                   11M               86.6           68.0   51.1     84.5
                   + pretraining                   11M               87.4           71.1   51.5     84.8
             GVP-ESM                   ✓           11M                  -           61.7      -     86.6
             GearNet-ESM               ✓           42M                  -           68.5      -     82.9
                   + pretraining       ✓           42M                  -           70.2      -     86.3
             AtomSurf-bench                       200k               87.6           70.7   45.2     83.1
             AtomSurf                  ✓          600k               90.9           71.6   61.7     85.7


4.3   E VALUATION ON PROTEIN INTERACTION PREDICTIONS

In addition to the Atom3d benchmark tasks, we evaluate our approach on the task of protein binding
sites prediction. Binding sites are regions of protein surfaces where a partner (that can be another
protein, an RNA molecule, a small molecule) interacts with the protein. A fine characterization of
those regions helps in understanding protein functions and plays a significant role in drug design.

Masif-ligand We start by evaluating our proposed approach on the task of ligand-binding preference
prediction for protein binding sites, introduced in (Gainza et al., 2020). It holds 1459 protein structures
bound to one of the seven most common ligands in the PDB. Given a binding site, the task amounts
to predicting its corresponding co-factor. We benchmark our approach against MaSIF (Gainza et al.,
2020) and HMR (Wang et al., 2023), with the latter being recognized as state-of-the-art on this task.
Additionally, considering the notable performance of ProNet on the previous benchmark, we include
it in this experiment. We use balanced accuracy (the average recall achieved for each class) as our
performance metric consistent with prior studies.
As depicted in Table 4, our method surpasses the existing methods and sets a new state-of-the-art
for this task. ProNet achieves a disappointing AuROC of 0.75. Unlike HMR, which relies solely
on surface representation, our results further validate the efficacy of synergistically combining
surface and graph representations, showcasing that this integration leads to superior performance in
ligand-binding pocket classification.

Antibody epitope prediction Improved understanding and ability to predict the interaction between
an antibody and its target, denoted as the antigen, has direct applications in antibody-based treatments,
which represent a highly promising therapeutic avenue (Kaplon et al., 2023; Jamali et al., 2024).
Pegoraro et al. (2024) introduced a dataset containing 235 antibody–antigen complexes. The task
consists in predicting interacting residue on the antibody and antigen, from their two structures.
The method proposed in their article, denoted as GEP, is a relevant comparison to ours, because it
averages predictions made by a surface model and by a graph-based model. We present the results in
Figure 3.
                                                             1.0

                                                                         GEP                                  0.5
                                   AuROC                     0.9         AtomSurf
                                                                                                              0.4
  MaSIF (Gainza et al., 2020)        0.74                    0.8
                                                     AuROC


  Pronet (Wang et al., 2022a)        0.75
                                                                                                                    MCC


                                                                                                              0.3

  HMR (Wang et al., 2023)            0.81                    0.7
                                                                                                              0.2
  AtomSurf-bench                     0.84                    0.6                                              0.1
  AtomSurf                           0.88
                                                             0.5                                              0.0
                                                                   Ab AuROC    Ag AuROC    Ab MCC    Ag MCC



 Table 4: Balanced accuracy of our hybrid       Figure 3: Performance of our model on the binding
 approach on the MaSIF-ligand task.             site detection task.

                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As can be seen in our results, AtomSurf has a comparable performance to GEP on the antigen
binding site prediction, but outperforms it with a comfortable margin on the antibody side (+0.25
MCC points). An accurate prediction of the antibody residues involved in the antigen recognition is
key for antibody specificity optimization.

Validation on PINDER In addition to this relatively small dataset, we validate our approach on
the recently proposed, large-scale PINDER dataset (Kovtun et al., 2024). We used the clustered
version of this dataset that holds around 42k structures. Systems are split rigorously, based on
interface similarity. Moreover, test systems are also available in their unbound form (Apo setting)
and as predicted by AlphaFold2 (AF2 setting), representing a more realistic use case. We consider
a first task formulated as PIP (Pinder-Pair) of predicting interacting pairs of residues and another
close to Masif-Site (Gainza et al., 2020), only taking one protein as input to predict interacting
residues (Pinder-site). We compare to ProNet in Table 5, and include a comparison of accuracies in
Supplementary Table 3.

           Table 5: Auroc of our method compared to ProNet on the PINDER dataset.
                    Task               Pinder-Pair               Pinder-Site
                    Split           Holo Apo AF2              Holo Apo AF2
                    Pronet          80.1    78.2       73.5   74.3   70.7   60.6
                    AtomSurf        92.8    88.4       87.1   88.3   84.2     82

AtomSurf widely outperform the ProNet baseline on all tasks, splits and metrics. The performance
over the apo set is decreased compared to the holo set, as well as the performance on predicted
structures, as expected (Huang et al., 2024). However, our network is able to retain a remarkable
accuracy across the board, validating its robustness.

4.4   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Visualization of our predictions We display the interaction probability predicted by our model
across two protein surfaces, a homodimer and a heterodimer, and plot the results in Figure 4. Despite
minor prediction errors, such as the misidentification of residues in the lower region of 3dbh, our
results clearly show that the model effectively identifies binding sites on proteins.


Figure 4: A qualitative view of our results: The top row shows the ground truth with interaction sites
marked in red, while the bottom row displays our predictions. On the left, the interaction between
chains A and B of the system with PDB ID 4A0M is illustrated. The two rightmost columns depict
chains E and F of the protein with PDB ID 3DBH from two rotated perspectives of 180◦ .

Learned time analysis In the Supplementary Fig. 2 and 3, we provide visualizations showing both
the relation between the effective receptive field and diffusion times, as well as the distribution of


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


learned times on the MSP task. These visualizations demonstrate that long-range communication
enabled by learned diffusion is indeed useful, and can contribute to overall performance, thus shedding
light on the relative strengths of surface-based learning.
Assessment of the reproducibility Supplementary Table 2 shows the standard error of our estimate
of the mean performance of AtomSurf, assessing its reproducibility and the significance of its
difference. Across tasks, the performance gap is higher than the standard error.

4.5   A BLATION S TUDY

Model ablations Finally, we examine the impact of different design choices on our tasks. In
Appendix C, we introduce the sequential and bipartite scenario, which amount to variations
in the connectivity of the blocks. Another major design choice is the choice of the Message Passing
(MP) component. We explore several options, including discarding the geometric notion of a
neighborhood, allowing for potentially long-distance message passing (Att. setting), as well as
varying the number of blocks. Our detailed results are presented in Appendix F.4.
The sequential strategy displays underwhelming results (70.7 vs 60.9 on MSP for example),
which could root from its incapacity to handle multi-scale, simultaneous message passing. Among
the bipartite settings, Att. is consistently outperformed by the localized message-passing
networks. In short, the best setting leverages several blocks of message passing, with enhanced results
for the most interconnected networks. In addition, the geometry of the bipartite graph is important,
and an attentive mechanism generally benefits the optimal mixing.

ESM embeddings ablation Due to the strong performance of protein language models, we also
perform an ablation by removing the ESM embeddings from our graph initial node features. Ablated
model’s performance decreases as expected, showing that ESM is truly an important feature. However,
even without ESM, our method retains state-of-the-art performance on most tasks, notably on
interaction tasks such as Masif-Ligand (84 vs 81), PINDER (overall +10 AuROC points) and others
(detailed results in Appendix F.5). Interestingly, on the PINDER dataset that has stricter splits, the
performance drop seems to be reduced. One possible explanation for this result would be that those
sequence-derived features contribute to memorization, whereas learned structural properties lead
to better generalization. We believe that a more in-depth investigation of this phenomenon is an
interesting direction for future work.

5     C ONCLUSION & L IMITATIONS
In this paper, we analyzed the utility of the surface representation in machine learning on protein
structures. We first adapted the design of the recent DiffusionNet in the context of protein analysis
tasks, and compared it against other methods by adhering to the Atom3d benchmark protocol,
revealing both the promise and the limitations of surface-only learning. We then introduced a novel
integrated architecture that combines surface and graph representations and achieves state-of-the-art
results across several benchmark tasks. Key to our approach is a node-wise information sharing
mechanism, which allows for joint training of graph and surface representations, coupled with
localized information propagation across all network layers. Our ablation analysis further highlights
that simplistic approaches to combining different representations lead to suboptimal performance.
We also demonstrated the performance of our approach in identifying antibody-antigen and ligand-
binding preferences achieving state-of-the-art results.
Our work strongly supports the notion that leveraging multiple representations with unique strengths
is a promising strategy for advancing protein analysis. Moreover, integrating biological priors both
within the learning frameworks and into information sharing across representations seems crucial
for achieving high accuracy in challenging scenarios. A validation on real-life scenarios is our
next step to fully establish this method. Despite our optimizations, one of the current limitations
of our approach is its significant memory requirements, highlighting the need for computationally
more efficient surface-based pipelines, in line with suggestions by Sverrisson et al. (2021). Beyond
addressing these challenges, our work can help pave the way to more powerful integrated multi-modal
solutions for additional tasks within structural bioinformatics, including generative modeling, but
also investigating ways in which information sharing across both representations and tasks can lead
to improvements in robustness and accuracy.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS & F UNDING
The authors would like to thank Emanuele Rodolà and Marco Pegoraro for discussions that contributed
to initiate this project. They also would like to thanks Erkan Turan for trying to setup more tasks, as
well as Victor Laigle for making the Supplementary Figures on batch size variability.
V.M., S.A. and M.O. are supported by the ANR Chair AIGRETTE, the ERC Starting Grant No.
758800 (EXPROTEA) and the ERC Consolidator Grant No. 101087347 (VEGA). V.M. was addi-
tionally supported by DataIA and Sanofi. Y.M and B.C. are supported by Swiss National Science
Foundation grants 310030_197724, TMGC-3_213750 and 200020_214843. This work was per-
formed using HPC resources from GENCI–IDRIS (Grant 2023-AD010613356) and CITAS at EPFL.

B ROADER IMPACT
This paper presents work to advance the field of machine learning on protein structure. There is no
direct ethical or societal implication of this work, but potential indirect ones, none of which we feel
must be specifically highlighted here.

R EFERENCES
Souhaib Attaiki, Gautam Pai, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Dpfm: Deep partial functional maps. In 2021
  International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pp. 175–185. IEEE, 2021.
Tristan Aumentado-Armstrong. Latent molecular optimization for targeted therapeutic design. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1809.02032, 2018.
Tristan Bepler and Bonnie Berger. Learning protein sequence embeddings using information from
  structure. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.08661, 2019.
H. M. Berman. The protein data bank. Nucleic Acids Research, 28(1):235–242, January 2000. doi:
  10.1093/nar/28.1.235. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/28.1.235.
Shaked Brody, Uri Alon, and Eran Yahav. How attentive are graph attention networks? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2105.14491, 2021.
Michael M. Bronstein and Iasonas Kokkinos. Scale-invariant heat kernel signatures for non-rigid
 shape recognition. In 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition. IEEE, June 2010. doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2010.5539838. URL http://dx.doi.org/
 10.1109/CVPR.2010.5539838.
Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Yann LeCun, Arthur Szlam, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Geometric
 deep learning: going beyond euclidean data. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 34(4):18–42,
 2017.
Joan Bruna, Wojciech Zaremba, Arthur Szlam, and Yann LeCun. Spectral networks and locally
  connected networks on graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6203, 2013.
Dongliang Cao and Florian Bernard. Unsupervised deep multi-shape matching. In European
 Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 55–71. Springer, 2022.
Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 2990–2999. PMLR, 2016a.
Taco S Cohen and Max Welling. Steerable cnns. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.08498, 2016b.
Tri Dao, Dan Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Flashattention: Fast and memory-
  efficient exact attention with io-awareness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:16344–16359, 2022.
Hehe Fan, Zhangyang Wang, Yi Yang, and Mohan Kankanhalli. Continuous-discrete convolution for
  geometry-sequence modeling in proteins. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Piero Fariselli, Osvaldo Olmea, Alfonso Valencia, and Rita Casadio. Prediction of contact maps with
  neural networks and correlated mutations. Protein engineering, 14(11):835–843, 2001.
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In
 ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
Pietro Fontana, Ying Dong, Xiong Pi, Alexander B Tong, Corey W Hecksel, Longfei Wang, Tian-Min
  Fu, Carlos Bustamante, and Hao Wu. Structure of cytoplasmic ring of nuclear pore complex by
  integrative cryo-em and alphafold. Science, 376(6598):eabm9326, 2022.
Fabian Fuchs, Daniel Worrall, Volker Fischer, and Max Welling. Se (3)-transformers: 3d roto-
  translation equivariant attention networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  1970–1981, 2020.
Pablo Gainza, Freyr Sverrisson, Frederico Monti, Emanuele Rodola, D Boscaini, MM Bronstein, and
  BE Correia. Deciphering interaction fingerprints from protein molecular surfaces using geometric
  deep learning. Nature Methods, 17(2):184–192, 2020.
Michael Garland and Paul S Heckbert. Surface simplification using quadric error metrics. In
 Proceedings of the 24th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp.
 209–216, 1997.
Rana Hanocka, Amir Hertz, Noa Fish, Raja Giryes, Shachar Fleishman, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
  Meshcnn: a network with an edge. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 38(4):1–12, 2019.
Michael Heinzinger, Konstantin Weissenow, Joaquin Gomez Sanchez, Adrian Henkel, Milot Mirdita,
 Martin Steinegger, and Burkhard Rost. Bilingual language model for protein sequence and structure.
 bioRxiv, pp. 2023–07, 2023.
Pedro Hermosilla, Marco Schäfer, Matěj Lang, Gloria Fackelmann, Pere Pau Vázquez, Barbora
  Kozlíková, Michael Krone, Tobias Ritschel, and Timo Ropinski. Intrinsic-extrinsic convolution
  and pooling for learning on 3d protein structures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.06252, 2020.
Yufei Huang, Siyuan Li, Lirong Wu, Jin Su, Haitao Lin, Odin Zhang, Zihan Liu, Zhangyang Gao,
  Jiangbin Zheng, and Stan Z Li. Protein 3d graph structure learning for robust structure-based
  protein property prediction. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 38, pp. 12662–12670, 2024.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 448–456.
  pmlr, 2015.
Clemens Isert, Kenneth Atz, and Gisbert Schneider. Structure-based drug design with geometric deep
  learning. Current Opinion in Structural Biology, 79:102548, 2023.
Kiarash Jamali, Lukas Käll, Rui Zhang, Alan Brown, Dari Kimanius, and Sjors HW Scheres.
  Automated model building and protein identification in cryo-em maps. Nature, pp. 1–2, 2024.
José Jiménez, Stefan Doerr, Gerard Martínez-Rosell, Alexander S Rose, and Gianni De Fabritiis.
  Deepsite: protein-binding site predictor using 3d-convolutional neural networks. Bioinformatics,
  33(19):3036–3042, 2017.
Bowen Jing, Stephan Eismann, Pratham N. Soni, and Ron O. Dror. Equivariant graph neural networks
  for 3d macromolecular structure, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.03843.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
Hélène Kaplon, Silvia Crescioli, Alicia Chenoweth, Jyothsna Visweswaraiah, and Janice M Reichert.
  Antibodies to watch in 2023. In MAbs, volume 15, pp. 2153410. Taylor & Francis, 2023.
Andrej Karpathy, George Toderici, Sanketh Shetty, Thomas Leung, Rahul Sukthankar, and Li Fei-Fei.
  Large-scale video classification with convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1725–1732, 2014.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
Daniel Kovtun, Mehmet Akdel, Alexander Goncearenco, Guoqing Zhou, Graham Holt, David
  Baugher, Dejun Lin, Yusuf Adeshina, Thomas Castiglione, Xiaoyun Wang, et al. Pinder: The
  protein interaction dataset and evaluation resource. bioRxiv, pp. 2024–07, 2024.
Andriy Kryshtafovych, Torsten Schwede, Maya Topf, Krzysztof Fidelis, and John Moult. Critical
  assessment of methods of protein structure prediction (casp)—round xiii. Proteins: Structure,
 Function, and Bioinformatics, 87(12):1011–1020, 2019.
Youhan Lee, Hasun Yu, Jaemyung Lee, and Jaehoon Kim. Pre-training sequence, structure, and
  surface features for comprehensive protein representation learning. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Lei Li, Nicolas Donati, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Learning multi-resolution functional maps with
  spectral attention for robust shape matching. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:29336–29349, 2022.
Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Nikita Smetanin,
  Robert Verkuil, Ori Kabeli, Yaniv Shmueli, Allan dos Santos Costa, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Tom
  Sercu, Salvatore Candido, and Alexander Rives. Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic level
  protein structure with a language model. bioRxiv, 2022. URL https://doi.org/10.1101/
  2022.07.20.500902. bioRxiv 2022.07.20.500902.
Jonathan Masci, Davide Boscaini, Michael Bronstein, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Geodesic con-
  volutional neural networks on riemannian manifolds. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision workshops, pp. 37–45, 2015.
Mark Meyer, Mathieu Desbrun, Peter Schröder, and Alan H Barr. Discrete differential-geometry
 operators for triangulated 2-manifolds. In Visualization and mathematics III, pp. 35–57. Springer,
 2003.
Federico Monti, Davide Boscaini, Jonathan Masci, Emanuele Rodola, Jan Svoboda, and Michael M
  Bronstein. Geometric deep learning on graphs and manifolds using mixture model cnns. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5115–5124,
  2017.
Christopher Morris, Martin Ritzert, Matthias Fey, William L Hamilton, Jan Eric Lenssen, Gaurav
  Rattan, and Martin Grohe. Weisfeiler and leman go neural: Higher-order graph neural networks.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 33, pp. 4602–4609, 2019.
Marco Pegoraro, Clémentine Dominé, Emanuele Rodolà, Petar Veličković, and Andreea Deac.
 Geometric epitope and paratope prediction. Bioinformatics, 40(7), 2024.
Adrien Poulenard, Marie-Julie Rakotosaona, Yann Ponty, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Effective rotation-
  invariant point cnn with spherical harmonics kernels. In 2019 International Conference on 3D
 Vision (3DV), pp. 47–56. IEEE, 2019.
Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets
  for 3d classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 652–660, 2017.
Roshan M Rao, Jason Liu, Robert Verkuil, Joshua Meier, John Canny, Pieter Abbeel, Tom Sercu,
  and Alexander Rives. Msa transformer. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  8844–8856. PMLR, 2021.
Alexander Rives, Joshua Meier, Tom Sercu, Siddharth Goyal, Zeming Lin, Jason Liu, Demi Guo,
  Myle Ott, C Lawrence Zitnick, Jerry Ma, et al. Biological structure and function emerge from
  scaling unsupervised learning to 250 million protein sequences. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 118(15):e2016239118, 2021.
Michel F Sanner, Arthur J Olson, and Jean-Claude Spehner. Reduced surface: an efficient way to
 compute molecular surfaces. Biopolymers, 38(3):305–320, 1996.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Vıctor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E (n) equivariant graph neural networks.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 9323–9332. PMLR, 2021.
Nicholas Sharp, Souhaib Attaiki, Keenan Crane, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Diffusionnet: Discretization
  agnostic learning on surfaces. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(3):1–16, 2022.
Vignesh Ram Somnath, Charlotte Bunne, and Andreas Krause. Multi-scale representation learning
  on proteins. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:25244–25255, 2021.
Hannes Stärk, Octavian Ganea, Lagnajit Pattanaik, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Equibind:
  Geometric deep learning for drug binding structure prediction. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 20503–20521. PMLR, 2022.
Jin Su, Chenchen Han, Yuyang Zhou, Junjie Shan, Xibin Zhou, and Fajie Yuan. Saprot: Protein
   language modeling with structure-aware vocabulary. bioRxiv, pp. 2023–10, 2023.
Jian Sun, Maks Ovsjanikov, and Leonidas Guibas. A concise and provably informative multi-scale
   signature based on heat diffusion. In Computer graphics forum, volume 28, pp. 1383–1392. Wiley
   Online Library, 2009.
Mingze Sun, Shiwei Mao, Puhua Jiang, Maks Ovsjanikov, and Ruqi Huang. Spatially and spectrally
 consistent deep functional maps. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
 Computer Vision, pp. 14497–14507, 2023.
Freyr Sverrisson, Jean Feydy, Bruno E Correia, and Michael M Bronstein. Fast end-to-end learning
  on protein surfaces. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 15272–15281, 2021.
Raphael JL Townshend, Martin Vögele, Patricia Suriana, Alexander Derry, Alexander Powers,
  Yianni Laloudakis, Sidhika Balachandar, Bowen Jing, Brandon Anderson, Stephan Eismann, et al.
  Atom3d: Tasks on molecules in three dimensions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.04035, 2020.
B. Vallet and B. Levy. Spectral Geometry Processing with Manifold Harmonics. Computer Graphics
  Forum, 2008. ISSN 1467-8659. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2008.01122.x.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903, 2017.
Limei Wang, Haoran Liu, Yi Liu, Jerry Kurtin, and Shuiwang Ji. Learning hierarchical protein
  representations via complete 3d graph networks, 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2207.12600.
Limei Wang, Yi Liu, Yuchao Lin, Haoran Liu, and Shuiwang Ji. Comenet: Towards complete and
  efficient message passing for 3d molecular graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:650–664, 2022b.
Yiqun Wang, Yuning Shen, Shi Chen, Lihao Wang, Fei Ye, and Hao Zhou. Learning harmonic
  molecular representations on riemannian manifold. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15520, 2023.
Yue Wang, Yongbin Sun, Ziwei Liu, Sanjay E Sarma, Michael M Bronstein, and Justin M Solomon.
  Dynamic graph cnn for learning on point clouds. ACM Transactions on Graphics (tog), 38(5):
  1–12, 2019.
Maurice Weiler, Mario Geiger, Max Welling, Wouter Boomsma, and Taco S Cohen. 3d steerable cnns:
 Learning rotationally equivariant features in volumetric data. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Ruben Wiersma, Ahmad Nasikun, Elmar Eisemann, and Klaus Hildebrandt. Deltaconv: anisotropic
  operators for geometric deep learning on point clouds. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41
  (4):1–10, 2022.
Fang Wu, Lirong Wu, Dragomir Radev, Jinbo Xu, and Stan Z Li. Integration of pre-trained protein
  language models into geometric deep learning networks. Communications Biology, 6(1):876, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shiyu Xu, Lian Shen, Menglong Zhang, Changzhi Jiang, Xinyi Zhang, Yanni Xu, Juan Liu, and Xi-
  angrong Liu. Surface-based multimodal protein-ligand binding affinity prediction. Bioinformatics,
  pp. btae413, 2024.
Zuobai Zhang, Minghao Xu, Arian Jamasb, Vijil Chenthamarakshan, Aurelie Lozano, Payel Das,
  and Jian Tang. Protein representation learning by geometric structure pretraining. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.06125, 2022.
Zuobai Zhang, Chuanrui Wang, Minghao Xu, Vijil Chenthamarakshan, Aurélie Lozano, Payel Das,
  and Jian Tang. A systematic study of joint representation learning on protein sequences and
  structures, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.06275.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX
In this document, we compile all results and discussions that could not be included in the main
manuscript due to page constraints.
More specifically, we first provide additional data illustrations in Appendix A. Then, we provide a
proof for Proposition 3.1 in Appendix B. Following this, we detail the specifics of our implementation
in Appendix C. Then, we provide an analysis of the computational aspects of our technique in
Appendix D. Finally, we provide additional results in Appendix F.

A     A DDITIONAL DATA ANALYSIS
In Supplementary Figure 1, we illustrate the different representations that exist for protein structures.

                                             SQIPASEQ…SVSEN


Supplementary Figure 1: Diverse mathematical objects used to represent a protein structure, se-
quences, molecular surfaces (blue), atom-level and residue-level point clouds (red) and graphs (green).
Effective machine learning for protein structures hinges on selecting the appropriate mathematical
representation along by a compatible machine-learning technique.

A.1    A SSESSMENT OF THE SCALE TO USE

In Figure 2, we plot the results of diffusing a Dirac initial distribution for several diffusion times, over
the surface of the MDM2 protein, involved in apoptosis and cancer treatment. On the figure we see
its groove, which corresponds to its binding site. Orange vertices correspond to the ones that have the
highest probabilities, such that their sum represents 90% of the probability mass. A diffusion time of
ten seems to convey a relevant scale for this binding site.


Supplementary Figure 2: Visualization of a Dirac delta function δx at a point, diffused for several
diffusion times.

In Figure 3, we plot the diffusion times learnt by a network (on the MSP task). We see that the
network keeps a variety of scales, and has learnt to use large scales, effectively enabling long-distance
message passing.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               6         Block
                                           Block 1
                               5           Block 2
                                           Block 3

                               4


                   Frequency   3


                               2


                               1


                               0
                                   0                 5                   10            15       20
                                                                     Diffusion Times


        Supplementary Figure 3: Histogram of the diffusion times obtained after training.


B    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3.1
Proof. For simplicity we use the computations in the discrete setting (on meshes). Everything
remains the same in the smooth (surface) setting, however. Let M1 represent a shape modeled as a
triangular mesh, with W1 and A1 denoting its cotangent Laplacian and area matrices, respectively.
Therefore, its eigenvalue decomposition satisfies:

                                                              W 1 ϕ 1 = λ 1 A1 ϕ 1 .

Suppose M2 is another mesh that is a scaled version of M1 by a scaling factor a. Then, according to
(Bronstein & Kokkinos, 2010):
                                                                 A2 = a 2 A1
                                                                 λ2 = λ1 /a2
                                                                 ϕ2 = ϕ1 /a

The heat kernel can be computed as per (Sun et al., 2009):
                                                               X
                                           kt (x, y) =                exp(−λi t)ϕi (x)ϕi (y).
                                                                 i

Consequently, we have:

                                                         X
                                       kt2 (x, y) =             exp(−λ2i t)ϕ2i (x)ϕ2j (y)
                                                          i
                                                         X
                                                =               exp(−λ1i /a2 t)ϕ1i (x)ϕ1j (y)/a2
                                                   i
                                                = kt/a2 (x, y)/a2
                                                   1



If g(x, y) denotes the geodesic distance between two points on the surface x and y, then:

                                                         g 2 (x, y) = ag 1 (x, y).


                                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Denoting E· (t, x) as the expected geodesic distance of a Brownian motion starting from x after time
t, we find:

                             X                                      X
              E 2 (t, x) =           kt2 (x, y)g 2 (x, y)A2 (y) =         kt2 (x, y)ag 1 (x, y)a2 A1 (y)
                             y                                        y
                             X
                        =            kt2 (x, y)ag 1 (x, y)a2 A1 (y)
                             y
                             X
                                   1            2   1       2 1
                        =        (kt/a2 (x, y)/a )ag (x, y)a A (y)

                             y
                             X
                                       1           1       1
                        =a            kt/a2 (x, y)g (x, y)A (y)

                                 y

                        = aE 1 (t/a2 , x).
                                                 √
            √ if we assume E(t, x) =
Interestingly,
 p                                                   t (as in the Euclidean setting), then: aE 1 (t/a2 , x) =
a t/a2 = t = E 2 (t, x).

C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
C.1   P ROTEIN REPRESENTATION DETAILS

Surface representation To generate the surface representation SP of the protein P, our initial step
involves computing the protein surface using MSMS (Sanner et al., 1996). The resulting meshes
are usually quite large, but in the rare cases of small proteins, we incrementally increase sampling
density until we achieve a minimum number of 256 vertices. Then, we employ quadratic decimation
(Garland & Heckbert, 1997), to embed our surfaces into coarser and more compact meshes, again
ensuring a minimum vertex count. Coarsening the mesh has an impact on computational efficiency
and on performance, assessed in Sections 3.5 and 4. Finally, we ensure mesh quality by removing
non-manifold edges, duplicated or degenerate vertices and faces, as well as small disconnected
components. We compute several surface features: the Gaussian and mean curvature, as well as the
shape index at each vertex. We also include the normal as well as the heat kernel signature (Sun et al.,
2009) at each point.

Graph representation In addition to the surface SP , we construct a graph representation GP =
(Vg , Eg ). To ensure consistency and fairness in comparison within the Atom3d benchmark, we
follow their conventions: each node in the graph corresponds to an atom within the protein and edges
Eg are defined between pairs of atoms that are within a 4.5 angstrom radius cutoff. The only initial
node features are one-hot encoding of atom types.
Independently, we construct another graph representation to be used outside of the benchmark setting.
We choose to use residue graphs for computational efficiency: each node in this graph represents an
amino-acid residue and edges are introduced between pairs of atoms that are within a 12 Å radius
cutoff. For each residue, we add a one hot encoding of its type, its secondary structure annotation and
its hydrophobicity. We also compute sequence embeddings using the ESM-650M (Rives et al., 2021)
pretrained model and include them as node features.

Bipartite graph construction To construct our hybrid approach, we start by building a bipartite
graph G = (V, E), where V = Vg ∪ Vs represents graph nodes and surface vertices, respectively. For
each vertex on the surface, we find its 16 nearest neighbors in the graph and add the corresponding
bidirectional edges in the bipartite graph. We also experimented with edges based on a geometric
neighborhood of 8 Å, corresponding to the value widely used to define contact maps (Fariselli et al.,
2001). However, distance-based cutoffs result in a varying number of neighbors which we found to
make learning less stable.
Outside of the benchmark setting, we add edge features to our bipartite graph. Given an edge eg,s
                                                                                        x −x
tying a graph node to a surface vertex with normal ⃗ns , we use its direction ⃗ug,s = ||xss −xgg || as a


                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


vector edge feature. The associated distance and angle, ⟨⃗ns , ⃗ug,s ⟩ are encoded using sixteen radial
basis Gaussian functions, and used as scalar edge features in the bipartite graph. We follow a similar
protocol for edges going from a vertex to a graph node.

C.2     M ODEL ARCHITECTURE DETAILS

In this section, we give more details on architectures that were explored during our investigations.
All models rely on a PyTorch Geometric (Fey & Lenssen, 2019) implementation.
Our initial attempt involves a sequential alternation between surface and graph encoding, referred
to as the sequential setting. This approach involves a two-step block: first, surface encoding
is performed and its features are projected onto the graph via message passing, denoted as hgn =
MPsg (sθ (X ))n . Denoting the intermediate graph node embeddings as Hg = {hgn , n ∈ Vg }, they
are propagated within the bipartite graph to derive surface embeddings again, using Xout = αX +
MPgs (gθ (Hg )), where α ∈ R is a residual connection. The architecture proposed by (Somnath et al.,
2021) fits within this sequential framework, employing just one block and sum pooling for message
passing.
However, the sequential approach does not simultaneously leverage the distinct scales (local and
global) offered by graph and surface processing. To overcome this, the bipartite approach
processes graph and surface features concurrently in separate encoders, and merge them with a
message passing incorporating learnable parameters, based on the equation: Xout = αX +MPgs (H)+
MPsg (H). Those architectures are illustrated in Figure 4.


 Supplementary Figure 4: Illustration of our approach integrating surface and graph information.
The architecture we used is outlined in the main text. We employ our modified version of DiffusionNet
(by adapting the original implementation provided by the authors1 ) for each surface encoder and
utilize GCN for the graph networks (using the implementation provided by PyTorch Geometric2 ).
The surface methods were trained using only the surface encoder, whereas the mixed methods
   1
       https://github.com/nmwsharp/diffusion-net
   2
       https://pytorch-geometric.readthedocs.io/en/latest/


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


incorporated an additional graph encoder and a message-passing framework. When employing both
encoders, we ensure the number of channels is equal for both. Thus, the variables are the number of
"blocks" and the number of channels for each block. Our networks were trained in accordance with
the parameter counts of other methods, strictly adhering to their optimization protocols, including the
number of epochs, learning rate, and batch size.
For the surface methods, we consistently used 3 blocks, with 94, 90, and 96 channels for the PIP,
MSP, and PSR tasks, respectively. For the bipartite methods, on the PIP task, we utilized 4 blocks
with a width of 118; for MSP, 3 blocks with a width of 148; and for PSR, 4 blocks with a width of
160. On the binding site classification task, our architecture featured 6 blocks, each with a width of
128. The repository used to conduct experiments and reproduce these results is enclosed and will be
publicly released upon acceptance.


D     C OMPUTATIONAL ANALYSIS

D.1    C OMPLEXITY ANALYSIS

In a DiffusionNet, the first main operations consist in a diffusion step using the equation introduced
in the main text: ft = Φe−Λt (ΦT M )f0 , for each feature map. For a given hidden dimension h,
the complexity of this operation is hence O(h|Vs |ω ) with ω the matrix multiplication complexity.
Then, the two subsequent operations are the pointwise gradient construction and mixing, as well as a
point-wise MLP of complexity: O(h2 |Vs |). Message passing layers complexity with regards to h
and their number of edges N is O(h2 N ). In our case, N = 16|Vs | for the bipartite graph.
                                         (1)   (2)
Given additional time constants in a kdiff , kdiff , kg , kbp representing the time needed for spectral and
point-wise operations in DiffusionNet, graph encoding operations and message passing over the
                                                           (1)           (2)
bipartite graph, the overall model complexity is O(kdiff h|Vs |ω + (kdiff + 16 ∗ kbp )h2 |Vs | + kg h2 |E|).
                                       (1)
The spectral operation component (kdiff ) does not depend strongly, but it has a strong dependency on
the size of the mesh, which is not well addressed by reducing the number of parameters. Empirically,
for the latent dimensions considered, this spectral component was the time bottleneck and thus,
coarsening the graphs resulted in significant speedups. We adjusted the number of vertices to make
the first term of similar magnitude to the others (obtained for a 0.1 coarsening rate). In this regimen,
when dividing the parameter count equally between the three learnt components, we observed
that the ProNet execution was the limiting operation, and hence conclude that our method has a
similar throughput to graph-based method for a fixed parameter count. Moreover, we observed that
our method seemed to require less parameters overall, and note that the parameter count is split
between components, effectively resulting in smaller ProNets than in the pure ProNet network of the
benchmark, and hence a slightly faster runtime overall.

D.2    M EMORY AND BATCHING

From the storage and memory perspective however, the memory footprint of the surface-related
operations dominate the ones originating from the graphs. We did not find it to be limiting in terms
of I/O, but it effectively forbids the use of large batch sizes, which can be limiting.
In addition to individual objects being large, the large variance in the object size (see Figure 5) also
prevents us from using large batch sizes. Indeed, due to the random composition of the batch, some
unlucky batches contain several particularly large proteins, causing spikes in memory usage and
out-of-memory errors. We validate in Figure 6 that using coarsened surfaces, we stay in the linear
dependency on the number of vertices for the hidden sizes at stake.
This is illustrated in Figure 7, for which we tracked the memory consumption of our model through
one epoch of learning. Observe the memory peaks that can result in over 20% excess memory
consumption, keeping in mind that this is only one run over one epoch. When training several models
for hours, the probability that one outlier results in a 50% increase forces user caution.
A naive solution is to use a safety margin, aggravating our small batch size issue. We implemented
a dynamic batching procedure to create batches that are balanced in size, alleviating the memory


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               Distribution of Vertex Numbers                                                                                                                                                  Memory profile
             175                                                                                                                                                            Protein size
                                                                                                                                                                            (nb vertices)
                                                                                                                                                                                   148
                                                                                                                                                                                   255
             150                                                                                                                                                                   395
                                                                                                                                                                                   577
                                                                                                                                                                                   955
             125                                                                                                                                                                   2586


                                                                                                                                                      Memory (GB)
             100
    Counts



                                                                                                                                                                    10 1
             75

             50

             25

              0
                       500                     1000              1500                   2000                    2500                                                                                               103                                       104
                                                      Number of Vertices                                                                                                                                            Total number of vertices in batch


Supplementary Figure 5: Distribution of the num- Supplementary Figure 6: Memory consumption
ber of vertices in a dataset.                    plotted as a function of the number of vertex, in a
                                                 log-log scale.

                                                                   Batch_size = 1                                                  Batch_size = 2                                                            Batch_size = 4
                                                                                                        0.060
                                      0.050                                                                                                                                     0.065
                                                                                                        0.055
                                                                                                                                                                                0.060
                                      0.045                                                             0.050
                                                                                                                                                                                0.055
                                      0.040                                                             0.045
                                                                                                                                                                                0.050
                             Memory


                                                                                                        0.040
                                      0.035                                                                                                                                     0.045
                                                                                                        0.035                                                                   0.040
                                      0.030
                                                                                                        0.030                                                                   0.035
                                      0.025
                                                                                                        0.025                                                                   0.030
                                      0.020                                                                                                                                                                                                     Batch_size
                                                                                                        0.020                                                                   0.025                                                                 1
                                                0      500     1000 1500 2000           2500     3000            0     200   400   600 800 1000 1200 1400                               0   100        200   300 400 500          600     700         2
                                                                  Batch_size = 8                                                   Batch_size = 16                                                           Batch_size = 32                          4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                         0.12                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.18                                                                 32
                                        0.08
                                                                                                         0.11                                                                    0.17
                                        0.07
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.16
                                                                                                         0.10
                               Memory


                                        0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.15
                                                                                                         0.09
                                        0.05                                                                                                                                     0.14
                                                                                                         0.08
                                        0.04                                                                                                                                     0.13

                                                                                                         0.07                                                                    0.12
                                                0     50     100   150     200   250   300     350               0     25    50    75     100   125   150             175               0         20          40          60         80
                                                                         Step                                                           Step                                                                       Step


Supplementary Figure 7: Memory consumption monitoring through an epoch, for different batch
sizes.


issues originating from batch size variability. Finding ways to reduce the memory footprint of surface
networks remains an important direction.

D.3                C OMPUTING RESOURCES USED FOR THE PROJECT

Depending on the task, the training takes between a few hours and up to four days (for PIP which is
our largest data set) on a standard setting; 4 CPU workers and a single GPU such as NVIDIA V100.
To achieve our results, and our ablation experiment, we performed about 100 model training (5 data
sets, several settings per datasets and some failed experiments).


E             VALIDATION DATASET DESCRIPTION

RNA segmentation : This task aims to segment 5s ribosomal RNA molecules into functional
components, as defined by aligned regions in a Multi-Sequence Alignment (Poulenard et al., 2019).
This dataset consists of 640 RNA surface meshes of about 15k vertices, split at random. It was
introduced as a benchmark to compare surface encoders.

Protein Interaction Prediction (PIP) : This task aims to predict which part of a protein interacts
with which part of another. Framed as a classification task, pairs of residues from two proteins are
labeled as positives if they interact and as negatives if they do not. The dataset comprises 87k, 31k,


                                                                                                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and 15k training, validation, and test examples, split based on a 30% sequence identity. Moreover,
proteins in the test set are presented in their apo conformation.

Mutation Stability Prediction (MSP) : The objective here is to determine if a mutation enhances
the stability of protein-protein interaction. Given a protein-protein interaction structure and its
mutated version, this classification task labels the pair as a positive example if it exhibits increased
stability. This task includes 2864, 937, and 347 examples in each data split, and the splitting is
performed based on a 30% sequence identity. For both PIP and MSP, the performance metric is the
Area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (AuROC).

Protein Structure Ranking (PSR) : PSR is a regression task and aims to assign a quality score to
predicted protein structures from the Critical Assessment of Methods of Protein Structure Prediction
(CASP) (Kryshtafovych et al., 2019) competition. The PSR data train, validation, and test splits hold
25.4k, 2.8k, and 16k systems respectively. Splits correspond to a time split, with more recent CASP
competition belonging to the test split. The "Rg " term represents the mean correlation across all
systems and proposals. Meanwhile, "Rl " refers to the average correlation for each system.
Masif-ligand: This task aims to predict ligand-binding preferences for protein binding sites, as
introduced in (Gainza et al., 2020). Binding sites are regions of protein surfaces where small molecules
(ligands) interact with the protein. A fine characterization of those regions helps understanding protein
functions and plays a significant role in drug design and discovery. This dataset consists of protein
binding sites that accommodate one of seven co-factors. It comprises 1,634 training instances, 202
validation instances, and 418 test cases, split using sequence identity. Given a binding site, the task
amounts to predicting its corresponding co-factor.
AbAg: This dataset focuses on binding site prediction in the context of immunology: predicting the
interaction between an antibody and its target, denoted as the antigen. Improved understanding and
ability to predict such interactions has direct applications in antibody-based treatments. (Pegoraro
et al., 2024) introduces a dataset containing 235 antibody–antigen complexes, with 186 for training
and 49 for testing, split based on a 70% similarity threshold. The task consists in predicting the
residues involved in the binding site on the antibody and antigen separately. The performance on
the antibody side is computed only on the Complementarity Determining Regions (CDRs). They
propose different methods and we chose to compare against MIXmean-egnn PiNet that had the most
balanced performance.
PINDER: This is a recent, large-scale dataset (Kovtun et al., 2024) that holds over 2M interaction in
its full version. We used the clustered version of this dataset that holds around 42k structures and
reduces redundancy. Pinder also introduces a strict splitting criterion based on interface similarity,
that was shown to reduce leakage. In addition to their bound form (holo), systems in the test set are
also available in their unbound form (apo) and as predicted by AlphaFold (predicted), representing
a more realistic use case. The number of systems present in the test set is 1955 clusters, with 342
corresponding apo and 1747 predicted structures. This is two orders of magnitude higher than AbAg.
We introduce two tasks related to binding site prediction. Our first task is formulated as PIP (Pinder-
Pair): given two interacting monomers taken in isolation, it aims at classifying pairs of residues into
interacting, and non-interacting. The other task is close to Masif-Site (Gainza et al., 2020), only
taking one protein as input to predict interacting residues (Pinder-site).

F     S UPPLEMENTARY RESULTS
F.1   VALIDATION OF THE NEW MODEL ON PSR

We conduct a similar analysis of the proposed enhancements to the one on ribosomal RNA on the
PSR task. We depict the obtained learning curves in Figure 8 and report performance in Table 1.
Again, we observe that our suggested enhancements result in a more stable learning.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Global R on validation
                      0.6                                                                                                                PSR
                                                                                                                                   Rl       Rg
                      0.4
                                                                                                        DiffusionNet (original)    0.17     0.39
                      0.2                                     DiffusionNet                              DiffusionNet (enhanced)    0.33    0.643
                                                              DiffusionNet (enhanced)
                            0      20      40            60           80            100
                                                Epochs

            Supplementary Figure 8: Global correlation                                          Supplementary Table 1: Results of our enhanced model
            learning curve on the PSR task before and                                           on the PSR task.
            after applying our enhancements to Diffu-
            sionNet.


F.2                         VARIATION OF OUR RESULTS OVER DIFFERENT SEEDS

In table 2, we computed the standard error of the mean computed over three replicates. The standard
error is small compared to the gap of performance with the next best method, hinting for a statistically
significant difference (unfortunately, there are no replicates for other methods to perform actual
statistical tests). As expected, the standard error is higher for smaller datasets (MSP, AbAg) than
larger ones (PIP, PSR).

Supplementary Table 2: Standard error of our model evaluated on three replicates for each of the task
included. As a reference, we include the best performing competing model, without pretraining.

                                           Task                         PIP                 MSP             PSR
                                           Metric                      AuROC               AuROC           Rl  Rg
                                   Runner-up method                          87.1                68.5     63.2    86.8
                                   Ours - Mean                               90.9                71.5     61.7    85.7
                                   Ours - standard error                    0.088                   1     0.27    0.22

                                        Task                        Ab                                Ag                 Masif Ligand
                                        Metric                  AuROC MCC                         AuROC MCC              Balanced acc.
                                Runner-up method                           80             28              72       18                81
                                Ours - Mean                                88             53            67.3     14.3              88.2
                                Ours - standard error                       1             2.1            1.8      1.5               0.3

F.3                         P ERFORMANCE ON PINDER TASK

Table 3 shows the performance of AtomSurf, compared to ProNet on the clustered PINDER dataset.
In this dataset, the systems are clustered to remove redundancy. Moreover, the splitting strategy is
stricter, based on a similarity score of the interfaces. In addition to the canonical test set, the test
set systems are also available in their unbound form (apo setting) and as predicted by AlphaFold
(predicted setting). This results in a more realistic estimate of the quality of the predictions. We
report the accuracy and AuROC on both tasks, on each of those splits. Finally, we also report its
performance without ESM embeddings.


                                                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Supplementary Table 3: Performance on the Pinder Task.

         Task                                           Pinder-Pair
         Split                       Holo                   Apo                  AF2
         Metric                   Auroc Acc             Auroc Acc             Auroc Acc
         Pronet                       80.1     72.5         78.2     71.5      73.5      67.9
         AtomSurf                     92.8     85.3         88.4     80.7      87.1      80.2
         AtomSurf - no ESM              93     85.4         87.6     80.2        87      79.9

              Task                                             Pinder-Site
              Split                        Holo                   Apo                 AF2
              Metric                    Auroc Acc             Auroc Acc            Auroc Acc
              Pronet                         74.3     69.2         70.7       71      60.6      56.3
              AtomSurf                       88.3     82.3         84.2     80.8       82       76.6
              AtomSurf - no ESM              87.6     79.2         82.4     77.1      80.9      78.8



F.4   M ODEL ABLATION

Here, we present the detailed ablation study of our method AtomSurf-bench. We examine the
impact of different design choices on our tasks. All of these results are obtained in benchmark
settings, both in terms of features (only atom-type as input) and of surface encoders and graph
encoders (GCNs).
First, we look at the overall architecture of our approach, following Appendix C, where we introduce
the sequential and bipartite scenarios, which amount to variations in the connectivity of the
blocks. In particular, the HoloProt method proposed in Somnath et al. (2021) falls into the sequential
framework with just one encoding block and a MeshCNN (Hanocka et al., 2019) for protein encoder.
For fairness, we replace MeshCNN with our encoder and refer to this setup as HoloProt.
Another major design choice is the choice of the Message Passing (MP) component. We explore
the use of three possible message-passing networks. Motivated by the success of DGCNN (Wang
et al., 2019), in our Att. setting, we discard the geometric notion of a neighborhood, allowing
for potentially long-distance message passing. In this setting, all nodes from the graphs attend to
all vertices from the surface. To deal with the incurred computational burden, we use the recent
memory-efficient Flash Attention (Dao et al., 2022). We also explore the use of more conventional
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN setting) (Kipf & Welling, 2016) and the use of Graph ATtention
networks (Veličković et al., 2017; Brody et al., 2021) for our final GAT setting. Finally, we also try
using three or four blocks in our networks, always adjusting the network width to keep the number of
parameters constant. Our results are presented in Table 4.

Supplementary Table 4: Ablation study of our method: We compare various architectural designs,
and message-passing methods for our task.

                                                MSP           PIP                  PSR
                   Method             MP       AuROC         AuROC          local R global R
               sequential         -                 0.609      0.855         0.319            0.71
               HoloProt           -                 0.537      0.824         0.383           0.715
                                  Att.              0.689      0.791         0.402           0.792
               bipartite          GCN               0.697      0.868         0.421           0.797
                                  GAT               0.707      0.876         0.452           0.833

The sequential strategy displays underwhelming results, which could root from its incapacity
to handle multi-scale, simultaneous message passing. Similarly, HoloProt does not display a top
performance, suggesting that their results could be enhanced by using better-performing mixing
strategies.


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Among the bipartite settings, Att. is consistently outperformed by the localized message-
passing networks. The other scenarios give an overall close performance, with an edge for the GAT
network. This is especially true on PSR, where surface methods alone were failing. The mixed
approach could simply use surface diffusion as an efficient long-distance communication, which
could explain why an attentive mechanism results in a performance boost in this scenario.
In short, the best setting leverages several blocks of message passing, with enhanced results for the
most interconnected networks. In addition, the geometry of the bipartite graph is important, and an
attentive mechanism generally benefits the optimal mixing.


F.5   ESM EMBEDDINGS ABLATION

We conducted an Ablation of our method by training models without the ESM embeddings as input
features. We do not change hyperparameters of our method to make up for this change, which strongly
disrupts the training on smaller datasets, and especially on MSP which fails to train. We report the
result in Table 5 on all tasks but Pinder, and in Table 3 for the PINDER task.


  Supplementary Table 5: Performance of our model when ablating the ESM node embeddings.

                     Task            PIP        MSP           PSR
                     Metric         AuROC      AuROC         Rl  Rg
              Runner-up method          87.1        68.5    63.2   86.8
              Ours - Mean               90.9        71.5    61.7   85.7
              Ours - no ESM               90        54.5     47      82

                  Task               Ab                   Ag              Masif Ligand
                  Metric         AuROC MCC            AuROC MCC           Balanced acc.
           Runner-up method            80      28            72      18               81
           Ours - Mean                 88      53          67.3    14.3             88.2
           Ours - no ESM               86      48            68    14.5               84


The performance decreases as expected, showing that ESM is truly an important feature. However,
even without ESM, our method still shows significant results on most tasks, such as PIP, AbAg
and MasifLigand. The overall difference was more noticeable on smaller datasets, especially on
MSP for which the ablated network failed to learn a useful signal without ESM. Considering that
AtomSurf-bench (which does not use ESM embeddings) gets 70.9 AuROC on MSP, we believe a
high performance could be recovered by tuning the optimization. Based on this ablation, we conclude
that ESM features are an important source of information, but that even without them, integrating a
surface and a graph method gives a strong performance.
On PINDER, we obtain a small benefit from using ESM embeddings as node features, most notably
on the apo set. However, this gap seems to be quite small on this dataset with stricter splits. One
possible explanation for this result would be that those sequence-derived features contribute to
memorization, whilst learnt structural properties could better generalize.


F.6   A SSESSMENT OF THE IMPACT OF THE THRESHOLD DISTANCE

To evaluate the sensitivity of our results to variations of the distance threshold used to construct
the bipartite graph, we varied this parameter on the PSR task. We report our findings in table
6. Our investigation indicates that changes to the threshold have a moderate effect on the model’s
performance. However, it is important to note that excessively large values may lead to out-of-memory
errors.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Supplementary Table 6: Performance on the PSR task as a function of the threshold used.

                       Threshold (A)           4           8      10    20
                       local R          0.445           0.434   0.434   OOM
                       global R         0.812           0.833   0.815   OOM


                                                   26
