Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S EARCHING FOR O PTIMAL S OLUTIONS
WITH LLM S VIA BAYESIAN O PTIMIZATION

 Dhruv Agarwal1,†∗, Manoj Ghuhan Arivazhagan2,† , Rajarshi Das3,‡ , Sandesh Swamy2 ,
 Sopan Khosla3,‡ , Rashmi Gangadharaiah2
 1
   University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2 AWS AI Labs, 3 Meta AI
 dagarwal@cs.umass.edu, {mghuhan,sanswamy,rgangad}@amazon.com,
 {rajarshi,sopan}@meta.com



                                               A BSTRACT
            Scaling test-time compute to search for optimal solutions is an important step to-
            wards building generally-capable language models that can reason. Recent work,
            however, shows that tasks of varying complexity require distinct search strate-
            gies to solve optimally, thus making it challenging to design a one-size-fits-all
            approach. Prior solutions either attempt to predict task difficulty to select the
            optimal search strategy, often infeasible in practice, or use a static, pre-defined
            strategy, e.g., repeated parallel sampling or greedy sequential search, which is
            sub-optimal. In this work, we argue for an alternative view using the probabilistic
            framework of Bayesian optimization (BO), where the search strategy is adapted
            dynamically based on the evolving uncertainty estimates of solutions as search
            progresses. To this end, we introduce Bayesian-OPRO (BOPRO)—a generaliza-
            tion of a recent method for in-context optimization, which iteratively samples from
            new proposal distributions by modifying the prompt to the LLM with a subset of
            its previous generations selected to explore or exploit different parts of the search
            space. We evaluate our method on word search, molecule optimization, and a joint
            hypothesis+program search task using a 1-D version of the challenging Abstrac-
            tion and Reasoning Corpus (1D-ARC). Our results show that BOPRO outperforms
            all baselines in word search (≥10 points) and molecule optimization (higher qual-
            ity and 17% fewer invalid molecules), but trails a best-k prompting strategy in
            program search. Our analysis reveals that despite the ability to balance explo-
            ration and exploitation using BOPRO, failure is likely due to the inability of code
            representation models in distinguishing sequences with low edit-distances.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Decision-making under uncertainty is a hallmark of intelligent behavior (Kochenderfer, 2015; Peter-
son, 2017), with uncertainty arising from incomplete task information (e.g., unknown constraints and
preferences) (Bazerman, 2012), limited or inaccessible data due to challenging or costly collection
processes (e.g., efficacy of a drug design, feedback from human users) (Benary et al., 2023), or vast
solution spaces that are difficult to model comprehensively (e.g., scientific hypotheses) (Schneider,
2018; Majumder et al., 2024; 2025). Such settings, thus, require searching for optimal solutions—
iteratively estimating the quality of plausible solutions conditioned on limited available evidence
and prior beliefs to propose a candidate that is either similar to a previous observation known to be
high-performing or provide new information for future decision-making, commonly referred to as
the exploration-exploitation tradeoff (Cohen et al., 2007). Specifically, we are interested in answer-
ing whether a search method with large language models (LLMs) can be designed to handle this
trade-off automatically.1
Recent work (Krishnamurthy et al., 2024) suggests that models are good at exploiting known so-
lutions (finding local optima) but struggle to sufficiently explore the search space (finding global
optima), thus, curtailing their application in real-world search tasks. Recent attempts to address this
    ∗
        Work done during an internship at Amazon. † Corresponding authors. ‡ Work done at Amazon.
    1
        Our code is available at: https://github.com/amazon-science/BOPRO-ICLR-2025.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Overview of Bayesian-OPRO. In every iteration t, BOPRO starts by optimizing an ac-
quisition function α to propose a latent vector zt′ ∈ Z, the embedding space of solution sequences.
zt′ represents a point in the search space considered promising to observe by the surrogate model. To
sample one or more solutions from zt′ , BOPRO constructs a search prompt for an LLM by retrieving
k previous observations most similar to the BO proposal in the latent space, using them as in-context
examples. The sampled solutions xt are then scored using the black-box function f (·) and mapped
to Z using embedding function ϕ(·), which are then together used to update the surrogate posterior.


issue often involve constructing static meta-heuristics to encourage exploratory behavior, such as
with evolutionary algorithms (Lehman et al., 2023; Meyerson et al., 2023; Romera-Paredes et al.,
2024), repeated sampling (Brown et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024), or tuning parallel-to-sequential
sampling ratios based on task difficulty (Snell et al., 2024). Despite moderate success, these solu-
tions are either too expensive, not performant enough, or require fixing a search strategy through
offline evaluations. In this work, we explore an alternative direction and ask:

    Can we enable LLM-based search to automatically adapt its strategy as search progresses?

We answer in the affirmative and propose the use of Bayesian optimization (BO) (Kushner, 1964;
Frazier, 2018), a framework that builds a surrogate of an objective function using a probabilistic
model initialized with a set of priors and initial samples, then generates a posterior predictive dis-
tribution over candidate solutions by iteratively integrating new evidence. While there has been
preliminary work in trying to combine LLMs with BO, prior works have either viewed the task as
a selection problem from an existing pool of candidates (Kristiadi et al., 2024; Opsahl-Ong et al.,
2024) or relied on heuristics over samples from the LLM itself to build unprincipled uncertainty
estimates (Liu et al., 2024).
We, therefore, propose Bayesian-OPRO (BOPRO)—a novel method for integrating BO with LLMs
that leverages the evolving uncertainty in estimates of the solution space to generate promising solu-
tions in each round of search to find the global optima. In each iteration, BOPRO uses latent-space
BO to propose a latent target for the LLM, which is used to sample solutions via a prompting
strategy that builds upon a recent in-context optimization method called OPRO (Yang et al., 2024).
Specifically, we prompt the LLM with previously generated solutions that are most similar to the
BO proposal vector in order to bias its generation towards the BO-proposed region in the search
space. We empirically validate our approach on three challenging language-based search tasks—
word search, molecule optimization, and hypothesis+program search—and find that BOPRO out-
performs the baselines on all tasks except program search. Notably on Semantle, while baselines
plateau, likely getting stuck in local optima, BOPRO shows steady gains, pointing to its ability to
adaptively explore and exploit the search space. We analyze the search behaviors of each method and
demonstrate that BOPRO indeed shows the capacity to balance exploration and exploitation, which
is important for complex reasoning tasks. Despite this ability, we find evidence to suggest that fail-
ure on program search likely occurs due to an unavailability of fine-grained code representations
that can distinguish between sequences with low edit-distances.
In summary, our contributions are: (1) we propose BOPRO (§5), a novel method for integrating BO
with LLMs that adapts to the problem difficulty and evolving uncertainties as search progresses. (2)


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We conduct a thorough empirical evaluation (§6) on three search tasks, validating the efficacy of
BOPRO in finding optimized solutions compared to several strong baselines (§7). (3) We highlight
program synthesis as a failure case for BOPRO and present detailed analyses that (a) clearly demon-
strate a strong exploration capability in BOPRO (§8.1), and (b) reveal that the lack of fine-grained
representations is likely the root cause of optimization failure (§8.2).

2       S EARCH TASKS
We first describe three language-based search tasks that we experiment with in this work in order to
provide grounding for subsequent sections.

2.1     S EMANTLE : W ORD S EARCH

Semantle2 is a synthetic word-search task, where the goal is to find a held-out English word (e.g.,
“polyethylene”) with a limited number of guesses (budget) given only scalar feedback scores that
describe the similarity of a guessed word to the held-out word. In particular, we use representations
from the SimCSE (Gao et al., 2021) embedding model as the black-box scoring function. Each
held-out word is also paired with an initial warm-start set of words and scores (e.g., “hope” (score:
0.29), “golfing” (score: 0.35), “serum” (score: 0.51)), which together define a problem instance.

2.2     D OCKSTRING : M OLECULE O PTIMIZATION

Dockstring (Garcı́a-Ortegón et al., 2022) provides a benchmark of challenging molecule optimiza-
tion tasks that are closely related to real problems in drug discovery. In this work, we focus on
the multi-objective task of synthesizing a drug molecule (using SMILES strings (Weininger, 1988))
that jointly optimizes for both druglikeness, as measured by QED scores (Bickerton et al., 2012),
and binding (or docking) affinity to a target protein site, measured by Vina scores (Trott & Olson,
2010). Following Yuksekgonul et al. (2024), we synthesize new molecules for each protein target
starting from 3 basic chemical fragments—benzene (c1ccccc1), pentane (CCCCC), and acetamide
(CC(=O)N).

2.3     1D-ARC: H YPOTHESIS +P ROGRAM S EARCH

The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (Chollet, 2019) is a set of analogy puzzles in which a
solver must infer the common abstract rule underlying a small set of 3-5 “train” grid transformations,
and apply that rule to a new “test” grid. In this work, we use a 1-dimensional version of the dataset,
1D-ARC, introduced by Xu et al. (2024).3 We take an inductive hypothesis+program search view
(Wang et al., 2024), wherein search is performed over the space of natural-language algorithms
followed by generating its implementation as a python program. The goal for each problem instance
is, therefore, to find an algorithm and its python implementation that can solve all the train examples,
followed by a single evaluation of the best found program on a test example to receive a score.

3       BACKGROUND : BAYESIAN O PTIMIZATION
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a framework for derivative-free, global optimization to find

                                           x∗ := arg max f (x),
                                                     x∈A


where f : Rd → Ro is the black-box function to optimize, A is a feasible set within the input space
(often defined by box constraints) to constrain search, d is the number of input dimensions to tune, o
is typically the number of scalar objectives used to evaluate f (we set o = 1 throughout this work),
and we are allowed a limited budget T of evaluations that can be made using the black-box function
    2
    Inspired by the online word game of the same name: https://semantle.com/.
    3
    We use the 1D version to remove the need for identifying non-sequential object cohesion in 2D grids, noted
as being challenging for both moderate-sized models and uni-modal text models (Xu et al., 2024).


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


f to get an observation of the objective at some point in the input space. The goal for BO is then to
iteratively select a point for evaluation that is most likely to be x∗ based on the available evidence.
In a typical BO implementation, we first initialize a Bayesian statistical model, called a surrogate,
to model f with either user-defined priors about the objective function or with uninformed priors.
Typical choices for the surrogate model include Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams,
2006) and Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) (Springenberg et al., 2016), which encode distributions
over plausible realizations of the true black-box function. Once initialized, a set of warm-start
experiments are then conducted by taking random samples from the input space and observing their
black-box values. These samples are used to compute the initial posterior predictive distribution
f (x) | f (x1:t−1 ), which, in the case of a GP, is a normal distribution with mean µt (x) and variance
σt2 (x) at each input x at time-step t. The final component is an acquisition function α : Rd → R,
which is a function that balances exploration and exploitation by assigning a scalar value to each
point in the input space denoting the utility of sampling that point based on the posterior predictive
at a given time-step. At each step t, the next point is then sampled as


                                  xt := arg max α(x, f (x) | f (x1:t−1 )),
                                            x∈A


which can be optimized using standard gradient-based methods. We then evaluate the black-box
function at this new point to get f (xt ) and update the posterior predictive. This loop is repeated
until either the search budget is exhausted or a solution with sufficient quality is found, following
which the best solution found thus far is returned.


4    R ELATED W ORK

Test-time compute with LLMs. Snell et al. (2024) provide a framework for categorizing different
methods for scaling test-time compute into refining the proposal distribution and using verifiers to
guide decoding, e.g. during beam search. Brown et al. (2024) present an analysis of the ability
of repeated sampling to scale test-time compute and derive scaling laws for the same. Several
other test-time search and optimization methods (Yang et al., 2024; Lehman et al., 2023; Meyerson
et al., 2023; Romera-Paredes et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024) approach the problem assuming the
availability of a known verifier, similar to our setting.

Bayesian optimization and LLMs. Some methods use the LLM itself to simulate each step of BO
via repeated prompting to compute uncertainties over candidate solutions (Liu et al., 2024; Ramos
et al., 2023). Other methods have used BO with LLMs to perform efficient selection over a discrete
solution set (Kristiadi et al., 2024; Opsahl-Ong et al., 2024). Chen et al. (2024) propose an approach
to learn soft-prompts with BO starting with a set of random vectors and show promising results
on instruction induction. Finally, our work is also related to earlier works performing LSBO with
autoencoders instead of LLMs (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018).


5    BAYESIAN -OPRO (BOPRO)

We now introduce BOPRO (Fig. 1)—a method for LLM-based search that can automatically adapt
its strategy based on the evolving uncertainties about the search space using latent-space BO over
textual embeddings of plausible solutions for a given task. In each iteration with BOPRO, a surro-
gate model builds a probabilistic estimate of task performance for unobserved regions of the search
space using previous observations and proposes a vector representing a promising region to sample
solutions from next. The proposal vector is used to build a search prompt that is input to an LLM to
sample new solution sequences. The generated solutions are then scored using the black-box func-
tion for the task and added to the pool of observations to improve surrogate estimates in subsequent
iterations. This process is repeated until either the optimal solution is found or the search budget is
exhausted, following which the best solution found thus far is returned.4
   4
     Our focus is to evaluate search methods and, thus, we use tasks with external verifiers to avoid confounding
with noisy feedback. However, our method can easily be used with learned verifiers such as reward models.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We next describe each component of BOPRO categorized broadly into: (1) generating the latent-
space proposal using BO, and (2) decoding the solution text from the latent proposal via prompting.


5.1     L ATENT-S PACE BO

5.1.1    WARM - STARTING
                                               (i)      (i)
To generate the initial warm-start set {(xw , f (xw ))}i=1:W , we prompt an LLM to generate W
unique solutions using a manually written task description (see Appendix A.6.1). We then compute
the latent-space embedding for each generated solution using a representation function ϕ(·), e.g.,
a text embedding model, to get z := ϕ(x) ∈ Rd . We then derive the initial posterior predictive
                               (i)     (i)
distribution conditioned on {(zw , f (xw ))}i=1:W . Note that the goal at this stage is only to provide
wide coverage of the solution space, and not to maximize f .

5.1.2    G ENERATING R EPRESENTATIONS

Representation prompt. To generate useful representations for solution candidates, we convert
the raw text of a solution into a task-dependent prompt before passing it through ϕ(·). E.g., in
program search, the algorithm x and code y may simply be represented as “Algorithm: x;
Code: y” (see Appendix A.6.2).

Representation function. BOPRO relies on the availability of an embedding function ϕ(·) that
is capable of generating good representations of plausible solutions for the task. For example, in
program search, embeddings must be able to distinguish between distinct algorithmic constructs.
Additionally, since it is widely reported that GPs struggle with large input dimensions (Snoek et al.,
2012; Wang et al., 2013), we, optionally, include a dimensionality reduction function ψ(·) to get z :=
                ′
ψ(ϕ(x)) ∈ Rd , where d′ ≪ d. Several choices exist for ψ, including PCA, low-rank projection
(Li et al., 2018; Aghajanyan et al., 2021), and random projection (Wang et al., 2013). When no
dimensionality reduction is used, ψ is simply set as the identity function.5

5.1.3    G ENERATING L ATENT- SPACE P ROPOSALS

Surrogate model. BOPRO uses a probabilistic surrogate model to estimate the uncertainty in
the search space and efficiently update its beliefs about the goodness of different regions as new
solutions are observed. Throughout this work, we use a Gaussian process (GP) surrogate model
with a Matérn kernel (Genton, 2001) and priors manually-tuned by visually assessing the fit of the
posterior distribution on a known set of solution-score pairs for each task on a randomly sampled
problem instance (see Fig. 7).

Acquisition function. As described in §3, given a posterior predictive distribution over the fea-
sible search space, BO uses an acquisition function to estimate the value of observing each point.
We optimize this acquisition function using multi-start projected gradient ascent to get a new pro-
posal vector that represents a promising region of the search space to sample solutions from. We
experiment with three common choices: log expected improvement (LogEI) (Ament et al., 2023),
upper-confidence bound (UCB) (Auer, 2002), and Thompson sampling (TS) Thompson (1933).
Please see Appendix A.4.2 for additional details on our BO setup.


5.2     L ATENT- TO -T EXT D ECODING

With a latent BO proposal that represents a promising region of the search space, we now require a
mechanism to sample textual sequences from the proposed region.

    5
      We found that using no dimensionality reduction results in the best performance and is, hence, our default
setting for all experiments. Please see Appendix A.5.6 for an ablation result.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.2.1     G ENERATING S OLUTIONS VIA S EARCH P ROMPTS
Given a BO proposal vector zt′ , we first compute the cosine similarity szt′ ,z between zt′ and each pre-
                                                                                     (i)
viously observed solution vector (including the warm-start set) z ∈ Z := {zw }i=1:W ∪{zj }j=1:t−1 .
We then use the resultant solution-score pairs to construct a search prompt by selecting and order-
ing the top-k solutions according to each szt′ ,z in order to provide an inductive bias for generating
solution xt such that zt := ψ(ϕ(xt )) has higher similarity to zt′ than previous solution vectors
z ∈ Z (see Appendix A.6.3). In practice, we sample a batch of candidates for each zt′ , which we
found improved performance for all methods we evaluated.6

Generalizing OPRO. Our method is a Bayesian generalization of a recent in-context optimizaton
method, OPRO (Yang et al., 2024), which instead constructs a search prompt by selecting the top-k
observed solutions according to the black-box function itself, thereby using a greedy strategy. As an
example, consider a Semantle problem with the hidden word being “wordsmith” and the following
previous guesses: “word” (score: 0.7), “sentence” (score: 0.65), “lock” (score: 0.5), and “metal”
(score: 0.49). Using OPRO, we would greedily select “word” and “sentence” to include in the
prompt, whereas BOPRO could sample “lock” and “metal” based on the evolving uncertainties in
the BO process, thus possibly generating “locksmith”, which can further generate “wordsmith”.
Different from OPRO, we also find that removing numerical scores from the prompt results in a
modest improvement across methods, therefore we use this as the default setting.

Alternative decoding strategies. Note that our generalization of OPRO can similarly be ex-
tended to other in-context optimization methods, e.g., LMX (Meyerson et al., 2023) and FunSearch
(Romera-Paredes et al., 2024), which are LLM-based evolutionary algorithms. To demonstrate this
generalization, we also show experimental results with one such extension (Bayesian-LMX), but
find that it consistently underperforms BOPRO.

Handling sampling errors. There are two types of errors that can occur when repeatedly generat-
ing solutions from an LLM. First, a generated solution may have already been sampled in a previous
iteration, and second, a generated solution might be invalid with respect to the black-box function,
e.g., a generated python program may have syntax errors. To address both problems, we follow prior
works and leverage retry (“self-refine”) loops. Please see Appendix A.4 for additional details.

6       E XPERIMENTS
To validate the search performance of BOPRO, we run a comprehensive set of experiments on three
challenging language-based search tasks as introduced in §2—Semantle (word search), Dockstring
(molecule optimization), and 1D-ARC (hypothesis+program search).

6.1     BASELINES

We evaluate three variants of BOPRO characterized by the acquisition function used: BOPRO-
logEI, BOPRO-UCB, and BOPRO-TS. Our main baseline is OPRO (Greedy) (Yang et al., 2024),
which replaces the Bayesian prompting in our method with a greedy best-k strategy. We also com-
pare with a repeated sampling (RS) baseline7 , which relies on the stochasticity from ancestral sam-
pling to generate new solutions from a fixed initial prompt. Lastly, we include a random baseline
that samples k previously observed solution-score pairs in each iteration to include in the prompt.

Additional baselines (§7.4). We also evaluate InstructZero (Chen et al., 2024), an approach that
replaces the hard-prompting in BOPRO with a soft-prompt that is iteratively optimized using BO.
Additionally, as described in §5, it is straightforward to generalize our Bayesian view to other in-
context optimization methods, including evolutionary algorithms, and we present an experiment
with one such method, LMX (Meyerson et al., 2023).
    6
      While every iteration in BOPRO may not yield zt that is close to zt′ , we show in experiments that the
generations are sufficient to guide search towards optimized solutions over time.
    7
      Note that in Semantle, the initial warm-start is part of the task description, so we make it available as a
fixed prompt to RS. For 1D-ARC, we manually write a common task description used across all methods.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                        0.9                                                                              0.6
          1.0       BOPRO-LogEI                                                                                                                                                    BOPRO-LogEI
                    BOPRO-TS
                    BOPRO-UCB                                                           0.8                                                                              0.5       BOPRO-TS
          0.8       OPRO (Greedy)
                    RS                                                                  0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                   BOPRO-UCB


                                                                 Scalarized Objective
                    Random                                                                                                                                               0.4       OPRO (Greedy)


                                                                                                                                                        Train Accuracy
          0.6                                                                           0.6                                                                                        RS
% Found

                                                                                                                                                                         0.3       Random
                                                                                        0.5
          0.4                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                        0.4                                             BOPRO-LogEI
                                                                                                                                        BOPRO-TS
          0.2                                                                                                                           BOPRO-UCB                        0.1
                                                                                        0.3
                                                                                                                                        OPRO (Greedy)
                                                                                                                                        RS
                                                                                        0.2                                             Random                           0.0
          0.0
                0        200         400     600    800   1000                                0   25    50     75   100   125     150      175    200                          0   25   50      75   100   125     150   175   200
                                    Words Guessed                                                            Molecules Proposed                                                              Solutions Generated
                            (a) Semantle                                                               (b) Dockstring                                                                   (c) 1D-ARC

Figure 2: Best-so-far search performance (using Mistral-Large). (a) On Semantle, all BOPRO
variants outperform greedy OPRO in finding the hidden word by ≥10 percentage points. (b) In
molecule optimization, BOPRO shows slightly better performance than OPRO on average. Impor-
tantly, OPRO is only able to finish optimization for 12 of 58 protein targets in the same wall-clock
time as BOPRO due to consistently proposing invalid sequences (causing high latency in black-box
evaluation). (c) In program search, BOPRO trails OPRO due to code embeddings that are unable
to distinguish between sequences with low edit-distances (see §8.2). Takeaway: BOPRO generates
higher-quality solutions than all baselines on the tasks of word search and molecule optimization,
but shows a failure scenario with hypothesis+program search.


6.2                 M ODELS

Our main results use Mistral-Large-2407 (Jiang et al., 2023) as the representative LLM to generate
solutions for each search method. We also present experiments with additional model families such
as LLaMA-3.1-8b-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024), Gemma-2-2b-It (Team et al., 2024), and GPT-4o
(Achiam et al., 2023). For the embedding model, on the tasks of Semantle and 1D-ARC, we use
GTE-Qwen-2-1.5b-Instruct (Li et al., 2023), an instruction-tuned embedding model, since it is pre-
trained on both general-purpose English data as well as code, both of which are relevant to the tasks
in question. For molecule optimization (Dockstring), we use the Molformer (Ross et al., 2022)
embedding model, which was jointly pre-trained on natural-language text and SMILES strings.
Please see Appendix A.4 for additional details of our experimental setting.


7               M AIN R ESULTS

7.1                 S EMANTLE : W ORD S EARCH

In Fig. 2(a), we show the main results on Semantle by describing the percentage of problems where
the hidden word was found over 50 problem instances (using 10 hidden words and 5 warm-start sets)
with a maximum budget in each run set to 1000 guesses and averaged over 3 repeat runs.

Results. First, we observe that both repeated sampling and the random baseline fail to find the
hidden word in most runs, thus validating that Semantle is a challenging test bed for search that
requires a substantial shift in the sampling distribution as more evidence is gathered. Next, we find
that all BOPRO variants outperform the baselines by ≥10 percentage points. Notably, while OPRO
shows rapid initial gains, it is followed by a long plateau, likely indicating that it gets stuck in local
optima. On the other hand, BOPRO shows steady gains, pointing to its capability to adaptively
explore and exploit the search space.

7.2                 D OCKSTRING : M OLECULE O PTIMIZATION

Fig. 2(b) shows our results for molecule optimization to synthesize optimized drug molecules for
58 clinically relevant protein targets from the Dockstring (Garcı́a-Ortegón et al., 2022) benchmark.
In order to perform multi-objective optimization over both druglikeness (QED) and binding affinity
(Vina scores), we follow the common practice in BBO and maximize instead a single scalarized
metric that takes a weighted combination of the two scores (see Appendix A.4.1). For each protein


                                                                                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


target, we start optimization with a warm-start set of benzene (c1ccccc1), pentane (CCCCC), and
acetamide (CC(=O)N), and generate a maximum of 200 new molecule SMILES strings.

Results. Our results show that BOPRO                                  Target: PTPN1
                                                        2
marginally outperforms greedy OPRO on av-                                                BOPRO-LogEI
                                                                                         BOPRO-UCB
erage. More notably, we find that OPRO is                                                BOPRO-TS
                                                        4                                OPRO (Greedy)
unable to even finish optimization for all 58                                            RS


                                                      Binding Affinity (Vina score)
targets (completing only 12) over a 2-day pe-           6
riod, which is the same wall-clock time allo-
cated to BOPRO. Analyzing the generations,              8
we find that the greedy approach in OPRO con-
sistently proposes SMILES strings that are 40%         10
longer than those proposed by BOPRO. This
increases evaluation time with the black-box           12
function and, in fact, results in 17% more in-            0.0    0.2  0.4          0.6  0.8        1.0
                                                                     Druglikeness (QED)
valid molecules being proposed than with BO-
PRO. In Fig. 3, we also visualize the distri-
                                                      Figure 3: SMILES distributions for PTPN1
bution of druglikeness and affinity scores of
molecules generated by each method for one protein target, tyrosine-protein phosphatase non-
receptor type 1 (PTPN1). We see that OPRO is unable to jointly optimize both objectives but all
BOPRO variants show an ability to explore the complex manifold and propose molecules that have
high druglikeness and better binding affinity (lower Vina score).

7.3     1D-ARC: H YPOTHESIS +P ROGRAM S EARCH

Constructing 1D-ARC-Hard. Following Wang et al. (2024), we run a preliminary evaluation on
their filtered subset of 108 problem instances. However, our results show that with only simple
repeated sampling (RS) for 100 iterations using Mistral-Large, it is possible to achieve a test set
accuracy of 81.48%, 8 points higher than the method in Wang et al. (2024) that uses GPT-4. We,
therefore, construct 1D-ARC-Hard, a challenging subset suitable for evaluating search performance
by first running RS for 100 generations for each of the 901 problems in the original dataset, followed
by sampling 130 instances from the unsolved subset of 175 problems.

                                                                                                      0.5
Results. Our results are shown in Fig. 2(c) and Fig. 4.
Unlike previously, we find that all BOPRO variants now                                                0.4
trail the greedy OPRO baseline, with BOPRO even un-
                                                                                      Test Accuracy


                                                                                                      0.3
derperforming repeated sampling, noted as being a strong
method for code generation in prior work (Brown et al.,                                               0.2
2024). We analyze this failure scenario and present our
hypothesis for the root cause in §8.                                                                  0.1


                                                                                                      0.0
                                                                                                                          I        S            -UCB           dy)   RS
                                                                                                                 O   -LogE BOPRO-T          O            (Gree            Rand
                                                                                                                                                                               om
7.4     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS                                                                            BOPR                       BOPR         OPRO

                                                              Figure 4: 1D-ARC test accuracy
Below, we present experiments with additional baselines
that represent two distinct LLM-based iterative optimization methodologies.

                                           InstructZero. InstructZero is a method that replaces
  Method                         Score     hard-prompts, as in BOPRO, with soft-prompts that are
  InstructZero                    4.00%    also optimized using BO to steer LLM generations to-
  InstructZero (w/ sampling)      8.00%    wards higher utility. We evaluate this method on all
  RS                             14.00%    50 problem instances in Semantle using Llama-3.1-8b-
  BOPRO-LogEI                    66.67%    Instruct and compare it with BOPRO in Table 1. We use
  BOPRO-UCB                      76.67%    both the original formulation of InstructZero as well as
  BOPRO-TS                       73.33%    a version that uses ancestral sampling instead of greedy
                                           decoding. Our results show that InstructZero is unable to
      Table 1: InstructZero on Semantle    outperform even repeated sampling, indicating the lack of
                                           any meaningful optimization.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 10                                                                                    0.6
                           All solved
                 8
                           Only BOPRO                                                                  0.5
                           Only OPRO
                           Only RS                                                                     0.4


                                                                                      Train Accuracy
                 6


       Density
                                                                                                       0.3
                 4
                                                                                                                                                BOPRO-LogEI
                                                                                                       0.2                                      BOPRO-TS
                                                                                                                                                BOPRO-UCB
                 2                                                                                     0.1                                      OPRO (Greedy)
                                                                                                                                                RS
                 0
                                                                                                       0.0                                      Random
                 0.45   0.50   0.55   0.60   0.65   0.70   0.75   0.80   0.85                                0    25   50      75   100   125     150   175   200
                               Average Score in Warm-start                                                                  Solutions Generated
      (a) Solved tasks vs. warm-start scores                                    (b) Performance with low warm-start scores


                         (c) BOPRO (solved)                                                                      (d) OPRO (unsolved)

Figure 5: Exploration-exploitation trade-off with BOPRO. (a) We show the distribution of tasks
exclusively solved by each method versus the average warm-start scores for those tasks. OPRO
is able to solve tasks with high-scores showing an exploitation strategy, random sampling solves
tasks with low scores due to no dependence on prior generations (thus, using an exploration-only
strategy), and BO shows a bimodal distribution solving both low- and high-scoring tasks, indicating
adaptability to task difficulty. (b) On tasks with low warm-start scores, BOPRO and other baselines
outperform greedy. (c, d) Search trajectories for 1 problem instance of 1D-ARC; OPRO gets stuck
in a local optima, while BOPRO-TS is able to explore different regions and find the correct solution.


LMX. Next, we evaluate the LMX evolutionary algorithm and also present its Bayesian general-
ization, BLMX, as described in §5. Our results on 1D-ARC show that both LMX and BLMX are
viable alternatives to OPRO and BOPRO, respectively, but often trail in performance. Please see
Appendix A.5.2 for more details.

Generalization to other LLMs. Finally, we also validate our method with other LLMs (of varied
sizes) by running additional experiments on Semantle with GPT-4o and Gemma-2-2b-It. Our results
are shown in Appendix A.5.1 and demonstrate similar trends to our main results.

8     W HY IS BOPRO UNDERPERFORMING ON PROGRAM SEARCH ?
To determine the root cause of failure of BOPRO on program search, we next present a detailed
analysis of our 1D-ARC results.

8.1   I S BOPRO UNABLE TO BALANCE EXPLORATION - EXPLOITATION ?

To answer this question, we design an experiment starting search with different amounts of informa-
tion available in the warm-start set. Arguably, tasks with low warm-start scores are more challenging
and require more exploration, whereas tasks with high warm-start scores can more easily be solved
by greedily exploiting the best observed solution. In Figure 5(a), we plot the probability density of
problem instances solved by each method as a function of the average scores observed in the warm-
start set. We find that OPRO performs better on tasks with higher warm-start scores, suggesting
an exploitation strategy. With BOPRO, on the other hand, we observe a bimodal distribution that
covers both low- and high-scores, indicating the ability to balance exploration and exploitation.


                                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Diagnostic for representation quality. The scatter plot shows the distance between
candidate solutions of 10 problems in 1D-ARC in the representation space and the corresponding
difference in terms of their black-box scores. Useful representations for BO should result in no
points in the top-left quadrant of these plots.

We verify these observations by plotting performance on a subset of 1D-ARC-Hard tasks that have
low warm-start scores (below the first quartile). As shown in Fig. 5(b), OPRO suffers a sharp drop
in performance whereas BOPRO, RS, and even random show improvements, with BOPRO-TS and
RS showing the best performance. We also provide visual evidence in Fig. 5(c,d) for demonstrating
the ability of BOPRO in balancing exploration-exploitation by plotting the search trajectories in
the latent search space (see Appendix A.5.3 for more details). Takeaway: BOPRO does show the
ability to balance exploration-exploitation and is, thus, not the cause of failure in program search.

8.2       A RE OFF - THE - SHELF CODE EMBEDDINGS ILL - SUITED FOR PROGRAM SEARCH ?

Since BOPRO relies on good representations of the solution space in order to perform meaningful
optimization, a likely cause of failure is poor representation quality from off-the-shelf code em-
bedders, which may not provide fine-grained signal for optimizing code sequences. To verify this
hypothesis for 1D-ARC and the GTE-Qwen embeddings, we present a diagnostic scatter plot (Ko-
rovina et al., 2020) in Fig. 6 that shows pairwise L2 distances between solution candidates as well
as their corresponding differences in black-box scores8 . Ideally, when L2 distance is low, the score
difference should also be low in order to provide useful signal to the nonparametric GP surrogate.
From our plot, however, we clearly see that this is not the case, i.e., solutions deemed similar in the
embedding space vary dramatically in terms of task scores. This is intuitive as well—consider two
python code sequences that only differ in one inequality operator. Off-the-shelf embeddings do not
capture this nuanced difference, but such a change is likely to have an impact on program output.
Takeaway: low edit-distances between candidate solutions and the unavailability of fine-grained
code embedding models are a likely cause of failure for BOPRO in program search, indicating an
important direction for future work.9

9       C ONCLUSION
We propose a novel methodology, Bayesian-OPRO (BOPRO), for LLM-based search using
Bayesian optimization, which uses the evolving uncertainty in estimates of the search space to pro-
pose promising new solutions in each iteration to find the global optima. Our experiments on word
search and molecule optimization show that BOPRO outperforms strong baselines. Notably, BO-
PRO outperforms OPRO by ≥10 percentage points on Semantle and produces 17% fewer invalid
molecules on Dockstring. On the challenging hypothesis+program search task of 1D-ARC, how-
ever, BOPRO trails OPRO. We investigate this failure and find that despite BOPRO showing the
ability to balance exploration and exploitation, the problem lies in the inadequacy of off-the-shelf
code embedding models in providing distinct representations for sequences with low-edit distances.
    8
        See Fig. 11 for the same plot on Semantle.
    9
        See Appendix A.1 for an additional discussion on limitations and future work.


                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Armen Aghajanyan, Sonal Gupta, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Intrinsic dimensionality explains the ef-
  fectiveness of language model fine-tuning. In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto
  Navigli (eds.), Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 7319–7328, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.568. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  acl-long.568.

Sebastian Ament, Samuel Daulton, David Eriksson, Maximilian Balandat, and Eytan Bakshy. Un-
  expected improvements to expected improvement for bayesian optimization. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36:20577–20612, 2023.

Peter Auer. Using confidence bounds for exploitation-exploration trade-offs. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 3(Nov):397–422, 2002.

Maximilian Balandat, Brian Karrer, Daniel Jiang, Samuel Daulton, Ben Letham, Andrew G Wil-
 son, and Eytan Bakshy. Botorch: A framework for efficient monte-carlo bayesian optimization.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:21524–21538, 2020.

MH Bazerman. Judgment in Managerial Decision Making. Free Press, 2012.

Manuela Benary, Xing David Wang, Max Schmidt, Dominik Soll, Georg Hilfenhaus, Mani Nassir,
 Christian Sigler, Maren Knödler, Ulrich Keller, Dieter Beule, et al. Leveraging large language
 models for decision support in personalized oncology. JAMA Network Open, 6(11):e2343689–
 e2343689, 2023.

G Richard Bickerton, Gaia V Paolini, Jérémy Besnard, Sorel Muresan, and Andrew L Hopkins.
  Quantifying the chemical beauty of drugs. Nature chemistry, 4(2):90–98, 2012.

Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V Le, Christopher Ré, and
  Azalia Mirhoseini. Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated sampling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21787, 2024.

Lichang Chen, Jiuhai Chen, Tom Goldstein, Heng Huang, and Tianyi Zhou. Instructzero: Effi-
  cient instruction optimization for black-box large language models. In Forty-first International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  rADFNrIss3.

François Chollet. On the measure of intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547, 2019.

Jonathan D Cohen, Samuel M McClure, and Angela J Yu. Should i stay or should i go? how the
  human brain manages the trade-off between exploitation and exploration. Philosophical Trans-
  actions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 362(1481):933–942, 2007.

Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

Peter I Frazier. A tutorial on bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.02811, 2018.

Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. Simcse: Simple contrastive learning of sentence
  embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08821, 2021.

Miguel Garcı́a-Ortegón, Gregor NC Simm, Austin J Tripp, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, Andreas
 Bender, and Sergio Bacallado. Dockstring: easy molecular docking yields better benchmarks for
 ligand design. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 62(15):3486–3502, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jacob R Gardner, Geoff Pleiss, David Bindel, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Andrew Gordon Wilson.
  Gpytorch: Blackbox matrix-matrix gaussian process inference with gpu acceleration. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.

Marc G Genton. Classes of kernels for machine learning: a statistics perspective. Journal of machine
 learning research, 2(Dec):299–312, 2001.

Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N Wei, David Duvenaud, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato,
  Benjamı́n Sánchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D Hirzel,
  Ryan P Adams, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven contin-
  uous representation of molecules. ACS central science, 4(2):268–276, 2018.

Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.

Mykel J Kochenderfer. Decision making under uncertainty: theory and application. MIT press,
 2015.

Ksenia Korovina, Sailun Xu, Kirthevasan Kandasamy, Willie Neiswanger, Barnabas Poczos, Jeff
  Schneider, and Eric Xing. Chembo: Bayesian optimization of small organic molecules with syn-
  thesizable recommendations. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 3393–3403. PMLR, 2020.

Akshay Krishnamurthy, Keegan Harris, Dylan J Foster, Cyril Zhang, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Can
  large language models explore in-context? arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.15371, 2024.

Agustinus Kristiadi, Felix Strieth-Kalthoff, Marta Skreta, Pascal Poupart, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, and
  Geoff Pleiss. A sober look at llms for material discovery: Are they actually good for bayesian
  optimization over molecules? arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05015, 2024.

Harold J Kushner. A new method of locating the maximum point of an arbitrary multipeak curve in
  the presence of noise. 1964.

Joel Lehman, Jonathan Gordon, Shawn Jain, Kamal Ndousse, Cathy Yeh, and Kenneth O Stanley.
  Evolution through large models. In Handbook of Evolutionary Machine Learning, pp. 331–366.
  Springer, 2023.

Chunyuan Li, Heerad Farkhoor, Rosanne Liu, and Jason Yosinski. Measuring the intrinsic dimension
  of objective landscapes. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=ryup8-WCW.

Zehan Li, Xin Zhang, Yanzhao Zhang, Dingkun Long, Pengjun Xie, and Meishan Zhang. Towards
  general text embeddings with multi-stage contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03281,
  2023.

Tennison Liu, Nicolás Astorga, Nabeel Seedat, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Large language models
  to enhance bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03921, 2024.

Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Harshit Surana, Dhruv Agarwal, Sanchaita Hazra, Ashish Sabhar-
  wal, and Peter Clark. Position: data-driven discovery with large generative models. In Forty-first
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Harshit Surana, Dhruv Agarwal, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Abhijeets-
  ingh Meena, Aryan Prakhar, Tirth Vora, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, and Peter Clark. Dis-
  coverybench: Towards data-driven discovery with large language models. In The Thirteenth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Elliot Meyerson, Mark J Nelson, Herbie Bradley, Adam Gaier, Arash Moradi, Amy K Hoover, and
  Joel Lehman. Language model crossover: Variation through few-shot prompting. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.12170, 2023.
Krista Opsahl-Ong, Michael J Ryan, Josh Purtell, David Broman, Christopher Potts, Matei Zaharia,
  and Omar Khattab. Optimizing instructions and demonstrations for multi-stage language model
  programs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11695, 2024.
Martin Peterson. An introduction to decision theory. Cambridge University Press, 2017.
Mayk Caldas Ramos, Shane S Michtavy, Marc D Porosoff, and Andrew D White. Bayesian opti-
 mization of catalysts with in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05341, 2023.
Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning.
  The MIT Press, 2006.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1908.10084.
Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog,
  M Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco JR Ruiz, Jordan S Ellenberg, Pengming Wang,
  Omar Fawzi, et al. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models.
  Nature, 625(7995):468–475, 2024.
Jerret Ross, Brian Belgodere, Vijil Chenthamarakshan, Inkit Padhi, Youssef Mroueh, and Payel Das.
   Large-scale chemical language representations capture molecular structure and properties. Nature
   Machine Intelligence, 4(12):1256–1264, 2022. doi: 10.1038/s42256-022-00580-7.
Gisbert Schneider. Automating drug discovery. Nature reviews drug discovery, 17(2):97–113, 2018.
Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally
  can be more effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314, 2024.
Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. Practical bayesian optimization of machine
  learning algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Aaron Klein, Stefan Falkner, and Frank Hutter. Bayesian optimiza-
  tion with robust bayesian neural networks. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2016/file/a96d3afec184766bfeca7a9f989fc7e7-Paper.pdf.
Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhu-
  patiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, et al. Gemma
  2: Improving open language models at a practical size. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2408, 2024.
William R Thompson. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of
 the evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 25(3-4):285–294, 1933.
Oleg Trott and Arthur J Olson. Autodock vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking with
  a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. Journal of computational
  chemistry, 31(2):455–461, 2010.
Ruocheng Wang, Eric Zelikman, Gabriel Poesia, Yewen Pu, Nick Haber, and Noah Goodman. Hy-
  pothesis search: Inductive reasoning with language models. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  G7UtIGQmjm.
Ziyu Wang, Masrour Zoghi, David Matheson, Frank Hutter, and Nando de Freitas. Bayesian opti-
  mization in a billion dimensions via random embeddings. In International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI). Technical Report arXiv:1301.1942., 2013.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


David Weininger. Smiles, a chemical language and information system. 1. introduction to method-
  ology and encoding rules. Journal of chemical information and computer sciences, 28(1):31–36,
  1988.
T Wolf. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
Yudong Xu, Wenhao Li, Pashootan Vaezipoor, Scott Sanner, and Elias Boutros Khalil. LLMs and
  the abstraction and reasoning corpus: Successes, failures, and the importance of object-based
  representations. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=E8m8oySvPJ.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun
  Chen. Large language models as optimizers. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bb4VGOWELI.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and
 James Zou. Textgrad: Automatic” differentiation” via text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496,
 2024.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

There remain several questions that lie beyond the scope of our immediate investigation but would
be useful to consider in future work. For instance, how can we accurately bound the space of valid
solutions in the latent embedding space in order for acquisition optimization to always give us a
valid latent proposal as well as not artificially constrain it to a limited region. Currently, we define
the bounds for acquisition optimization as 1.5× the convex hull defined by the observed warm-
start set. However, this may either be too large or too small, depending on the problem. Another
unanswered question is whether BO is negatively affected by the existence of multiple global optima,
such as in 1D-ARC. Lastly, it is evident that using a prompting-based decoding method to translate
latent proposals back to discrete textual tokens does not offer precise control. Future work should
investigate methods that can improve the accuracy of converting latent proposals to text.

A.2     A DDITIONAL M ETHOD D ETAILS

A.2.1    H ANDLING S AMPLING E RRORS
Repetitions. Since our method repeatedly samples an LLM to generate new solutions, generation
of duplicate samples is common. We, therefore, use a limited number of re-sampling calls to the
LLM to try and generate new solutions in each round of search. If all calls result in repeated so-
lutions, we accept the generation but use the BO proposal as the representation of the generated
sequence along with the observed black-box value to update the surrogate in the next iteration.10

Invalid generations. In tasks such as code generation, some proposed generations may be invalid,
e.g., a generated program may have syntax errors. In such cases, we use a limited number of self-
refine (Madaan et al., 2024) calls that attempt to fix the generated solution using the same LLM. If
errors persist, we assign the solution a score of −1, assuming a [0, 1] range for valid scores.

A.2.2    E XTENDED BO D ESCRIPTIONS
Acquisition functions. We evaluate BOPRO with three types of acquisition functions that each
uses the posterior distribution differently to estimate the value of sampling the next point.

    • Log expected improvement (LogEI) computes the expected gain in performance for each
      point with respect to the best known solution so far.
   10
      We found this technique reduced repetitions in our experiments. This is likely due to noisy updates allow-
ing the acquisition optimization to escape local optima.


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  • Upper-confidence bound (UCB) computes the value as the sum of the mean value of a point
    and the standard deviation (uncertainty) at the point weighted by an exploration factor.
  • Thompson sampling (TS) randomly samples a function from the posterior distribution and
    uses the estimates from it as the acquisition values.

Acquisition optimization bounds. To optimize the acquisition function and generate a new BO
proposal, we use multi-start projected gradient-ascent, which requires the specification of bounds to
constrain the proposals. We use a heuristic of setting each dimension of the input embedding space
to 1.5x the range observed in an a priori collection of unlabeled candidate solutions. When such a
collection is unavailable, we make use of the warm-start set instead.

Tuning priors. We sample a set of known solution-score pairs, order them in ascending order of
their black-box scores, and plot the mean and standard deviation of the posterior distribution for
each round of BO to see if the posterior progressively fits to the ground-truth function as shown in
Fig. 7.


                           Figure 7: Prior tuning example on 1D-ARC.


A.3     A DDITIONAL TASK /DATASET D ETAILS

A.3.1    ARC AND 1D-ARC E XAMPLES
In Fig. 8, we show two examples of the type of grid transformations that are required in the ARC
and 1D-ARC datasets.


                      (a) ARC                                          (b) 1D-ARC

           Figure 8: ARC (Chollet, 2019) and 1D-ARC (Xu et al., 2024) example tasks.



                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

A.4.1    TASK -S PECIFIC S ETTINGS

Semantle. The black-box function we use is the cosine similarity of vector representations gener-
ated using the SimCSE (Gao et al., 2021) sentence embedding model, where the score for a candidate
word x for a hidden word y is computed by comparing sequences “What is a {x}?” and “What is
a {y}?”. The number of warm-start candidates is 20, number of solution generations is 1000, BO
optimization batch size is 1 (i.e., in each iteration we only sample one proposal vector by optimiz-
ing the acquisition function), BO decoding batch size is 10. The total BO iterations are, therefore,
100. We also use repeat retries with a maximum count of 3. During decoding, we use 10 in-context
examples. The representation model we use is GTE-Qwen2-1.5b-Instruct.

Dockstring. To perform multi-objective optimization over both druglikeness (QED scores) and
binding affinity (Vina scores), we scalarize the objective into a single metric. First, we normalize
vina scores by using their typical range of -3 to -12. We then take its negative and compute a
weighted combination of this negative normalized Vina (NNV) score and QED scores as: 0.2 ×
QED + 0.8 × NNV. Given a new SMILES string generated by the LLM, we follow the mechanism in
Yuksekgonul et al. (2024) to compute QED and Vina scores. Number of warm-start candidates is 3,
number of solution generations is 200, BO optimization batch size is 1, BO decoding batch size is
10, number of in-context examples is 10, number of repeat retries is 3, and the representation model
is Molformer.

1D-ARC. Since the dataset imposes only a 0-1 accuracy as the objective, we introduce a
Hamming-distance based metric to provide process-level supervision for different search meth-
ods. Specifically, we calculate the objective as the proportion of cells in the predicted grid that match
the ground-truth grid. If there is a shape mismatch, we assign a score of -1. See Appendix A.3.1
for an example task. Number of warm-start candidates is 100, number of solution generations is
200, BO optimization batch size is 1, BO decoding batch size is 10, number of in-context exam-
ples is 3, number of unique retries is 0, the number of self-refine trials for code fixes is 1, and the
representation model is GTE-Qwen-2-1.5b-instruct.

A.4.2    BO S ETUP

We use BoTorch (Balandat et al., 2020) and GPyTorch (Gardner et al., 2018) for all BO-related code
in our experiments. We use output standardization and no input normalization, but our embeddings
generated using Sentence-Transformers are already normalized. We use a GP as the surrogate model
and manually tune the lengthscale and outputscale priors for a Matérn 5/2 kernel (Genton, 2001)
by visualizing whether the posterior mean and standard deviation conform to the true black-box
function in successive BO iterations over a random sample of known set of solution-score pairs for
a single instance of a task (see Figure 7). Specifically, we use a gamma prior with concentration=4
and rate=2 for the lengthscale (setting ard num dims=1) and outputscale, and a normal prior with
mean=0.4 and std=0.01 for the mean function. We also add noise variance of 0.001.

A.4.3    LLM AND E MBEDDINGS S ETUP

We use Huggingface transformers (Wolf, 2019) library and AWS Bedrock APIs to access the LLMs
used in this work. For embeddings, we use the sentence-transformers (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019)
library along with models hosted on Huggingface. The decoding parameters used for sampling
solutions from the LLM are temperature=1.0, top p=0.9, max new tokens=512.

A.5     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS

A.5.1    P ERFORMANCE WITH A DDITIONAL LLM S ON S EMANTLE

In Fig. 9, we show experiments on Semantle using two additional LLMs on opposite ends of the
scale spectrum—Gemma-2-2b-It and GTP-4o.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   1.0       BOPRO-LogEI                                                                1.0       BOPRO-LogEI
                             BOPRO-TS                                                                             OPRO (Greedy)
                             BOPRO-UCB
                   0.8       OPRO (Greedy)                                                              0.8
                             RS
                             Random
                   0.6                                                                                  0.6
  % Found


                                                                                          % Found
                   0.4                                                                                  0.4

                   0.2                                                                                  0.2

                   0.0                                                                                  0.0
                         0          200        400         600      800         1000                          0            200         400        600          800            1000
                                           Words Guessed                                                                             Words Guessed
                                      (a) Gemma-2-2b-It                                                                                (b) GPT-4o

Figure 9: Performance on 50 Semantle problem instances. (a) Using Gemma-2, we see the same
trend as with Mistral-Large of BOPRO outperforming OPRO, albeit with a smaller gap. (b) Using
GPT-4o, BOPRO only marginally outperforms OPRO, but demonstrates a similar tendency of OPRO
in showing rapid initial gains followed by a plateau versus the behavior of BOPRO, which shows
steady gains. Note that we able to evaluate on two methods due to budget constraints.


A.5.2                    P ERFORMANCE WITH LMX AND BLMX ON 1D-ARC

The BOPRO methodology can similarly be extended to other in-context optimization methods by
replacing the objective scores in constructing prompts with latent-space similarity scores to the BO
proposal vector. For instance, below is a description for Bayesian-LMX (BLMX).

Bayesian-LMX. LMX (“language model cross-over”) is an evolutionary algorithm that iteratively
builds a new generation of child solutions by prompting the LLM with randomly sampled parent
solutions from the previous generation, followed by a round of tournament sampling to refine the set
of parents to sample from in the next iteration based on their objective scores. Similar to BOPRO,
BLMX can be constructed by modifying the tournament selection to instead leverage the cosine
similarity scores with respect to the BO proposal instead of the black-box function scores.

                                                                                                       0.5
                   0.6
                               BLMX-LogEI
                   0.5         BLMX-TS                                                                 0.4
                               BLMX-UCB
                                                                                       Test Accuracy


                   0.4         LMX (Greedy)                                                            0.3
  Train Accuracy


                               Random (LMX)
                   0.3
                                                                                                       0.2
                   0.2

                   0.1                                                                                 0.1

                   0.0                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                       I             -TS         -UCB                dy)                 )
                                                                                                                  -LogE          BLMX        BLMX             (Gree                  (LMX
                         0     25         50   75    100    125   150     175   200                           BLMX                                      LMX                Rand
                                                                                                                                                                                om
                                     Solutions Generated
                                (a) 1D-ARC-Hard: Train                                                                       (b) 1D-ARC-Hard: Test

Figure 10: LMX Performance on 1D-ARC. Performance on 1D-ARC-Hard using LMX-decoding
(instead of OPRO) averaged over 130 problem instances on a single run. Overall, the trends remains
the same as with OPRO-decoding, but all methods show a drop in performance.


Results on 1D-ARC-Hard. To implement the BLMX strategy, we first double the number of top-
k candidates as compared to those used with BOPRO, followed by randomly selecting k of them to


                                                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Diagnostic for representation quality on Semantle. The scatter plot shows the distance
between candidate solutions of 10 hidden words in Semantle in the representation space and their
corresponding difference in terms of their black-box scores. Useful representations for BO should
result in no points in the top-left quadrant of the plots.


include. We, additionally, do not provide scores in the prompt and instruct the model to combine the
included solutions to generate new ones. Figure 10 shows our results.

A.5.3   V ISUALIZING SEARCH TRAJECTORIES FOR 1D-ARC

We aim to visualize the exploration-exploitation ability in BOPRO by plotting the search trajectory
using t-SNE contour plots of the latent space of embedding vectors. To do this, we aggregate all so-
lutions generated across runs from each of our evaluated methods to construct a map of the effective
search space for each task. In Fig. 5(c,d), we show search trajectories with BOPRO-TS and OPRO
on a single problem instance, which demonstrates that BOPRO is indeed able to conduct effective
exploration of the search space.

A.5.4   D IAGNOSTIC R EPRESENTATION P LOT: S EMANTLE

To contrast the diagnostic plot shown for 1D-ARC in Fig. 6, we show the same plot for Semantle in
Fig. 11, a task where BOPRO does perform well. We clearly see that our desideratum from such a
diagnostic plot of having low score differences when L2 distances are low are well satisfied.

A.5.5   A BLATION : E FFECT OF NUMBER OF WARM - START EXAMPLES : S EMANTLE

In this section, we perform an ablation to evaluate the effect of the number of warm-start examples
used to initialize the surrogate model. To do this, we perform an experiment on Semantle using
5 target words and 5 warm-start sets, resulting in 25 problem instances. We evaluate performance
using W = {2, 5, 10, 20, 40} warm-start examples. Our results are shown in Fig. 12. We find that
performance initially increases with an increase in the number of warm-start examples from W = 2
till W = 20. At W = 40, we find that performance lowers. This result follows from the fact that
while starting with more warm-start examples initializes the surrogate model with more accurate
beliefs about the search space, there is a trade-off between using the available budget to perform an
initial sampling vs. applying that budget to targeted search.

A.5.6   A BLATION : E FFECT OF DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION ON S EMANTLE

In Fig. 13, we show the effect on search performance of using PCA dimensionality reduction, re-
ducing the original Qwen embeddings to 10 dimensions. We run an oracle experiment, where we
replace the LLM latent-to-text decoding step with a selection procedure from a fixed set of 4000
words based on nearest-neighbor retrieval to the proposed BO vector. We do this to remove any
errors from LLM sampling in our analysis. The results clearly show that using PCA-based dimen-


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        1.0       BOPRO-LogEI-10
                                  BOPRO-LogEI-2
                                  BOPRO-LogEI-20
                        0.8       BOPRO-LogEI-40
                                  BOPRO-LogEI-5

              % Found   0.6

                        0.4

                        0.2

                        0.0
                              0        200          400        600     800        1000
                                                   Words Guessed
              Figure 12: Effect of the number of warm-start examples on Semantle.


sionality reduction hampers search performance in BOPRO by a large amount (nearly 40 percentage
points).


                        1.0

                        0.8

                        0.6
              % Found


                        0.4

                        0.2
                                                                     BOPRO-LogEI
                        0.0                                          BOPRO-LogEI (PCA)
                              0        100          200        300     400         500
                                                   Words Guessed
   Figure 13: Effect of PCA using a selection-based BOPRO run over 4000 words on Semantle.


A.6     LLM P ROMPTS

A.6.1    WARM - START G ENERATION

Semantle

Your task is to guess a hidden test word from the English dictionary.
Start by guessing {n_cands} diverse words to maximize your chance of
guessing the hidden word. Be creative.


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Do not guess any of the following words: {list of words repeated by the
LLM in the previous iteration}.


Dockstring

Your task is to find the optimal drug molecule that has both a high
druglikeness (QED) as well as a strong binding affinity (vina) to the
target protein. While both properties are important, binding affinity is
twice as important as the druglikeness. Here is the target protein: {
target_protein}.

Do not propose any of the following molecules: {list of molecules
repeated by the LLM in the previous iteration}.


1D-ARC

Given the following {len(task_demos)} examples of input-output grids of
integers from 0-9, your task is to determine the transformation logic
common to all examples and provide a python function that converts each
input grid into its corresponding output grid. Here are the examples:

INPUT #1:
[[1,1,1,1.....]]
OUTPUT #1:
[[1,1,1,1.....]]
...

Each number in a grid may be treated as a unique color and a 0 may be
treated as an empty or black cell. Continuous sequences of numbers row-
wise, column-wise, or diagonally may represent objects forming patterns.
The transformation involves figuring out how these object patterns change
 from the input to the output. For e.g., object patterns may contain
shapes like rectangles, triangles, or crosses which can then be mirrored,
 rotated, translated, deformed, combined, repeated, etc.

Your functions should have the following signature:
‘‘‘python
def transform(input: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray:
    # Your code here
‘‘‘
The following packages are already imported so do not repeat them: ‘numpy
 as np‘ and ‘itertools‘

Start by guessing exactly {n_cands} diverse solutions that could solve
the task. Make sure to not repeat any previous docstring or code. Be
creative in the logic of your proposals!

Do not repeat any of the following guesses:

REPEAT #1:
<docstring>This function...</docstring>
‘‘‘python
def transform(input: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray:
    ...
‘‘‘

REPEAT #2:
...

(Note: directly start your response using the specified output format)



                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.6.2    S OLUTION R EPRESENTATION
To compute embeddings for the generated solutions, we first map the raw solution text to a template
to provide additional context for sentence-embedding models when needed:

        • Semantle: "{x}"
        • 1D-ARC: "Algorithm:{x}"
        • Dockstring: "Protein target:{target} Molecule Candidate:{x}"

A.6.3    S OLUTION G ENERATION

Semantle

Your task is to guess a hidden test word from the English dictionary. Use
 the below series of your previous guesses (in increasing) order of their
 similarity to the hidden word in terms of their *meaning*) to make a new
 guess. Your new guess should not have been made before and should score
higher than your previous guesses. Analyze your previous guesses to
decide what word could reach a target score of {target_score:.4f}.

If you guess an invalid word (i.e., not in the dictionary or a repeat
guess), you will get no score, so stick to proper, single-word English
words, and do not repeat your previous guesses!

Now, guess exactly n=%s new word(s) that could give you a target score of
 {target_score:.4f}.

(Note: give only the word in the provided JSON format)


Dockstring

Your task is to find the optimal drug molecule that has both a high
druglikeness (QED) as well as a strong binding affinity (vina) to the
target protein. While both properties are important, binding affinity is
twice as important as the druglikeness. Here is the target protein: {
target_protein}. Use the below series of your previous guesses in
increasing order of their scalarized scores (between 0 and 1) to make a
new guess to maximize the score. Your new guess should not have been made
 before. Analyze your previous guesses to decide what molecule to guess
next. If you propose an invalid molecule or make a repeat guess, you will
 get no score, so stick to valid SMILES strings, and do not repeat your
previous guesses!

Now, guess exactly n=%s new molecule(s) that could be the optimal word.
Be creative!

Now, guess exactly n=%s new word(s) that could give you a target score of
 {target_score:.4f}.

(Note: give only a list of SMILES strings in the provided JSON format, e.
g. \
{{"response": ["SMILES1", "SMILES2", ...]}})


1D-ARC

Given the following {len(task_demos)} examples of input-output grids of
integers from 0-9, your task is to determine the transformation logic
common to all examples and provide a python function that converts each
input grid into its corresponding output grid. Here are the examples:

INPUT #1:


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[[1,1,1,1.....]]
OUTPUT #1:
[[1,1,1,1.....]]
...

Each number in a grid may be treated as a unique color and a 0 may be
treated as an empty or black cell. Continuous sequences of numbers row-
wise, column-wise, or diagonally may represent objects forming patterns.
The transformation involves figuring out how these object patterns change
 from the input to the output. For e.g., object patterns may contain
shapes like rectangles, triangles, or crosses which can then be mirrored,
 rotated, translated, deformed, combined, repeated, etc.

Your functions should have the following signature:
‘‘‘python
def transform(input: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray:
    # Your code here
‘‘‘
The following packages are already imported so do not repeat them: ‘numpy
 as np‘ and ‘itertools‘

Here are your top previous guesses and scores (in ascending order of
accuracy compared to the target solution)

GUESS (score: ...):
<docstring> ... </docstring>

GUESS (score: ...):
<docstring> ... </docstring>

GUESS (score: ...):
<docstring> ... </docstring>

....


Analyze your previous guesses to make exactly {n} new guess(es) likely to
  give you a target score of {target_score:.4f}. Be creative in your logic
!

Do not repeat any of the following guesses:

REPEAT #1:
<docstring>This function...</docstring>
‘‘‘python
def transform(input: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray:
    ...
‘‘‘

REPEAT #2:
...

(Note: directly start your response using the specified output format)


                                               22
