Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T OPO LM: BRAIN - LIKE SPATIO - FUNCTIONAL ORGANI -
ZATION IN A TOPOGRAPHIC LANGUAGE MODEL

  Neil Rathi∗,1,2 , Johannes Mehrer∗,1 , Badr AlKhamissi1 ,
  Taha Binhuraib3 , Nicholas M. Blauch4 ,
  Martin Schrimpf1,†
 1
   EPFL, 2 Stanford University, 3 Georgia Institute of Technology, 4 Harvard University



                                               A BSTRACT

            Neurons in the brain are spatially organized such that neighbors on tissue often
            exhibit similar response profiles. In the human language system, experimental
            studies have observed clusters for syntactic and semantic categories, but the mech-
            anisms underlying this functional organization remain unclear. Here, building
            on work from the vision literature, we develop TopoLM, a transformer language
            model with an explicit two-dimensional spatial representation of model units. By
            combining a next-token prediction objective with a spatial smoothness loss, rep-
            resentations in this model assemble into clusters that correspond to semantically
            interpretable groupings of text and closely match the functional organization in
            the brain’s language system. TopoLM successfully predicts the emergence of a
            spatially organized cortical language system as well as the organization of func-
            tional clusters selective for fine-grained linguistic features empirically observed in
            human cortex. Our results suggest that the functional organization of the human
            language system is driven by a unified spatial objective, and provide a functionally
            and spatially aligned model of language processing in the brain.1


1       I NTRODUCTION

Artificial neural network (ANN) models of language have recently been shown to accurately predict
neural activity in the human language system (Schrimpf et al., 2021; Caucheteux & King, 2022;
Goldstein et al., 2022). When presented with the same text input, the unit activity at internal layers
of especially transformer-based models (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019) is strikingly
similar to the internal activity measured experimentally in human cortex. The most powerful models
predict even close to 100% of the explainable variance of neural responses to sentences in some brain
datasets (Schrimpf et al., 2021). However, while there is a strong alignment to the brain’s functional
responses, a crucial element of cortex is entirely lacking from today’s language models: the spatial
arrangement of neurons on the cortical surface.
In recent models of the visual system, the introduction of topography has led to ANNs that begin to
match brain activity functionally as well as spatially (Lee et al., 2020; Margalit et al., 2024; Keller
et al., 2021; Blauch et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2023). These models provide a principle for understanding
the development of spatial organization in the brain, in the form of minimizing wiring cost, such that
neurons with similar response profiles tend to cluster together. These clusters resemble the spatio-
functional organization in the early cortex with orientation preferences such as pinwheels (Hubel &
Wiesel, 1962; 1968; Maunsell & Newsome, 1987; Felleman & Van Essen, 1991), and in higher-level
visual regions with category-selective regions such as face patches (Kanwisher et al., 1997; Haxby
et al., 2001; Tsao et al., 2003; 2006; 2008; Freiwald et al., 2009).
The topography of the human language system on the other hand lacks a comprehensive compu-
tational explanation. Neuroscience experiments suggest both a macro-organization at the level of
a distributed cortical network that selectively responds to linguistic processing (Fedorenko et al.,
2010; 2011; 2024; Blank et al., 2014), as well as a micro-organization into clusters that correspond
    ∗
        Equal contribution by NR and JM. † Correspondence: martin.schrimpf@epfl.ch
    1
        Code available at https://github.com/epflneuroailab/topolm.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a)                                                                               (b)

                                                                                                                                                                                                      (                  )
                                                                                                      [ ]
             logits                                                                                      input 1                                                             r = corr


                                                                                        input batch
             ×N                            xi+2                                                          input 2

                  +                                                                                           ...                                                                                     1 – corr(r, d)
                                                                                                                                                                             SLk =
                      spatial encoding
                                                                                                         input n                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                 3

             MLP                    xi+1                                   task
                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                             spatial                                                                                                                                  d=
                                                         +             +                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                               dist(i, j) + 1
                                                              loss         loss                                                  activations at layer k                                           5
                                                                                                                                                                             4
                  +
                      spatial encoding

                                                                                  (c)               fMRI readout             fMRI-like readout                       f (x)
                                      xi                                                          sampling in cortex         sampling in model
                                                                                                                                                                                          FWHM
      h0    h1        h2      ...


                                                                                                                                                 fMRI-like signal
                                                               total loss                                                                                           f max
                                                                                                                                                                    f max
                                           xi−1                                          y                             ~ y                                            2
                                                  xi−2
                                                                                                          x                         x                                   0                x1               x2         x
            tokens


Figure 1: Building a topographic language model with brain-like spatio-functional organiza-
tion. (a) TopoLM modifies the Transformer architecture with a two-dimensional spatial encoding
at the output of each attention and MLP layer. This representation enables the use of a spatial cor-
relation loss that encourages smooth response profiles in adjacent units. This spatial loss is jointly
optimized with cross-entropy task loss during training. (b) At each forward pass, we randomly se-
lect five neighborhoods in each layer (of which we here only show 3 for clearity) and compute the
pairwise correlation of unit activations within each neighborhood. The spatial loss is computed by
comparing these correlations to the inverse distances between associated unit pairs, with the final
loss averaged across units pairs and neighborhoods. Computing the loss on cortical neighborhoods
is an efficient approximation of the spatial loss. (c) We use a FWHM filter to simulate the fMRI
sampling process such that a simulated voxel’s response (‘fMRI-like signal’) is composed of a com-
bination of responses from neighboring units (Kriegeskorte et al., 2010). We simulate the response
as a Gaussian random variable, with FWHM 2.0 mm, assuming unit distances of 1.0 mm.


to syntactic and semantic categories such as verbs, nouns, and concrete words (Shapiro et al., 2006;
Moseley & Pulvermüller, 2014; Hauptman et al., 2024). What are the mechanisms underlying this
spatio-functional organization of the language system in the brain?
Here, we develop TopoLM, a neural network model for brain-like topographic language processing.
TopoLM is based on the transformer architecture but incorporates an explicit spatial arrangement of
units. We train the model via a combined task and spatial loss, which optimizes the model to per-
form autoregressive language modeling while encouraging local correlation, similarly to a recent
approach used in vision (Lee et al., 2020; Margalit et al., 2024). The spatio-functional organization
that emerges in this model is semantically interpretable and aligned with clusters that have been
observed experimentally in brain recordings. Comparing TopoLM with a non-topographic baseline
model (i.e. one trained without spatial loss) on a series of benchmarks, we show that while TopoLM
achieves slightly lower scores on some behavioral tasks (BLiMP), its performance on other down-
stream tasks (GLUE) and on brain alignment benchmarks (using the Brain-Score platform) is on par
with the non-topographic control.
Importantly, this spatio-functional organization arises purely as a result of the combined task and
spatial loss, as the model is trained solely on naturalistic text without fitting to brain data. This
work thus extends the principle of cortical response smoothness proposed in vision (Margalit et al.,
2024) into the language system, providing a unified explanation for understanding the functional
organization of cortex.

2          R ELATED W ORK
Topographic Vision Models. In contrast to the core human language system, the primate visual
cortex shows a clear hierarchy of interconnected regions starting at the primary visual cortex (V1),
passing V2 and V4, and reaching inferior temporal cortex (IT) which is thought to underlie rep-
resentations of complex visual objects such as faces and scenes. Within V1, orientation-selective
cortical patches (’hypercolumns’) are spatially arranged in circular ’pinwheels,’ where the preferred
orientation of neurons rotates smoothly around a central point, covering all possible orientations (0
to 180 degrees). This structure is observed across species, including humans and non-human


                                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


primates (Kaschube et al., 2010). On a more global level, early visual areas (V1, V2) show strong
retinotopic organization where nearby stimuli in the visual field activate nearby locations in early
visual regions (Engel et al., 1994; 1997; Tootell et al., 1998). While the strength of retinotopic
organization strongly decreases, but remains detectable going to higher-level regions of the visual
cortex (Larsson & Heeger, 2006; Schwarzlose et al., 2008; Kravitz et al., 2010; Groen et al., 2022),
the final stage of the ventral visual pathway, IT, shows clear categorical clustering into e.g. regions
selective for faces or scenes (Kanwisher et al., 1997; Haxby et al., 2001).
This spatial organization of the primate visual cortex has prompted work on topographic ANNs
for vision. First approaches focused on the organization of inferotemporal cortex, restricting topo-
graphic organization to later model layers (TDANN, Lee et al. 2020; ITN, Blauch et al. 2022; DNN-
SOM, Zhang et al. 2021, Doshi & Konkle 2023). Recent models are designed such that all layers are
topographic and thus mimic topographic features across the visual cortex—for example, smoothly
varying orientation preference maps forming pinwheels in model V1 and category-selective regions
in model IT (All-TNNs, Lu et al. 2023; new version of TDANN, Margalit et al. 2024).
Our topographic language model belongs to the Topographic Deep Artificial Neural Network
(TDANN) family of models (Lee et al., 2020; Margalit et al., 2024). Herein, a central claim is that
inducing a preference towards smoothness of cortical responses in the model provides a unifying
principle for the development of topography in the brain. This smoothness optimization is applied
to all layers in the model and replicates functional organization in early (e.g. V1) and later (e.g. IT)
regions of the visual cortex. The TDANN’s spatial smoothness, as implemented with an additional
loss term, is an indirect but efficient approach to minimizing local wiring-length, and can addition-
ally help to minimize long-range connectivity which, in neuroscience terms, corresponds to brain
size and power consumption (Margalit et al., 2024).

Topographic Language Models. Comparatively little work has explored the idea of inducing
topography in language models. In particular, the only topographic language model we are aware of
is BinHuraib et al. (2024)’s Topoformer, which induces spatial organization onto a single-headed
attention Transformer architecture using local connectivity constraints. This model arranges keys
and queries on 2D grids, combined with a locally connected layer in the attention mechanism as
opposed to full connectivity.
Our approach primarily differs from Topoformer in that we use a spatial smoothness loss term to
drive the emergence of local correlations, similarly to Lee et al. (2020) and Margalit et al. (2024)’s
TDANN vision models. In this sense, our model extends Margalit et al. (2024)’s unifying principle
of functional organization from the visual cortex into the language system. TopoLM is thus able to
benefit from full connectivity, rather than requiring local connectivity to develop clustering. Because
we apply this loss to the output of entire attention mechanism at each layer (as well as to the MLP),
TopoLM can also benefit from multi-head attention, which empirically improves fits to neural data
(AlKhamissi et al., 2024); this was not explored in (BinHuraib et al., 2024). Finally, our model also
uses an autoregressive task loss, rather than a masked autoencoder objective (as used in BinHuraib
et al. (2024)), which has been shown to have higher performance on neural alignment benchmarks
(e.g. Schrimpf et al., 2021).


3    M ODEL D ESIGN AND V ISUALIZATION

Instead of the convolutional neural network architecture used in topographic vision models (Mar-
galit et al., 2024), we use the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) which is dominant in
language modeling. We augment the objective function with a spatial correlation loss, in addition
to the cross-entropy task loss. This loss function measures spatial smoothness, which serves as an
efficiently computable proxy for neural wiring length: neurons located close to one another should
have similar response profiles—i.e. their activations should be correlated (Lee et al., 2020).
To introduce a notion of ‘space’ in the model, we bijectively map the units of each attention layer
and MLP to a square grid. We randomly permute these positions for each layer such that each layer
has a unique spatial encoding.2 On each forward pass, we first compute the pairwise Pearson’s
   2
     Our goal is to abstract away from feed-forward propagation as much as possible, as the hierarchical orga-
nization of the brain is quite different from that of a language model. This random permutation prevents the


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


correlation vector rk between unit activations on the input batch for each layer k (see Figure 1B). If
a layer has N units, r is of dimension nCr(N, 2). Then, the spatial loss for layer k is given by

                                               1
                                      SLk =      (1 − corr(rk , dk )) ,                                   (1)
                                               2

where dk is a vector of pairwise inverse distances between units, based on their spatial encoding,
and corr is Pearson’s r. This means that nearby units (i.e. high inverse distance) should have highly
correlated activations on the same inputs, and that distant units should be less correlated; this gives
us a notion of spatial smoothness. We scale by a factor of 0.5 to ensure that SL ∈ [0, 1].
We compute this spatial loss for every attention and MLP layer in a Transformer, prior to normaliza-
tion and addition into the residual stream. Rather than computing the spatial loss for the entire layer,
as in Margalit et al. (2024) we approximate the loss using small neighborhoods, ensuring that the
model optimizes for local, rather than global ‘long-distance’ constraints.3 For each batch of inputs,
the model is then optimized subject to the loss criterion

                                                      X
                                        ℓ = TL +               αk SLk ,                                   (2)
                                                    k∈layers


where TL is the task loss and αk is the relative weight of the spatial loss associated with layer
k. This combined loss metric encourages the model to learn representations that are both spatially
organized and useful (and, in the case of self-supervised cross-entropy task loss, task-general).

Model Specification and Training. In the below experiments, we utilize an adapted GPT-2-small
style architecture (Radford et al., 2019). We use hidden dimension 784 such that we can evenly
embed units in a 28 × 28 grid. The model has 12 Transformer blocks, each with 16 attention heads
and a GELU activation function. We train our models on a randomly sampled 10B-token subset
of the FineWeb-Edu dataset. The task loss is cross-entropy on next-word prediction. We use batch
size 48 and block size 1024. For spatial loss, we set αk = 2.5 across all layers4 and operationalize
the inverse distance vector d with the ℓ∞ norm. For each batch, we average the spatial loss across
5 randomly selected neighborhoods, each of ℓ∞ radius 5. This allows us to compute loss more
efficiently without significant performance drops.
We train both a topographic model and a non-topographic baseline, where αk = 0 and all other hy-
perparameters remain the same.5 We trained both models with early stopping after three consecutive
increases on validation loss. At the end of training, the topographic model achieved a validation task
loss of 3.075 and spatial loss of 0.108 (summed across layers), while the non-topographic model
achieved validation loss 2.966. Models trained for 5 days on 4xNVIDIA 80GB A100s.
In all below analyses, we compare TopoLM to BinHuraib et al. (2024)’s pre-trained Topoformer-
BERT, a BERT-style model (Devlin et al., 2019) with local connectivity trained on the BookCorpus
dataset (Zhu et al., 2015).6 Note critically that Topoformer-BERT is a baseline, but not a control—it
is trained on a much smaller corpus, has only one attention head per layer, and is bidirectional.

model from exploiting the feed-forward nature of the Transformer. Without it, the model minimizes spatial loss
by propagating the same spatial pattern through the network; see Figure 12.
   3
     This could be controlled for using many alternative methods, e.g. a Gaussian smoothing kernel. However,
we choose to use neighborhood-level approximations for simplicity.
   4
     We chose this value of α after extensive hyperparameter search. In particular, lower values of α do not
adequately encourage the development of topography, while greater values impede task performance and the
development of meaningful representations.
   5
     After hyperparameter tuning, we optimize using AdamW with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.95 and learning rate
6 × 10−4 , scheduled with warmup and cosine decay. We use weight decay 0.1, gradient clipping at 1.0, and do
not use dropout. Neighborhood size and number of neighborhoods were also determined via hyperparameter
search; note, however, that we empirically observed little effect of neighborhood size and number of neighbor-
hoods on task performance or on our topographic metrics.
   6
     Topoformer-BERT has 16 layers, each with a single attention head, with topographic constraints applied
both at the output of each attention layer and after the key matrix product; we therefore compare TopoLM to
outputs at these levels. We refer to BinHuraib et al. (2024) for more details.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) TopoLM: Individual Responses Across Language Selective Clusters


                             sentences

                             unconnected words


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    language selectivity (t-value)
                             jabberwocky sentences                                                                                                                                                                                                           150

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             100

                             unconnected nonwords                                                                                                                                                                                                            50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                    MLP layers 5-12
                                                                                      (top left to bottom right)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             –50


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             –100
                              Clusters:
                              sentences,                                                                                                                                                                                                                     –150


                              nonwords


(b) Fedorenko et al.: Individual Responses Across Anatomical Regions


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                             sentences


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BOLD signal change (%)
                             unconnected words
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2


                             jabberwocky sentences
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1

                             unconnected nonwords
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0


                         3                                                                                                                  3                                              3                                               3
BOLD signal change (%)


                                                                                                                   BOLD signal change (%)


                                                                                                                                                                  BOLD signal change (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                             BOLD signal change (%)


                         2                                                                                                                  2                                              2                                               2


                         1                                                                                                                  1                                              1                                               1


                         0                                                                                                                  0                                              0                                               0


(c) Whole-network Responses in TopoLM, Non-topographic Baseline, and Neural Data
                                                                                                                                                Non-topographic                                Topographic                                     Neural Data
                Stimulus Conditions
                grammatical sentences
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                in the winter jack liked to go to the alps to ski
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BOLD signal change (%)


                unconnected words
                the her fell of but to camera of he some up museum


                jabberwocky sentences                                                                                                                                                                                                      1

                lignis pome a nop in jafen but he didn't snay to mirn


                unconnected nonwords
                at lusses nox and lared to the weer a vire of dast


Figure 2: Brain-like response profiles across the core language system. (a) Applying a functional
localizer (Fedorenko et al., 2010) we isolate the core language system of TopoLM, and find clear
brain-like spatial organization (for brevity, we only show Transformer blocks 5-12 here). Response
profile across individual language-selective clusters (shown in yellow) in TopoLM are similar to
one another, consistent with (b) the language system in human cortex (Fedorenko et al., 2024). (c)
Across the entire core language system, TopoLM (blue) mostly matches the neural data (green), but
not exactly; however, the non-topographic baseline model (orange) fails to capture neural patterns
as well.                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Readout Sampling. Due to the coarse spatial sampling in fMRI neuroimaging work, voxels con-
tain the aggregated response of a large population of neurons (Kriegeskorte et al., 2010, Figure 1C).
In all following analyses, we thus apply a simulated version of fMRI readout sampling to model acti-
vations, consisting of smoothing with a Gaussian kernel, to imitate the locally aggregated responses
of fMRI voxels. Importantly, we do so before computing selectivity based on these activations, and
thus do not apply readout sampling to the functional selectivity maps directly. We set unit distance
1.0 mm and FWHM 2.0 mm.

4    S PATIO -F UNCTIONAL O RGANIZATION OF THE C ORE L ANGUAGE S YSTEM

Language processing in the brain engages a set of left-lateralized frontal and temporal brain regions.
These areas are typically referred to as the ’core language system’ (Fedorenko et al., 2010) and
respond selectively to linguistic input in contrast to non-linguistic stimuli (see Fedorenko et al.,
2024, for an overview). Due to anatomical differences between individuals, the language system
is defined via a functional localizer that contrasts syntactically and semantically valid sentences
against a perceptually matched control, such as strings of nonwords (Fedorenko et al., 2011).
Within individuals, the core language system shows clear spatio-functional organization, wherein
language selective neurons cluster together across multiple cortical lobes. Anatomically distinct
subregions of this system exhibit highly consistent response profiles to stimuli, suggesting that the
system operates as a network (e.g. Fedorenko et al., 2011; Tuckute et al., 2024) (Figure 2B).
Prior work on neural alignment in language models typically compares neural responses across
the entire core language system of the brain to model activations. The topographic organization
of our model enables us to test for the emergence of a brain-like spatially organized core language
system in silico. A successful spatio-functional alignment between brain and model would mean that
(1) distinct language-selective clusters emerge in the model, (2) these clusters all have consistent
response profiles similar to consistent response profiles across sub-regions of the ’core language
system’ in humans 7 , and (3) the response profiles match the activity profiles in the brain (sentences
> {unconnected words, jabberwocky} > nonwords; AlKhamissi et al., 2024).

Methods. To isolate the core language system in TopoLM, we use the same localization stimuli
as Fedorenko et al. (2010), which consists of a set of 160 sentences and 160 strings of non-words,
all 12 words each. After passing these through the model, at each attention and MLP layer we run
a t-test across the activations of all layer units. We then define the core language system as all units
that are significantly language-selective (p < 0.05 after correction for multiple comparison across
all layers using the false-discovery-rate (FDR) (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995)).
We then define language-selective clusters using an evolutionary clustering algorithm applied to each
contrast map. In each layer, we begin with the most selective unit by t-value, and then repeatedly
add the most selective neighboring unit to the cluster, until we hit a pre-determined p-value threshold
associated with the unit’s selectivity (here, p(FDR) < 0.05). We repeat this process, searching for
new clusters until all units in the layer are exhausted. We discard clusters with fewer than 10 units.
Within each cluster, we measure responses to the same stimuli used in neuroscience experiments
(Figure 2B, Fedorenko et al., 2011): sentences (indexing syntactic and lexical information), uncon-
nected (scrambled) words (lexical but not syntactic), Jabberwocky sentences which are well-formed
sentences where content words are replaced by phonotactically plausible non-words (syntactic but
not lexical), and unconnected (scrambled) non-words (neither syntactic nor lexical). Note that these
stimuli are distinct from those used for localization. We measure the model ‘response’ as the mean
absolute activation across all units in a cluster.

Results. TopoLM exhibits clear brain-like spatial organization of the language network, such that
(1) multiple language-selective clusters emerge across the topographic tissue (Figure 2A and Fig-
ure 8), (2) across most clusters, the response profiles are consistent with one another (Figure 9), and
(3) response profiles mostly match the ones in the brain. The response profiles are not a perfect match
to the brain data—while sentences have higher activations than Jabberwocky and nonword stimuli,
   7
     ”The language areas all show a similar response profile (despite slight apparent differences, no region by
condition interactions come out as reliable, even in well-powered studies.” Fedorenko et al. (2024),


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            (a) Neural Data — Hauptman et al. 2024 (b)


                                                                   spatial autocorrelation (I)
                                                                                                      neural data
                                                     t-value


                                                                                                                                             topo + sampling
                                                                                                                topo + sampling
                                                                                                     non-topo


                                                                                                                                  non-topo
                                                                                                                                                  topo
                                                                                                                  topo
                                                                                                    Hauptman 2024                  Moseley 2014
                        Clusters: verbs,nouns                                                           stimuli                       stimuli

            (c)    Non-topographic               Topographic                                        Topographic
                  no fMRI readout sampling   no fMRI readout sampling                            + fMRI readout sampling                        t-value
                                                                                                                                                           8


                                                                                                                                                           4


                                                                                                                                                           0


                                                                                                                                                         -4


                                                                                                                                                         -8


Figure 3: Brain-like verb- and noun-selective clusters in TopoLM. (a) fMRI data from Hauptman
et al. (2024) points to verb- (red) and noun-selective (blue) regions in the human cortex with strong
clustering (Moran’s I = 0.96). (b) Quantification of clustering. Relative to high clustering in
the brain (green dashed line), the non-topographic baseline shows limited clustering (orange). The
topographic model shows moderate clustering at the unit level (light blue) and strong clustering
when simulating fMRI sampling (dark blue). On stimuli from Moseley & Pulvermüller (2014)
(fMRI data not available) we find qualitatively similar results. (c) Exemplary model maps (last
MLP layer) showing the verb-/noun contrast (red-blue) in response to stimuli from Hauptman et al.
(2024). The non-topographic baseline shows no clustering while the topographic model develops
verb- and noun-selective clusters.

they do not have higher activation than unconnected words as in brain data. However, looking across
the entire language selective network, the response profile of the non-topographic baseline model
similarly fails to capture the neural response profile (Figure 2C), suggesting a general shortcoming
of the base transformer model, rather than a weakness of topography. We similarly find evidence for
language-selective clustering in Topoformer-BERT (see Figure 13).

5       S PATIO -F UNCTIONAL O RGANIZATION O F S EMANTIC C LUSTERS
Beyond selectivity for language in general, experimental evidence supports the existence of cortical
noun- and verb-selective clusters across human subjects during processing of verbal and nominal
stimuli in auditory (Elli et al., 2019; Hauptman et al., 2024), visual (Moseley & Pulvermüller, 2014),
and speech production (Shapiro et al., 2006) tasks. Here, we compare spatial activation patterns
predicted by TopoLM to two groups of fMRI studies: Elli et al. (2019) / Hauptman et al. (2024), who
use the same set of stimuli and the same experimental setup (Figure 3 and Appendix Figures 7 and
10), and Moseley & Pulvermüller (2014) (Figure 4). We evaluate TopoLM predictions quantitatively
using Hauptman et al. (2024)’s fMRI data8 and perform qualitative evaluations where no neural data
was available (Elli et al., 2019; Moseley & Pulvermüller, 2014).

5.1      C LUSTERS SELECTIVE FOR VERBS AND NOUNS

Neuroimaging Study. Using fMRI data from Hauptman et al. (2024) (Appendix B), we find verb-
and noun-selective clusters in the left hemisphere (Figure 3A and Appendix Figure 7), thus repli-
cating their results. To quantify the ‘degree’ of clustering in these maps, we use Moran’s I with
    8
        Available on OPENICPSR at https://doi.org/10.3886/E198163V3.


                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a)                                      Non-topographic             Topographic               Topographic                                                      (b)
                                        no fMRI readout sampling no fMRI readout sampling   + fMRI readout sampling                                                                                  non-topo           topographic          topographic
                                                                                                                                                                                                    no fMRI sampling    no fMRI sampling    + fMRI-like sampling



verb/noun contrast
                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0        n.s.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ***                  ***
                     concrete stimuli


                                                                                                                                                                spatial autocorrelation ( )
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.8


                                                                                                                            noun - verb selectivity (t-value)
                                                                                                                      75

                                                                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.6
                                                                                                                      25

                                                                 Clusters: verbs,nouns                                0

                                                                                                                      –25
verb/noun contrast


                                                                                                                                                                                              0.4
                                                                                                                      –50
                     abstract stimuli


                                                                                                                      –75

                                                                                                                                                                                              0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                    abstract concrete   abstract concrete   abstract concrete


Figure 4: Verb- and noun-selectivity in response to concrete and abstract stimuli. (a) Using
stimuli from Moseley & Pulvermüller (2014), we find verb-/noun-selective clusters (verb: red /
noun: blue) emerging in TopoLM for concrete (solid lines), but not for abstract words (dashed lines),
thus replicating their results. (b) We obtain strong verb-/noun-clustering when concrete words are
used to compute the verb-/noun-contrast (light blue, solid lines), I = 0.80), but substantially lower
clustering for abstract words (I = 0.23, light blue, dashed lines, t-test: p < 0.001). However, we
do not find evidence for such a difference in verb-/noun-clustering when using the non-topographic
control (I = 0.11 vs. 0.12, t-test: p > 0.05, orange). Results do not change qualitatively when
fMRI readout sampling is performed before computing contrasts and clustering (dark blue). In all
the presented cases, spatial autocorrelation is computed on un-thresholded maps (for all layers, see
Figure 11). Following neuroimaging conventions on defining category-selective cortical clusters,
we show model maps thresholded at p(FDR) < 0.05.


Queen contiguity (i.e. ℓ∞ radius, following the distance metric used to train TopoLM), a common
measure of spatial autocorrelation, ranging from −1 to 1 (see Appendix A for details). The group
level effects indicate strong clustering (I = 0.96, p < 0.001).

Clustering in TopoLM. To investigate whether similar verb- and noun-selective clusters emerge
in TopoLM, we extracted the model activations in response to the same stimuli as Elli et al. (2019)
and Hauptman et al. (2024). We find that verb and noun-selective clustering emerges across layers
in TopoLM after contrasting activations to verb and noun stimuli (verb: red / noun: blue, Figure 3A,
Figure 10). Similar to our analysis of the neuroimaging data, we quantified this observation using
Moran’s I. The non-topographic baseline model yields a low degree of clustering (I = 0.11).
Contrast maps in TopoLM show a strong degree of clustering (I = 0.48) which is further increased
when applying fMRI-like readout sampling (I = 0.81, Figure 3B). Applying the same sampling to
the non-topographic model also increases clustering, but it remains substantially less brain-like than
the topographic model (I = 0.60, Appendix Figure 10).

Clustering in Topoformer-BERT. Applying the same procedure to Topoformer-BERT, we find
no evidence for noun-verb selective clustering, with few units coming out significant in the noun-
verb contrast (10.61% of units; see Figure 13). However, we do find that, before thresholding for
significance (p < 0.05), the model does exhibit a high degree of clustering competitive with TopoLM
(Moran’s I = 0.66 before sampling, 0.85 after sampling). In other words, though local connectivity
constraint induces clustering in the model, these clusters do not match the spatio-functional organi-
zation of the brain. This impression is confirmed by additional anaylsis using a variant of Moran’s I
that only considers units with significant t-values (Figure 14).

5.2                                        C LUSTERS SELECTIVE FOR CONCRETE , BUT NOT ABSTRACT VERB - NOUN CONTRASTS

Neuroimaging Study. Moseley & Pulvermüller (2014) focus on how cortical noun-verb selectiv-
ity relates to semantics, in particular focusing on concreteness. Examining specific anatomically
defined brain regions in fMRI, this study finds evidence for selectivity between concrete verbs and


                                                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


concrete nouns; yet, critically, there is no evidence for responses to abstract words from the same
categories. Here, we investigate whether TopoLM replicates these findings—both the existence of
spatially organized noun-verb selectivity in response to concrete words and the nonexistence of this
selectivity in response to abstract words (Figure 4).
Clustering in TopoLM. We presented the original experimental stimuli to TopoLM and computed
contrasts between abstract and concrete verbs and nouns (see Appendix C for stimulus details).
Rather than comparing response profiles in anatomically defined subregions as in Moseley & Pul-
vermüller (2014) (since the model lacks defined ‘anatomical’ regions), we explore whether lexical
class-selective clustering emerges between concrete and abstract words. Consistent with brain data,
we find clustering of verb- and noun-selective model units in concrete stimuli, but find only very
weak or no clustering for the same contrast in abstract stimuli. We quantified this impression us-
ing again Moran’s I: concrete words yield substantially higher verb-/noun-clustering than abstract
words (I = 0.8 vs. I = 0.23 in unthresholded maps for TopoLM, Figure 4, light blue). We
obtain qualitatively similar results when simulating the fMRI sampling process before computing
contrasts (Figure 4, dark blue). Additionally, we observed overall low degrees of clustering in
non-topographic baseline models and no evidence for a difference in the degree of clustering when
concrete vs. abstract words were used for computing the verb-/noun-contrast (Figure 4, orange).

Clustering in Topoformer-BERT. We again apply the same procedure to Topoformer-BERT and
find no evidence for noun-verb selective clustering, with no units coming out significant in the
noun-verb contrast (see Figure 13). Again, before thresholding, we find high clustering (concrete-
concrete: Moran’s I = 0.60 before sampling, I = 0.84 after; abstract-abstract: I = 0.61 before
sampling, I = 0.84 after); yet since none of these units come out significant, we fail to find evidence
for brain-like spatio-functional organization in Topoformer-BERT (for details, see Figure 14).

6   D OWNSTREAM P ERFORMANCE AND B RAIN A LIGNMENT

Some topographic vision models sacrifice task performance for the sake of spatial organization,
leading to diminished utility as a model of brain function (Lee et al., 2020). As a control, we
evaluate TopoLM’s performance on linguistic knowledge (BLiMP), downstream task (GLUE), and
brain alignment benchmarks (Brain-Score), compared to the non-topographic baseline model.

Benchmark Description and Methods. BLiMP (Warstadt et al., 2020) is a multi-task linguistic
benchmark consisting of minimal pairs (acceptable / unacceptable) that probe knowledge of linguis-
tic phenomena; Models are evaluated without fine-tuning. Brain-Score Language (Schrimpf et al.,
2021; 2020) is a set of benchmarks that measure how well models align with the human language
system. We train a ridge regression model to predict brain activity from model representations, using
the same stimuli as in the neuroimaging studies. Representations are taken from each transformer
block with spatial loss (attention and MLP). For both models, we select the output layer with the
best alignment across datasets. The final score is the Pearson correlation between actual and pre-
dicted brain activity, averaged over 10 cross-validation folds and over four brain-recording datasets
(Blank et al., 2014; Fedorenko et al., 2016; Pereira et al., 2018; Tuckute et al., 2024, Appendix D).
GLUE (Wang et al., 2018) is a multi-task benchmark for downstream performance on tasks like
entailment and sentiment analysis. We fine-tune models for each task. During fine-tuning, we use
the same weighted combination of task loss (cross-entropy or MCC) and spatial correlation loss with
α = 2.5. We set batch size 64, dropout 0.1, and learning rate 2 × 10−5 ; all other hyperparameters
are the same as during pretraining. We use early stopping after 3 successive increases in validation
loss, keeping the checkpoint before this increase.

Results. We find that introducing spatial correlation loss does not strongly affect task performance
or brain alignment (Table 1). On BLiMP, we find slight decreases in performance between TopoLM
and the non-topographic baseline across all subtasks, with a 5 point average decrease overall. On
Brain-Score, we find a 2 point average decrease overall, with TopoLM outperforming the non-
topographic baseline on some subtasks (see Appendix D, Figure 6). On GLUE, across most subtasks
we see an increase in performance from TopoLM compared to the baseline model, with a 3 point
average increase overall. We hypothesize this increase might be due the spatial loss term serving as
additional regularization against overfitting.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Model        BLiMP       GLUE       Brain-Score
                           TopoLM         0.71          0.68       0.78
                           Non-topo       0.76          0.65       0.80

Table 1: Results from evaluation of TopoLM and a non-topographic baseline (‘non-topo’) on
BLiMP, GLUE, and Brain-Score. The baseline model outperforms TopoLM on BLiMP (5 pts)
and Brain-Score (2 pts), but TopoLM outperforms the non-topographic control on GLUE (3 pts).


7   D ISCUSSION
Here, we presented a new topographic Transformer language model based on a spatial smoothness
constraint and showed that it predicts key patterns of spatio-functional organization from the neu-
roimaging literature. We demonstrated that TopoLM has a spatially organized core language system
exhibiting brain-like uniformity of response profiles across clusters. TopoLM also shows brain-like
noun-verb selective clusters, specific to concrete over abstract words. This spatial correspondence
to the human brain comes at virtually no cost to performance or functional brain alignment.

Spatial smoothness principle. TopoLM is in the TDANN family of models. Margalit et al. (2024)
originally posited the loss term underlying TDANN models as a unifying account of the develop-
ment of spatio-functional organization in the visual cortex. TopoLM successfully extends the corre-
sponding spatial loss to the domain of language neuroscience, and thus provides evidence that this
principle of spatial smoothness indeed generalizes across cortex.

Comparison with Topoformer-BERT. We also observe evidence for spatial organization with
noun-verb contrasts in TopoLM, but not BinHuraib et al. (2024)’s Topoformer-BERT. However,
Fedorenko et al. (2010)’s stimuli do reveal a spatially organized language network in Topoformer-
BERT. This asymmetry is likely in part because the model induces topography only in the attention
layers, which primarily track relationships between tokens: while Fedorenko et al. (2010)’s stimuli
consists of entire sentences, the noun-verb contrast stimuli are one or two word items.
However, it’s important to note that—while this comparison is a useful baseline—our primary goal
is to ask whether the TDANN spatial smoothness principle generalizes to language, not to build
a topographic language model that “improves” on certain benchmarks. Topoformer asks a similar
question using a different guiding principle (local connectivity), but these models do not necessarily
“compete” with one another: indeed, TopoLM’s spatial smoothness and Topoformer’s explicit local
connectivity are both closely related to the principle of wiring length minimization.

Limitations. TopoLM is a feed-forward model of linguistic processing with multiple layers. Since
the topographic maps are specific to each layer, there is as such no coherent tissue across the entire
system as in the the brain. This also limits eventual modeling of ‘BMI’ tissue perturbations, such as
micro-stimulation, since the spread of current ends at one topographic map (out of several).

Model-guided experiments. Since TopoLM is stimulus-computable, it can be used to discover
new candidates for spatial clustering in linguistic processing. For instance, the automatic identi-
fication of clusters emerging from model activations in response to extensive textual input could
inform the selection of optimal stimuli for further neuroimaging experiments. Given that the model
successfully predicted spatio-functional organization in three existing brain datasets, it is likely that
additional predictions derived from this approach would be informative.
Taken together, our results suggest that the spatial smoothness principle leads to topographic orga-
nization consistent with the spatio-functional organization of linguistic processing in the brain.

8   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Miriam Hauptman and Marina Bedny for providing fMRI data and for useful discussion.
We also thank Greta Tuckute, members of the EPFL NeuroAI lab, and members of the Stanford
CLiMB Lab for helpful feedback. Neil Rathi was supported by a Summer@EPFL Fellowship.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Badr AlKhamissi, Greta Tuckute, Antoine Bosselut, and Martin Schrimpf. The LLM Language
  Network: A Neuroscientific Approach for Identifying Causally Task-Relevant Units, 2024. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2411.02280. arXiv:2411.02280 [cs].

Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg. Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and Pow-
  erful Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statisti-
  cal Methodology, 57(1):289–300, January 1995. ISSN 1369-7412, 1467-9868. doi: 10.1111/
  j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x. URL https://academic.oup.com/jrsssb/article/
  57/1/289/7035855.

Taha BinHuraib, Greta Tuckute, and Nicholas M Blauch. Topoformer: Brain-like topographic
  organization in transformer language models through spatial querying and reweighting. ICLR
  2024 Re-Align Workshop Paper, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  3pLMzgoZSA.

Idan Blank, Nancy Kanwisher, and Evelina Fedorenko. A functional dissociation between lan-
  guage and multiple-demand systems revealed in patterns of BOLD signal fluctuations. Jour-
  nal of Neurophysiology, 112(5):1105–1118, September 2014. ISSN 0022-3077, 1522-1598.
  doi: 10.1152/jn.00884.2013. URL https://www.physiology.org/doi/10.1152/
  jn.00884.2013.

Nicholas M. Blauch, Marlene Behrmann, and David C. Plaut. A connectivity-constrained compu-
  tational account of topographic organization in primate high-level visual cortex. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences, 119(3):e2112566119, January 2022. ISSN 0027-8424, 1091-
  6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2112566119. URL https://pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/
  pnas.2112566119. Number: 3.

Charlotte Caucheteux and Jean-Rémi King. Brains and algorithms partially converge in natu-
  ral language processing. Communications Biology, 5(1):134, December 2022. ISSN 2399-
  3642. doi: 10.1038/s42003-022-03036-1. URL https://www.nature.com/articles/
  s42003-022-03036-1. Number: 1.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep
  Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding, May 2019. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1810.04805. arXiv:1810.04805 [cs].

Fenil R. Doshi and Talia Konkle. Cortical topographic motifs emerge in a self-organized map of ob-
  ject space. Science Advances, 9(25):eade8187, June 2023. ISSN 2375-2548. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.
  ade8187. URL https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.ade8187.

Giulia V Elli, Connor Lane, and Marina Bedny. A Double Dissociation in Sensitivity to Verb
  and Noun Semantics Across Cortical Networks. Cerebral Cortex, 29(11):4803–4817, December
  2019. doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhz014.

Stephen A. Engel, David E. Rumelhart, Brian A. Wandell, Adrian T. Lee, Gary H. Glover, Eduardo-
  Jose Chichilnisky, and Michael N. Shadlen. fMRI of human visual cortex. Nature, 369(6481):
  525–525, June 1994. ISSN 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/369525a0. URL http://
  www.nature.com/articles/369525a0. Number: 6481.

Stephen a. Engel, Gary H. Glover, and Brian a. Wandell. Retinotopic organization in human vi-
  sual cortex and the spatial precision of functional MRI. Cerebral Cortex, 7(2):181–192, 1997.
  ISSN 10473211. doi: 10.1093/cercor/7.2.181. Number: 2 ISBN: 1047-3211 (Print) 1047-3211
  (Linking).

Evelina Fedorenko, Po-Jang Hsieh, Alfonso Nieto-Castañón, Susan Whitfield-Gabrieli, and Nancy
  Kanwisher. New Method for fMRI Investigations of Language: Defining ROIs Functionally in
  Individual Subjects. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104(2):1177–1194, August 2010. ISSN 0022-
  3077, 1522-1598. doi: 10.1152/jn.00032.2010. URL https://www.physiology.org/
  doi/10.1152/jn.00032.2010.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Evelina Fedorenko, Michael K Behr, and Nancy Kanwisher. Functional specificity for high-level
  linguistic processing in the human brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108
  (39):16428–16433, 2011. doi: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1112937108. Publisher: National
  Acad Sciences.
Evelina Fedorenko, Terri L. Scott, Peter Brunner, William G. Coon, Brianna Pritchett, Ger-
  win Schalk, and Nancy Kanwisher. Neural correlate of the construction of sentence mean-
  ing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(41):E6256–E6262, 2016. doi:
  10.1073/pnas.1612132113. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.
  1612132113. eprint: https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.1612132113.
Evelina Fedorenko, Anna A. Ivanova, and Tamar I. Regev. The language network as a natural kind
  within the broader landscape of the human brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, April 2024. ISSN
  1471-003X, 1471-0048. doi: 10.1038/s41583-024-00802-4. URL https://www.nature.
  com/articles/s41583-024-00802-4.
D. J. Felleman and D. C. Van Essen. Distributed Hierarchical Processing in the Primate Cerebral
  Cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 1(1):1–47, January 1991. ISSN 1047-3211, 1460-2199. doi: 10.1093/
  cercor/1.1.1. URL https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-lookup/doi/
  10.1093/cercor/1.1.1. Number: 1.
Winrich a Freiwald, Doris Y Tsao, and Margaret S Livingstone. A face feature space in the macaque
 temporal lobe. Nature neuroscience, 12(9):1187–96, September 2009. ISSN 1546-1726. doi:
 10.1038/nn.2363. URL http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.
 fcgi?artid=2819705{&}tool=pmcentrez{&}rendertype=abstract. Number:
 9 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
J. A. Frost. Language processing is strongly left lateralized in both sexes: Evidence from func-
   tional MRI. Brain, 122(2):199–208, February 1999. ISSN 14602156. doi: 10.1093/brain/
   122.2.199. URL https://academic.oup.com/brain/article-lookup/doi/10.
   1093/brain/122.2.199.
Richard Futrell, Edward Gibson, Harry J. Tily, Idan Blank, Anastasia Vishnevetsky, Steven Pianta-
  dosi, and Evelina Fedorenko. The Natural Stories Corpus. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Interna-
  tional Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018), Miyazaki, Japan, May
  2018. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). URL https://aclanthology.
  org/L18-1012.
Ariel Goldstein, Zaid Zada, Eliav Buchnik, Mariano Schain, Amy Price, Bobbi Aubrey, Samuel A.
  Nastase, Amir Feder, Dotan Emanuel, Alon Cohen, Aren Jansen, Harshvardhan Gazula, Gina
  Choe, Aditi Rao, Catherine Kim, Colton Casto, Lora Fanda, Werner Doyle, Daniel Friedman,
  Patricia Dugan, Lucia Melloni, Roi Reichart, Sasha Devore, Adeen Flinker, Liat Hasenfratz, Omer
  Levy, Avinatan Hassidim, Michael Brenner, Yossi Matias, Kenneth A. Norman, Orrin Devinsky,
  and Uri Hasson. Shared computational principles for language processing in humans and deep
  language models. Nature Neuroscience, 25(3):369–380, March 2022. ISSN 1097-6256, 1546-
  1726. doi: 10.1038/s41593-022-01026-4. URL https://www.nature.com/articles/
  s41593-022-01026-4.
Iris I.A. Groen, Tessa M. Dekker, Tomas Knapen, and Edward H. Silson. Visuospatial coding as
   ubiquitous scaffolding for human cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 26(1):81–96, Jan-
   uary 2022. ISSN 13646613. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2021.10.011. URL https://linkinghub.
   elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1364661321002813.
Miriam Hauptman, Giulia Elli, Rashi Pant, and Marina Bedny. Neural specialization for ‘visual’
 concepts emerges in the absence of vision, February 2024. URL http://biorxiv.org/
 lookup/doi/10.1101/2023.08.23.552701.
James V. Haxby, M. Ida Gobbini, Maura L. Furey, Alumit Ishai, Jennifer L. Schouten, and Pietro
  Pietrini. Distributed and Overlapping Representations of Faces and Objects in Ventral Temporal
  Cortex. Science, 293(5539):2425–2430, September 2001. ISSN 0036-8075, 1095-9203. doi: 10.
  1126/science.1063736. URL https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.
  1063736. Number: 5539.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D. H. Hubel and T. N. Wiesel. Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional architec-
  ture in the cat’s visual cortex. The Journal of Physiology, 160(1):106–154, January 1962.
  ISSN 00223751. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1962.sp006837. URL https://onlinelibrary.
  wiley.com/doi/10.1113/jphysiol.1962.sp006837.
D. H. Hubel and T. N. Wiesel. Receptive fields and functional architecture of monkey striate cor-
  tex. The Journal of Physiology, 195(1):215–243, March 1968. ISSN 00223751. doi: 10.1113/
  jphysiol.1968.sp008455. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1113/
  jphysiol.1968.sp008455.
Nancy Kanwisher, Josh McDermott, and Marvin M Chun. The Fusiform Face Area: A Module in
  Human Extrastriate Cortex Specialized for Face Perception. The Journal of Neuroscience, 1997.
  doi: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17-11-04302.1997.
Matthias Kaschube, Michael Schnabel, Siegrid Löwel, David M. Coppola, Leonard E. White, and
 Fred Wolf. Universality in the Evolution of Orientation Columns in the Visual Cortex. Science,
 330(6007):1113–1116, November 2010. ISSN 0036-8075, 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.
 1194869. URL https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1194869.
T. Anderson Keller, Qinghe Gao, and Max Welling. Modeling Category-Selective Cortical Regions
   with Topographic Variational Autoencoders, December 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/
   abs/2110.13911. arXiv:2110.13911 [cs, q-bio].
Dwight J. Kravitz, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, and Chris I. Baker. High-level visual object representa-
 tions are constrained by position. Cerebral Cortex, 20(12):2916–2925, 2010. ISSN 10473211.
 doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhq042.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Rhodri Cusack, and Peter Bandettini. How does an fMRI voxel sample the
  neuronal activity pattern: Compact-kernel or complex spatiotemporal filter? NeuroImage, 49(3):
  1965–1976, 2010. ISSN 10538119. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.09.059.
Jonas Larsson and David J Heeger. Two retinotopic visual areas in human lateral occipital cortex.
  The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 26(51):13128–
  13142, 2006. ISSN 1529-2401. doi: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1657-06.2006.
Hyodong Lee, Eshed Margalit, Kamila M. Jozwik, Michael A. Cohen, Nancy Kanwisher, Daniel
  L. K. Yamins, and James J. DiCarlo. Topographic deep artificial neural networks reproduce
  the hallmarks of the primate inferior temporal cortex face processing network. preprint, Neu-
  roscience, July 2020. URL http://biorxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2020.07.
  09.185116. DOI: 10.1101/2020.07.09.185116.
Zejin Lu, Adrien Doerig, Victoria Bosch, Bas Krahmer, Daniel Kaiser, Radoslaw M Cichy, and
  Tim C Kietzmann. End-to-end topographic networks as models of cortical map formation and
  human visual behaviour: moving beyond convolutions. Arxiv preprint, 2023. doi: https://doi.org/
  10.48550/arXiv.2308.09431.
Eshed Margalit, Hyodong Lee, Dawn Finzi, James J. DiCarlo, Kalanit Grill-Spector, and Daniel L.K.
  Yamins. A unifying framework for functional organization in early and higher ventral vi-
  sual cortex. Neuron, 112(14):2435–2451.e7, July 2024. ISSN 08966273. doi: 10.1016/
  j.neuron.2024.04.018. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
  S0896627324002794.
J H R Maunsell and W T Newsome. Visual Processing in Monkey Extrastriate Cortex. Annu. Rev.
  Neurosci., pp. 363, 1987. doi: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ne.10.030187.002051.
Rachel L. Moseley and Friedemann Pulvermüller. Nouns, verbs, objects, actions, and abstrac-
  tions: Local fMRI activity indexes semantics, not lexical categories. Brain and Language,
  132:28–42, May 2014. ISSN 0093934X. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2014.03.001. URL https:
  //linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0093934X1400039X.
Francisco Pereira, Bin Lou, Brianna Pritchett, Samuel Ritter, Samuel J. Gershman, Nancy Kan-
  wisher, Matthew Botvinick, and Evelina Fedorenko. Toward a universal decoder of linguistic


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  meaning from brain activation. Nature Communications, 9(1):963, March 2018. ISSN 2041-
  1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-03068-4. URL https://www.nature.com/articles/
  s41467-018-03068-4.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and
  Ilya Sutskever.      Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learn-
  ers.       2019.       URL   https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/
  Language-Models-are-Unsupervised-Multitask-Learners-Radford-Wu/
  9405cc0d6169988371b2755e573cc28650d14dfe.
Martin Schrimpf, Jonas Kubilius, Michael J. Lee, N. Apurva Ratan Murty, Robert Ajemian, and
 James J. DiCarlo. Integrative Benchmarking to Advance Neurally Mechanistic Models of Hu-
 man Intelligence. Neuron, 108(3):413–423, November 2020. ISSN 08966273. doi: 10.1016/
 j.neuron.2020.07.040. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
 S089662732030605X. Number: 3.
Martin Schrimpf, Idan Asher Blank, Greta Tuckute, Carina Kauf, Eghbal A. Hosseini, Nancy
 Kanwisher, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Evelina Fedorenko. The neural architecture of lan-
 guage: Integrative modeling converges on predictive processing. Proceedings of the National
 Academy of Sciences, 118(45):e2105646118, November 2021. ISSN 0027-8424, 1091-6490.
 doi: 10.1073/pnas.2105646118. URL https://pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.
 2105646118.
Rebecca F Schwarzlose, Jascha D Swisher, Sabin Dang, and Nancy Kanwisher. The dis-
  tribution of category and location information across object-selective regions in human vi-
  sual cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
  America, 105(11):4447–4452, March 2008. ISSN 1091-6490. doi: https://doi.org/10.1073/
  pnas.0800431105. URL http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.
  fcgi?artid=2393746{&}tool=pmcentrez{&}rendertype=abstract.
Kevin A. Shapiro, Lauren R. Moo, and Alfonso Caramazza. Cortical signatures of noun and verb
  production. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(5):1644–1649, January 2006.
  ISSN 0027-8424, 1091-6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0504142103. URL https://pnas.org/
  doi/full/10.1073/pnas.0504142103.
Jerzy P. Szaflarski, Scott K. Holland, Vincent J. Schmithorst, and Anna W. Byars. fMRI study of lan-
   guage lateralization in children and adults. Human Brain Mapping, 27(3):202–212, March 2006.
   ISSN 1065-9471, 1097-0193. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20177. URL https://onlinelibrary.
   wiley.com/doi/10.1002/hbm.20177.
R Tootell, N Hadjikhani, J Mendola, S Marrett, and M Dale. From retinotopy to recognition: fMRI
  in human visual cortex. Trends in cognitive sciences, 2(5):174–83, May 1998. ISSN 1364-6613.
  URL http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21227152. Number: 5.
Doris Y Tsao, Winrich A Freiwald, Tamara A Knutsen, Joseph B Mandeville, and Roger B H
  Tootell. Faces and objects in macaque cerebral cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 6(9):989–995,
  September 2003. ISSN 1097-6256, 1546-1726. doi: 10.1038/nn1111. URL https://www.
  nature.com/articles/nn1111.
Doris Y. Tsao, Winrich A. Freiwald, Roger B. H. Tootell, and Margaret S. Livingstone. A Cortical
  Region Consisting Entirely of Face-Selective Cells. Science, 311(5761):670–674, February 2006.
  ISSN 0036-8075, 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.1119983. URL https://www.science.
  org/doi/10.1126/science.1119983. Number: 5761.
Doris Y. Tsao, Sebastian Moeller, and Winrich A. Freiwald. Comparing face patch systems in
  macaques and humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(49):19514–19519,
  December 2008. ISSN 0027-8424, 1091-6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0809662105. URL https:
  //pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.0809662105. Number: 49.
Greta Tuckute, Aalok Sathe, Shashank Srikant, Maya Taliaferro, Mingye Wang, Martin Schrimpf,
  Kendrick Kay, and Evelina Fedorenko. Driving and suppressing the human language network
  using large language models. Nature Human Behaviour, 2024. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/
  s41562-023-01783-7.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is All you Need. In I. Guyon, U. Von
  Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/
  file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. GLUE:
  A Multi-Task Benchmark and Analysis Platform for Natural Language Understanding. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Net-
  works for NLP, pp. 353–355, Brussels, Belgium, 2018. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W18-5446. URL http://aclweb.org/anthology/W18-5446.
Alex Warstadt, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mohananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and
  Samuel R. Bowman. BLiMP: The Benchmark of Linguistic Minimal Pairs for English. Transac-
  tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:377–392, December 2020. ISSN 2307-
  387X. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00321. URL https://direct.mit.edu/tacl/article/
  96452.
Yiyuan Zhang, Ke Zhou, Pinglei Bao, and Jia Liu. Principles governing the topological organization
  of object selectivities in ventral temporal cortex. preprint, Neuroscience, September 2021. URL
  http://biorxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2021.09.15.460220.
Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Richard Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba,
  and Sanja Fidler. Aligning Books and Movies: Towards Story-like Visual Explanations by Watch-
  ing Movies and Reading Books, June 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.06724.
  arXiv:1506.06724 [cs].


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    M ORAN ’ S I AND S PATIAL AUTOCORRELATION
We use Moran’s I to estimate the degree of clustering in TopoLM layer maps and in surface-based
fMRI data. Moran’s I is given by

                                       PN PN
                               N         i=1    j=1 wij (xi − x̄)(xj − x̄)
                            I=   ·              PN                         ,
                               W                  i=1 (xi − x̄)
                                                               2


where N is the number of units (e.g. fMRI vertices or model units), xi is the value at position i, x̄ is
the mean of all xi , and wij is a weight indicating the spatial relationship between units at positions
i and j such that wij = 1 if two points are ‘neighbors’ and wij = 0 otherwise (see below on how
this is defined).
Moran’s I ranges from −1 to 1. Positive values indicate spatial clustering, where similar map val-
ues (e.g., high-high or low-low) tend to group together; negative values indicate spatial dispersion,
where dissimilar map values (e.g., high-low) are neighbors; and a value close to 0 indicates no au-
tocorrelation, i.e. a random distribution. In our data, we do not see significantly negative values of
I, as spatial dispersion is a systematic non-random pattern not encouraged by topography.

Application to TopoLM layer maps. To quantify the degree of clustering in TopoLM maps (fig-
ures 3, 4), we apply Moran’s I using ‘Queen’ contiguity (i.e. an ℓ∞ radius). Queen contiguity
is a measure commonly used in geospatial statistics, where each model unit is considered to be a
neighbor if it shares any boundary (edges or corners) with another model unit of the same layer.
This method allows for a more inclusive neighborhood structure than ‘Rook’ contiguity, which only
considers edge-sharing neighbors.

Application to fMRI vertices. We re-analyzed fMRI data from the left hemisphere of 22 sighted
subjects from Hauptman et al. (2024). The functional and structural data were pre-processed by
Hauptman et al. (2024) and provided as GIfTI files. These files contain the cortical surface repre-
sentation with 32,492 vertices (GIfTI format, Human Connectome Project benchmark) spanning the
left hemisphere. To quantify the spatial autocorrelation in the fMRI data (fig. 3), we define wij
such that each vertex is considered to have six direct neighbors, reflecting the surface mesh struc-
ture where each vertex connects to six surrounding vertices based on their adjacency on the cortical
surface.
Independent of the input modality (model layer units, fMRI vertices) Moran’s I was always applied
to un-thresholded maps. This is because thresholding a map before applying Moran’s I would
artificially inflate the estimate of spatial autocorrelation, as it results in contiguous patches of 0
values.

B    H AUPTMAN ET AL . (2024): DESIGN AND F MRI PROCESSING
fMRI Processing. Both Elli et al. (2019) and Hauptman et al. (2024) are based on fMRI recordings
in response to the same task and stimuli—similarity judgments of auditorily presented words—and
both investigate the relationship between sensory input and conceptual representations in the human
cortex. Elli et al. (2019) (n = 13) provide evidence suggesting that lexico-semantic information
about verbs and nouns is represented in partially non-overlapping cortical networks (Figure 1A in
Elli et al. (2019)). The data from Hauptman et al. (2024) are available at OPENICPSR.
Hauptman et al. (2024) presented the same auditory stimuli to 21 congenitally blind and 22 sighted
subjects and investigated how neural representations of sensory concepts develop independent of
sensory experience; here, we only include data from the 22 sighted subjects in our analysis. Similarly
to Elli et al. (2019), Hauptman et al. (2024) find distinct verb- and noun-selective regions (e.g. Figure
3A in Hauptman et al. (2024); Figure 7 below). For scanning parameters, and details on the fMRI
preprocessing pipeline, see Hauptman et al. (2024).

Experimental Design. In each 2-second trial, subjects assessed the similarity of two auditorily
presented words from the same verb or noun subcategory (e.g., bird or mammal for nouns, light


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                           Pereira2018                                        Blank2014                                Tuckute2024                          Fedorenko2016                                                                                                Brain-Score
                                                                                      243sentences                                       384sentences
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n.s.
                                                                                                         *                                                  *                                   *                                         *                                     *

     Noise-normalized benchmark performance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mean across all cross-validation folds of 4 benchmarks
                                              mean across 10 cross-validation folds


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Brain-Score
                                                                                       non-topographic


                                                                                                                                          non-topographic


                                                                                                                                                                              non-topographic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        non-topographic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              non-topographic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          non-topographic
                                                                                                             topographic


                                                                                                                                                                topographic


                                                                                                                                                                                                    topographic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              topographic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    topographic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   topographic
Figure 5: Brain-Score brain alignment performance (linear predictivity). We tested TopoLM
and the non-topographic control on Brain-Score language using linear predictivity to estimate align-
ment. TopoLM outperforms the control in Blank2014 and Tuckete2024, but performs slightly worse
at Pereira2018 and Fedorenko2016 (t-test performed for each benchmark separately: p < 0.05).
For each benchmark, we sampled from 10 cross-validation loops to compute the bootstrapped 95%
confidence intervals (black bars). When results are averaged across the 4 benchmarks (last panel
‘Brain-Score’), we don’t find evidence for a significant difference between TopoLM and its control
(t-test: p > 0.05).


or sound for verbs). Four trials, all using stimuli from the same subcategory, form a mini-block,
followed by a 10-second baseline condition. This yielded a total of 288 pairs of nouns and 288 pairs
of verbs9 .
To evaluate each vertex’s selectivity for a mini-block, we ran a general linear model with one pre-
dictor per mini-block. Contrasting verb and noun mini-blocks produced a t-value for each vertex,
indicating selectivity toward verbs vs. nouns. As in Hauptman et al. (2024), we based our analy-
sis on data from the left hemisphere, which is more involved in language processing (Frost, 1999;
Szaflarski et al., 2006); this is standard in work on language neuroscience.


C           M OSELEY & P ULVERM ÜLLER (2014): EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN .

In each trial, 18 participants from Moseley & Pulvermüller (2014) silently read a single word from
one of four categories: abstract nouns (e.g. clue, guide), concrete nouns (e.g. rice, goose), abstract
verbs (e.g. heal, dwell), and concrete verbs (e.g. knit, poke). In total, there were 40 stimuli in
each category for a total of 160 words. For additional information on the experimental design and
neuroimaging parameters, please see Moseley & Pulvermüller (2014).


D               B RAIN -S CORE L ANGUAGE DATASETS AND P ERFORMANCE

Blank et al. (2014) This dataset consists of fMRI signals recorded from 12 functional regions of
interest (fROIs), offering a lower resolution than the dataset used by Pereira et al. (2018). Five par-
ticipants listened to eight naturalistic stories, adapted from fairy tales and short stories (Futrell et al.,
2018). Each story lasted approximately five minutes, containing around 165 sentences, providing
significantly longer context compared to other neuroimaging datasets.

Fedorenko et al. (2016) This dataset captures ECoG signals from five participants as they read
sentences consisting of eight words, presented one word at a time for either 450 or 700 ms. Follow-
ing Schrimpf et al. (2021), we focus on 52 out of 80 sentences presented to all participants.

   9
     Each pair was presented with verbs in the infinitive (with ‘to’) and nouns in the definite (with ‘the’).
Removing these determiners when feeding stimuli through the model results in visually more distinct selectivity
clusters; see Figure 10.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                 Pereira2018                                        Blank2014                       Fedorenko2016                                                                                                Brain-Score


     Noise-normalized benchmark performance (RSA)
                                                                                            243sentences                                       384sentences

                                                                                                               *                                                  *                                   *                                 *                                                                                                       *


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mean across all cross-validation folds of 4 benchmarks
                                                    mean across 10 cross-validation folds


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Brain-Score
                                                                                             non-topographic


                                                                                                                                                non-topographic


                                                                                                                                                                                    non-topographic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      non-topographic
                                                                                                                   topographic


                                                                                                                                                                      topographic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            topographic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  non-topogr.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    topogr.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          topogr.
Figure 6: Brain-Score brain alignment performance (RSA). We tested TopoLM and the non-
topographic control on Brain-Score language using representational similarity analysis (RSA) to
estimate alignment. TopoLM outperforms the control in Pereira2018, but performs worse at
Blank2014 and Fedorenko2016 (t-test performed for each benchmark separately: p < 0.05). For
each benchmark, we sampled from 10 cross-validation loops to compute the bootstrapped 95%
confidence intervals (black bars). When results are averaged across the 3 benchmarks (last panel
‘Brain-Score’), we find evidence for a significant difference between TopoLM and its control (t-
test: p > 0.05). However, this result needs to be interpreted with caution as it is dominated by the
results from Fedorenko2016 which only show very large absolute values, because the underlying
data used for normalization is very noisy, i.e. the noise ceiling is very low.


Pereira et al. (2018) This dataset contains fMRI activations (BOLD responses) recorded as par-
ticipants read short passages, with each sentence displayed for four seconds. It consists of two
experiments: the first with nine participants reading 384 sentences, and the second with six partici-
pants reading 243 sentences. Each experiment covered 24 topics. Results are reported as the average
alignment across both experiments, normalized using cross-subject consistency estimates.

Tuckute et al. (2024) This dataset is used to assess the distributional robustness of language mod-
els. Five participants read 1,000 six-word sentences, each presented for two seconds. BOLD re-
sponses from language network voxels were averaged both within and across participants, providing
an overall response for each sentence. The stimuli span a wide linguistic range, allowing for diverse
model-brain comparisons. Randomized sentence order and averaging across participants reduce
temporal autocorrelation effects, making this dataset particularly challenging for model evaluation
due to the linguistic diversity.


                                                                                                                                                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    S UPPLEMENTARY F IGURES
                                                                      ventral   dorsal
                                            medial
          lateral                                                                        posterior   anterior
                                                            t-value


                    Clusters: verbs,nouns            p (FDR) < 0.05


Figure 7: Verb/noun-clusters across the human cortex. Re-analyzing data from Hauptman et al.
(2024), we replicated their main findings in that we found verb-/noun-selective clusters (red vs. blue)
across the left hemisphere. We here show group-level results of all sighted subjects at p(FDR) <
0.05.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     TopoLM language selectivity
                                                                   using stimuli from Fedorenko et al. 2010

                                         Non-Topographic                                                  Topographic                                              Topographic
                                        no fMRI readout sampling                                      no fMRI readout sampling                                   fMRI readout sampling


                            attention
                 layer 1

                            MLP
                            attention
                 layer 4

                            MLP
                            attention
                 layer 7

                            MLP
                            attention
                 layer 10


                                                                      Clusters: sentences, nonwords


                                                                                                                                 Clusters: sentences, nonwords
                            MLP
                            attention
                 layer 12

                            MLP


Figure 8: Core language system. Using stimuli from Fedorenko et al. (2010), we create contrast
maps reflecting language-selectivity for each unit of a given layer (language-selective cluster in
yellow). We here show maps for TopoLM with (right column, dark blue) or without (center column,
light blue) simulating the fMRI readout sampling process. Using a cluster growing algorithm we
identify language-selective clusters. For comparison, we also show the language-selectivity maps
from the non-topographic control (left column, orange frames).



                                                                                                             20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Consistent response profiles across language-selective clusters in TopoLM. Us-
ing stimuli from Fedorenko et al. (2024), we extract response profiles to 4 linguistic categories
across language-selective clusters. Importantly, the observed response profiles are consistent across
language-selective clusters. For brevity, here, we only show clusters with more than 100 units.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           spatial autocorrelation (I)
                                                                                                                                        neural data


                                                                                         mean across all layers


                                                                                                                                                           readout sampling
                                                                                                                                                             topo + fMRI
                                                                                                                                 readout sampling
                                                                                                                                  non-topo + fMRI
                                                                                                                      non-topo


                                                                                                                                                    topo
                                                                                                                                                                                           Clusters: verbs,nouns

                                                  stimulus presentation including to [verb] / the [noun]                                                                                                                     no to / the in stimuli
                                                                                                                  as in Hauptman et al. 2024

                        Non-Topographic                    Non-Topographic                                                                                 Topographic                 Topographic               Topographic                 Topographic
                       no fMRI readout sampling            fMRI readout sampling                                                                     no fMRI readout sampling        fMRI readout sampling   no fMRI readout sampling      fMRI readout sampling
           attention
layer 1

           MLP
           attention
layer 4

           MLP
           attention
layer 7

           MLP
           attention
layer 10

           MLP
           attention
layer 12

           MLP


Figure 10: Verb-noun clusters across TopoLM layers in response to stimuli from Hauptman et
al. 2024. Complementing Figure 3, here, we show autocorrelation estimates (Moran’s I) for both
TopoLM and its non-topographic control with and without FWHM filtering to simulate the fMRI
sampling process (upper panel) and the associated verb-noun contrast maps (verb: red / noun: blue)
for 5 layers (columns 1-4). When the stimuli are presented without ’to’ or ’the’ to accompany verbs
and nouns, respectively, the verb-noun clustering becomes even more prominent (columns 5-6).


                                                                                                                                                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                  spatial autocorrelation (I)
                                                                                                mean across all layers


                                                                                                                                                                 readout sampling
                                                                                                                                                                   topo + fMRI
                                                                                                                                    readout sampling
                                                                                                                                     non-topo + fMRI


                                                                                                                                                       topo
                                                                                                                         non-topo
                                                                                                                                                                                         Clusters: verbs,nouns



                                                              stimulus presentation as in Moseley et al. 2014]
                                    Non-Topographic                         Non-Topographic                                                                        Topographic                      Topographic
                                   no fMRI readout sampling                   fMRI readout sampling                                                           no fMRI readout sampling            fMRI readout sampling
                       attention
            layer 1

                       MLP
                       attention
            layer 4

                       MLP
                       attention
            layer 7

                       MLP
                       attention
            layer 10

                       MLP
                       attention
            layer 12

                       MLP


Figure 11: Verb-noun clusters across TopoLM layers in response to stimuli from Moseley et
al. 2014. Complementing Figure 4, here, we show autocorrelation estimates (Moran’s I) for both
TopoLM and its non-topographic control with and without FWHM filtering to simulate the fMRI
sampling process (upper panel) and the associated verb-noun contrast maps for 5 layers. Autocorre-
lation estimates are based on the verb-noun contrast maps (verb: red / noun: blue).



                                                                                                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Hauptman                               Moseley                                     Moseley
                                      noun-verb                           concrete-concrete                           abstract-abstract


                          attention
               layer 1

                          MLP
                          attention
               layer 4

                          MLP
                          attention
               layer 7

                          MLP
                          attention


                                                  Clusters: verbs,nouns


                                                                                              Clusters: verbs,nouns
               layer 10

                          MLP
                          attention
               layer 12

                          MLP


Figure 12: Verb-noun clusters in a TopoLM without randomly permuted positions. As de-
scribed in Footnote 2, we trained an equivalent model without first randomly permuting the spatial
encoding of each layer. We evaluate this model on the stimuli from Hauptman et al. (2024) and
Moseley & Pulvermüller (2014). We see that the spatial activation pattern propagates through the
entire network, as the model no longer has to learn unique spatial maps for each layer in order to
minimize spatial loss. Verb and noun clusters shown in red and blue respectively.



                                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Fedorenko                                   Hauptman                                Moseley                                     Moseley
                 sentences-nonwords                                noun-verb                            concrete-concrete                           abstract-abstract
           keys
layer 1

           attention
           keys
layer 6

           attention
           keys
layer 11

           attention


                                   Clusters: sentences, nonwords


                                                                                Clusters: verbs,nouns


                                                                                                                            Clusters: verbs,nouns
           keys
layer 16

           attention


Figure 13: Topoformer-BERT Evaluations. Contrast maps (with fMRI-like readout sampling) for
Topoformer-BERT (BinHuraib et al., 2024) on stimuli from Fedorenko et al. (2010), Hauptman et al.
(2024), and Moseley & Pulvermüller (2014). We plot contrasted activations after multiplication by
the key matrix and after the entire attention layer, as this is where local connectivity is applied. We
note that few units come out significant for the stimuli from Hauptman et al. (2024) and Moseley
& Pulvermüller (2014); however, we identify some clusters in Fedorenko et al. (2010)’s language
localization task.


                                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A                     Hauptman 2024 - noun / verb contrast                                      B           Moseley & Pulvermüller 2014 - noun / verb contrast


                                                                                                                                                       not applicable


                                                                                                                                                                                    not applicable
Moran's I


                                                                                                Moran's I
            no fMRI sampling   fMRI sampling   no fMRI sampling         fMRI sampling                       no fMRI sampling   fMRI sampling   no fMRI sampling               fMRI sampling

                        TopoLM                      Topoformer BERT                                                     TopoLM                      Topoformer BERT

C             Moseley & Pulvermüller 2014 - concrete - concrete
                                                       not applicable                           D            Moseley & Pulvermüller 2014 - abstract - concrete


                                                                               not applicable


                                                                                                                                                       not applicable


                                                                                                                                                                                    not applicable
Moran's I


                                                                                                Moran's I


            no fMRI sampling   fMRI sampling   no fMRI sampling         fMRI sampling                       no fMRI sampling   fMRI sampling   no fMRI sampling               fMRI sampling

                        TopoLM                      Topoformer BERT                                                     TopoLM                      Topoformer BERT

E             Moseley & Pulvermüller 2014 - abstract - abstract                                 F


                                                                                                Islands
                                                                                                Moran's I
                                                       not applicable


                                                                               not applicable


                                                                                                                                                                        not applicable
Moran's I


                                                                                                                  TopoLM        Topoformer
                                                                                                                                                             = no significant
                                                                                                                                   BERT
                                                                                                                                                           t-values in model
                                                                                                                                                         to compute Moran's I



                                                                                                Standard
                                                                                                Moran's I


            no fMRI sampling   fMRI sampling   no fMRI sampling         fMRI sampling                             TopoLM        Topoformer
                        TopoLM                      Topoformer BERT                                                                BERT



Figure 14: TopoLM comparison of clustering with baseline model. We compared TopoLM to
an additional baseline model (Topoformer BERT, BinHuraib et al. (2024)) with regard to clustering.
Most t-values across contrasts in multiple datasets (Hauptman et al. (2024); Moseley & Pulvermüller
(2014)) are not significant in Topoformer BERT (after applying FDR correction as has been done
in TopoLM). Thus, we estimated autocorrelation using a variant of Moran’s I only considering ”is-
lands” of units with significant t-values for a given contrast (and averaging across islands while not
considering island size to obtain a single estimate per map). We computed ”Islands Moran’s I” for
both TopoLM and Topoformer BERT. A) Using this metric, we find strong clustering in TopoLM
(Island’s Moran’s I = 0.52 without simulated fMRI sampling, and Island’s Moran’s I = 0.83 with
sampling), numbers matching our results when computing Standard Moran’s I (I = 0.53 without
simulated fMRI sampling, I = 0.85 with sampling). In contrast, we observe patterns of dispersion
or neither clear dispersion, nor autocorrelation in Topoformer BERT (Island’s Moran’s I = -0.51
without simulated fMRI sampling, and Island’s Moran’s I = -0.14 with sampling). B-E) With the
exception of one contrast (see panel E), TopoLM results based on data from Moseley & Pulvermüller
(2014) using Islands Moran’s I qualitatively match the results obtained by using Standard Moran’s
I. In contrast, in Topoformer BERT autocorrelation using Islands Moran’s I cannot be computed for
the contrasts in Moseley & Pulvermüller (2014) as t-values underlying the contrast maps are not
significant. F) Legend.
                                                   26
