Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T HE C ASE FOR C LEANER B IOSIGNALS : H IGH -
FIDELITY N EURAL C OMPRESSOR E NABLES T RANSFER
FROM C LEANER I EEG TO N OISIER EEG

 Francesco S. Carzaniga1, 2 , Gary Hoppeler3 , Michael Hersche1 ,
 Kaspar A. Schindler2 , Abbas Rahimi1
 1
   IBM Research – Zurich, Rüschlikon, Switzerland
 2
   Department of Neurology, Inselspital, Sleep-Wake-Epilepsy-Center,
 Bern University Hospital, Bern University, Bern, Switzerland
 3
    ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
 frc@zurich.ibm.com



                                            A BSTRACT

         All data modalities are not created equal, even when the signal they measure
         comes from the same source. In the case of the brain, two of the most impor-
         tant data modalities are the scalp electroencephalogram (EEG), and the intracra-
         nial electroencephalogram (iEEG). iEEG benefits from a higher signal-to-noise
         ratio (SNR), as it measures the electrical activity directly in the brain, while
         EEG is noisier and has lower spatial and temporal resolutions. Nonetheless,
         both EEG and iEEG are important sources of data for human neurology, from
         healthcare to brain–machine interfaces. They are used by human experts, sup-
         ported by deep learning (DL) models, to accomplish a variety of tasks, such as
         seizure detection and motor imagery classification. Although the differences be-
         tween EEG and iEEG are well understood by human experts, the performance of
         DL models across these two modalities remains under-explored. To help charac-
         terize the importance of clean data on the performance of DL models, we pro-
         pose BrainCodec, a high-fidelity EEG and iEEG neural compressor. We find
         that training BrainCodec on iEEG and then transferring to EEG yields higher
         reconstruction quality than training on EEG directly. In addition, we also find
         that training BrainCodec on both EEG and iEEG improves fidelity when recon-
         structing EEG. Our work indicates that data sources with higher SNR, such as
         iEEG, provide better performance across the board also in the medical time-
         series domain. This finding is consistent with reports coming from natural lan-
         guage processing, where clean data sources appear to have an outsized effect
         on the performance of the DL model overall. BrainCodec also achieves up
         to a 64× compression on iEEG and EEG without a notable decrease in qual-
         ity. BrainCodec markedly surpasses current state-of-the-art compression mod-
         els both in final compression ratio and in reconstruction fidelity. We also eval-
         uate the fidelity of the compressed signals objectively on a seizure detection
         and a motor imagery task performed by standard DL models. Here, we find
         that BrainCodec achieves a reconstruction fidelity high enough to ensure no per-
         formance degradation on the downstream tasks. Finally, we collect the sub-
         jective assessment of an expert neurologist, that confirms the high reconstruc-
         tion quality of BrainCodec in a realistic scenario. The code is available at
         https://github.com/IBM/eeg-ieeg-brain-compressor.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Collecting high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) data can prove to be a challenging endeavor in many
situations, especially when considering human data. However, noisier signals are sometimes ade-
quate to perform the task at hand. Following this principle, different data modalities can be collected
from the same source with varying levels of quality. For instance, the electroencephalogram (EEG)


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     a. BrainCodec training                          BrainCodec
                                                      Encoder                                    Decoder
     Ch. 1                                                              Quantizer                                             Ch. 1

     Ch. 2                                                                                                                    Ch. 2


     Ch. C                                                                                                                    Ch. C

                            Time 1    Time 2                                                                Time 1   Time 2


     b. High-quality cross-modal compression                      c. Downstream tasks with compressed signals

                                         Testing modality             iEEG
                                                                                    BrainCodec                   Seizure detection
        Training modality


                                               iEEG EEG
                                     iEEG                              EEG
                                                                                    BrainCodec                   Motor imagery
                                     EEG

                            iEEG + EEG


Figure 1: BrainCodec training and usage. a. BrainCodec can be trained on EEG or iEEG data. b.
BrainCodec trained on iEEG can compress both iEEG and EEG data, while BrainCodec trained on
EEG can only compress other EEG data. c. BrainCodec’s high-fidelity compressed signals can be
used to perform downstream classification on iEEG and EEG data.


is a multi-variate time-series recording of the electrical activity of the brain, where the quality and
SNR vary considerably based on the specific recording setup. On the one hand, non-invasive scalp
EEG can be easily collected in many environments through the placement of extracranial electrodes
on the scalp, but suffers from low spatial and temporal resolutions. The use of ultra long-term
non-invasive EEG systems is expected to help improve personalized patient care, for example, by
objectively assessing seizure rate, and also macro- and microstructure of sleep (Yilmaz et al., 2024;
Casson et al., 2010), which are both treatable risk factors for dementia (Hanke et al., 2022). On the
other hand, intracranial EEG (iEEG) collected through invasive intracranial electrodes benefits from
a higher SNR and a more direct physical connection to the brain. In particular, iEEG is used by neu-
rologists to delineate the seizure onset zone in patients suffering from pharmacoresistant epilepsy,
and deep learning (DL) models have been developed to support them (Kuhlmann et al., 2018; Craik
et al., 2019). As such, both EEG and iEEG are essential data sources available to physicians and re-
searchers for the study and treatment of a variety of neurological diseases. However, the storage and
transmission of EEG signals is often very costly in these highly critical and sensitive environments.
Data compression is a viable solution to reduce the costs associated with storing and transmitting the
large quantities of (i)EEG data that are collected every day. Data compression significantly predates
the current rise of DL; therefore, the most successful algorithms in this field do not belong to the
class of DL models, i.e., they are not neural compressors. However, recent developments (Dani &
Srinivasan, 2021; Webex, 2022; Défossez et al., 2023) have shown that DL models may outperform
more traditional approaches. Nonetheless, no compressor has yet found widespread use for EEG
and iEEG data.
Data compressors can be divided into two main classes: lossless and lossy. Lossless compression,
e.g., lz4, guarantees full signal integrity, at the cost of lower compression ratios. Lossy compression,
on the contrary, achieves high compression ratios; however, the fidelity of the reconstruction cannot
be guaranteed. As such, no lossy compression algorithm can be used for manual or automated
seizure detection without thorough evaluation in real-world scenarios. For time-series, it is usually
preferred to use lossy compression, as they often contain information that is noisy and/or not relevant
for use by humans. For example, lossy audio compressors are ubiquitous and achieve remarkable
size reductions by discarding all content that is mostly unnoticeable by humans. We can do the same
with EEG and iEEG. However, the spectral content and the frequencies of interest in audio and EEG
are significantly different. Moreover, lossy compression is strongly affected by noise. For these
reasons, we expect the behavior of lossy compression on EEG and iEEG to be notably different
between the two modalities, and also from audio.
The state-of-the-art neural model (EnCodec; Défossez et al. (2023)) currently available for high-
fidelity lossy audio signal compression cannot be used directly on EEG signals, since its design is
inadequate in preserving the information content relevant for further analysis. Moreover, the state-


                                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of-the-art neural compressors have not been validated as viable or effective on either EEG or iEEG
signals. As we have seen previously, it is well-known that EEG is overall a noisier data source than
iEEG, so a model that is successful on one modality is not guaranteed to work on the other. At
the same time, it has been reported in other fields, such as natural language processing (Lee et al.,
2022; Muennighoff et al., 2023; Gunasekar et al., 2023), that training DL models on cleaner and less
noisy data can provide increased performance across the board. Therefore, we also aim to provide
concrete guidelines on the performances of neural compressors when transferring between the two
data modalities.
To guide our evaluation throughout this work, we propose a set of criteria to define the high-fidelity
reconstruction of EEG signals: 1. percentage root-mean-square difference (PRD) lower than 30 as
suggested by Higgins et al. (2010); and 2. less than 1% drop in classification performance of down-
stream tasks such as seizure detection or motor imagery classification for brain–machine interface;
and 3. high reconstruction quality as rated by an expert neurologist. Any EEG compressor that
fulfills all the criteria outlined above is considered a high-fidelity compressor.
In this work, we introduce BrainCodec (see Figure 1), a high-fidelity quantized autoencoder com-
pressor for EEG and iEEG. BrainCodec has the following features:

       • universal compression of both iEEG and EEG using the same model;
       • favorable transfer from cleaner iEEG to noisier EEG;
       • high-fidelity compression of EEG signals up to a compression ratio as high as 64;
       • variable compression ratio, depending on the task requirements.

Remarkably, a BrainCodec model trained on iEEG signals and used to compress EEG signals con-
sistently achieves better performance at high compression ratios compared to a BrainCodec trained
on the same EEG modality. This indicates that training with higher quality, higher SNR data gener-
alizes better even across modalities. This is also consistent with previous body of work on natural
language, and highlights the advantage of clean signals with high SNR for the pretraining stage. In
fact, training DL models on such high-quality signals can improve performance even on their noisier
counterparts.


2   R ELATED WORK

Neural audio compression. Neural network models have recently started gaining popularity in the
audio compression domain due to their high compression ratios and design flexibility. Most neural
compression architectures consist of the encoder-decoder pair of an autoencoder, together with a
quantizer to generate discrete representations. VQ-VAE (Van Den Oord et al., 2017) introduced this
method—unrelated to the compression objective—by combining variational autoencoders (VAE)
with vector quantization (VQ). VQ uses a learnable codebook containing a discrete set of vectors to
represent a larger set of input vectors.
GANs have been shown (Kumar et al., 2019; Yamamoto et al., 2020; Kong et al., 2020) to be an ef-
fective solution to drive the overall neural compressor towards better representations. MelGAN (Ku-
mar et al., 2019) introduced a multi-scale discriminator that consists of three convolutional discrimi-
nators that operate on different scales of the waveform. This architecture restricts the discriminators
to specific frequency bands so that they learn features of different scales. The learned features can
be used to train a generator by minimizing the distance between features of real and synthetic data.
Combining autoencoder, quantizer, and GAN, SoundStream (Zeghidour et al., 2022) and En-
Codec (Défossez et al., 2023) represent the state-of-the-art audio compression models. They are
based on a fully convolutional encoder-decoder network with a residual vector quantizer (RVQ)
and a convolutional GAN discriminator, operating on the frequencies of interest of the signal. All
components are jointly trained end-to-end by minimizing reconstruction, quantization, as well as
perceptual adversarial losses.
Lossless EEG compression. Standard lossless compression algorithms such as gzip, zstd, and lz4
are used routinely to reduce the storage requirements of large EEG collections. Typical compression
ratios for these algorithms on EEG are 1.2× to 1.5×. Lossless compression models developed


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


specifically for EEG are more scarce (Alsenwi et al., 2018; Hadi et al., 2021; Al-Nassrawy et al.,
2022) and have not found use in practice.
Lossy EEG compression. Lossy compression has not been adopted for either clinical or research
use due to the uncertainty about the fidelity of the reconstructed signal. In particular, standard
lossy time-series compressed formats such as mp3 have not been developed for EEG and thus have
poor performance. Recently, wavelet transform-based techniques using NLSPIHT (Xu et al., 2015),
arithmetic coding (AAC; Nguyen et al. (2017)), and artificial neural networks (ANN; Hejrati et al.
(2017)), have shown impressive results on EEG, with compression ratios up to 8× and high re-
construction fidelity. Given the importance of EEG signals in a variety of clinical tasks, seizure
detection (Nguyen et al., 2018) has been used to validate the reconstruction fidelity of lossy com-
pression as well. Finally, DL models equipped with compressed sensing techniques (CS; Du et al.
(2024)) have achieved state-of-the-art compression performance in terms of reconstruction fidelity.
Our BrainCodec surpasses existing work by consistently achieving higher compression ratios and
higher reconstruction fidelity.


3   B RAIN C ODEC : Q UANTIZED AUTOENCODER NEURAL COMPRESSOR

This section presents the main contribution of this work, the neural compressor BrainCodec.
First, we outline a typical use case for BrainCodec. Consider an EEG signal X ∈ RC×T having C
channels and a duration T = d × fs of d seconds at a sampling frequency of fs . First, each channel
of the signal is fed separately to the BrainCodec encoder, which outputs a compressed representation
for the given channel. The compressed signal can now be transmitted and stored at a fraction of the
cost of the original signal. The BrainCodec decoder reconstructs the original EEG signal from the
compressed representation, preserving the relevant information content and producing a high-fidelity
result.
We now focus on the design of our neural compressor model, specifically adapted to EEG signals.
We adopt the basic quantized autoencoder design of SoundStream (Zeghidour et al., 2022) and
EnCodec (Défossez et al., 2023), and tailor it to the EEG use case by modifying the loss function
and the parameters of the architecture. The compressor consists of three components: an encoder, a
quantizer, and a decoder. The encoder maps the EEG signal to a latent representation. The quantizer
compresses this latent representation to a quantized representation using residual vector quantization
(RVQ). Finally, the decoder reconstructs the signal from the RVQ output. We design the compressor
to achieve high compression ratios while preserving the information content needed to perform
classification on the signal. The model is trained end-to-end together with a discriminator that learns
multi-scale features of the input data. We apply multiple losses over both the time and frequency
domain to capture different properties of the signal. This allows our compressor to be used in end-to-
end classification pipelines as we show in our seizure detection and motor imagery results, providing
significant storage savings.
Encoder and decoder. First, we divide the EEG signal (X) channel-wise into short patches xi,j ∈
                                      T
RW , i ∈ 1, . . . , C, j ∈ 1, . . . , W = TW , with the patch size W in the order of a few seconds.
In particular, we choose W to be 4 seconds long at the signal sampling frequency. The patches
serve as the input to the encoder. The encoder is composed of a 2D convolutional layer with 1
input channel, F output channels, and a kernel size of (3, 1). This ensures that each channel is
treated separately, and allows the encoder to work on signals with varying number of channels. The
initial layer is followed by N encoder blocks, where N depends on the compression ratio. Each
encoder block comprises a residual block as well as a 2D convolutional layer with a kernel size
of (K, 1) and a stride of (S, 1) for down-sampling, with K twice the size of S. The number of
channels is doubled with each down-sampling layer until there are 256. The encoder blocks are
followed by a final 2D convolutional layer with D output channels and a kernel size of (3, 1). We
choose F = 16, S = 2, D = 64, and ELU as the activation function. The encoder finally outputs
a latent representation zi,j for each input patch. The decoder mirrors the encoder, replacing strided
convolutions with transposed convolutions.
Quantizer. We quantize the latent representation (z) to a compressed representation (zq ) through
RVQ. A codebook stores a finite set of learnable prototype vectors that are used to represent a larger
set of input vectors. When compressing z, the quantizer maps the input vector to the closest pro-


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


totype vector in the codebook. RVQ (Zeghidour et al., 2022) extends this principle to an iterative
process. After mapping an input vector onto a prototype vector, RVQ computes the residual and
maps it to another prototype vector from a second codebook. By repeating this process, the sum of
prototype vectors converges to the original vector. As suggested in previous literature (Zeghidour
et al., 2022; Dhariwal et al., 2020), the selected prototype vectors are updated using an exponential
moving average with a decay of 0.99, whereby the entries that have not been assigned to an input
vector are replaced by a randomly sampled input vector. To improve the initialization of the code-
books, we apply k-means clustering to the first training batch and use the centroids as prototype
vectors. During training, we use a straight-through estimator (Bengio et al., 2013) to pass the gradi-
ents from the decoder to the encoder. At the same time, we compute the MSE between z and zq and
add it to the overall loss. For all our models, we use 4 codebooks each of size 256 (i.e., the storage
of an index that refers to a codebook entry requires 8 bits).
Discriminator (GAN component). During training, we use a multi-scale STFT-based (MS-STFT)
discriminator (Défossez et al., 2023) to improve the reconstruction of high frequencies. The MS-
STFT discriminator is composed of 5 convolutional discriminators operating on different scales of
the complex-valued spectrogram. Each discriminator is composed of an initial 2D convolutional
layer with 64 output channels and a kernel size of (3, 3). The initial layer is followed by 3 con-
volutional layers with increasing dilation in the time dimension of 1, 2, and 4, a kernel size of
(3, 3), and a stride of (1, 2). Another 2D convolutional layer with a kernel size of (3, 3) is fol-
lowed by the final 2D convolutional layer with 1 output channel and a kernel size of (3, 3). We use
(2048, 1024, 512, 256, 128) as STFT window lengths and LeakyReLU as the activation function.


4     T RAINING SETUP

We train BrainCodec following the schema of SoundStream (Zeghidour et al., 2022). To help guide
BrainCodec towards reconstructed signals apt for downstream classification, we also add a new
loss based on the line length, which is widely considered to be a useful feature for EEG classifica-
tion (Schindler et al., 2001; Guo et al., 2010; Burrello et al., 2021). We observe that the GAN has a
significant effect on the reconstruction fidelity of the signal (see App. C.3); therefore, we train one
model with GAN and one without. To avoid the risk of cross contamination between the subjects,
we always train the model on one single subject, and test the reconstruction on the remaining sub-
jects. To provide a direct baseline for the performance of BrainCodec in the seizure detection task,
we also train a standard EEGWaveNet on the original signal, and then test it using the reconstructed
signal.
Validation. We also provide objective metrics of the reconstruction performance of our BrainCodec
in two downstream tasks: the iEEG seizure detection task, and the EEG motor imagery classification
task. In particular, for iEEG we train a standard EEGWaveNet (Thuwajit et al., 2022) classifier on
the original signal, and evaluate its performance on the reconstructed signal. For EEG, we train an
MI-BMInet (Wang et al., 2024b) classifier on the original signal, and evaluate its performance on
the reconstructed signal. For more information on the detailed training regime of BrainCodec refer
to App. A.
Optimizer and setup. We apply the 1-cycle learning rate policy, with a learning rate varying from
10−5 to 10−4 for the generator and from 10−7 to 10−6 for the discriminator. We further use the
weights λt = 1 and λq = 1 for the base model. For the GAN model, we choose λt = 0.1, λs = 1,
λl = 0.1, λf = 3, λg = 3, and λq = 1. The model is trained with full fp32 precision.


4.1   DATASETS

SWEC iEEG (Burrello et al., 2019). This short-term iEEG dataset contains 15 subjects, 14 hours of
recording, and 104 ictal events. The iEEG signals were recorded intracranially with a sampling rate
of either 512 Hz or 1024 Hz. The signals were median-referenced and band-pass filtered between
0.5 and 120 Hz using a fourth-order Butterworth filter, both in a forward and backward pass. All the
recordings were inspected by an expert neurologist for identification of seizure onsets and offsets,
and to remove channels corrupted by artifacts.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Multi-center (MC) iEEG (Li et al., 2021). This iEEG dataset contains iEEG signals around ictal
events for 91 subjects for a total of 462 events, with a sampling rate up to 1000 Hz. The onset and
offset times of the seizures are included in the dataset.
Brain Treebank iEEG (Wang et al., 2024a). This iEEG dataset contains 10 subjects for a total of
43 hours. The subjects have an average of 168 electrodes with a sampling rate of 2048 Hz. As this
is not an ictal dataset, there are no labels for seizures.
CHB-MIT (Shoeb, 2010; 2009). This EEG dataset contains a total of 24 subjects, 983 hours of
recording, and 198 seizures. All signals have a sampling rate of 256 Hz. The onset and offset times
of the seizures are included in the dataset.
BONN (Andrzejak et al., 2001). This EEG dataset is composed of five sets (Z, O, N, F, S), each
containing approximately 40 minutes of single-channel EEG. All signals have a sampling rate of
173.61 Hz, and they were band-pass filtered between 0.5 Hz and 40 Hz. We use all sets for evaluating
the compression only.
BCI Competition IV-2a (Tangermann et al., 2012). This EEG dataset contains a total of 9 subjects.
The data was collected for the purpose of 4-class motor imagery classification in brain-machine
interfaces, so we have useful labels for downstream classification. All signals have a sampling rate
of 250 Hz, and they were band-pass filtered between 0.5 Hz and 120 Hz with an additional notch
filter at 50 Hz to remove line noise.

4.2   BASELINES

We compare the performance of BrainCodec with multiple state-of-the-art lossy compression al-
gorithms that have been developed for EEG. We benchmark against the following methods: NL-
SPIHT (Xu et al., 2015), a classical algorithm; ANN (Hejrati et al., 2017), a deep-learning model;
AAC (Nguyen et al., 2017), a wavelet-based model with adaptive arithmetic coding; and CS (Du
et al., 2024), a compressed-sensing based deep learning model.
To showcase the adaptability of BrainCodec, we test it on three iEEG datasets (SWEC, MC, Tree-
bank), which have a high SNR, and also on multiple EEG datasets (CHB-MIT, BONN, and BCI
IV-2a), which are noisier. Finally, we evaluate the generalization capabilities of BrainCodec across
datasets and modalities. The full comparison with all the baselines is shown in App. D.

5     R ESULTS
To evaluate the compression performance in terms of reconstruction fidelity, we report the percent-
age root-mean-square distortion (PRD):
                                              ∥x − x̂∥2
                                      PRD =             · 100,                                     (1)
                                                ∥x∥2
which represents the relative L2 -distance between the original and the reconstructed signal. In order
to have a comprehensive outlook, we train multiple models at varying compression ratios.

5.1   B RAIN C ODEC CROSS - MODAL COMPRESSION

Reports from other fields, especially natural language processing, have shown (Lee et al., 2022;
Muennighoff et al., 2023; Gunasekar et al., 2023) that training with higher-quality data often yields
better performance than simply training with more, and more similar, data. We aim to characterise
this phenomenon for human iEEG and EEG, where, due to its higher SNR, we consider iEEG to be
of higher quality than EEG in the signal processing domain.
To evaluate the role of high-SNR data in human EEG signals, we train an instance of BrainCodec
on the SWEC iEEG dataset and use it to compress EEG signals. Figure 2a shows the median PRD
across all tested EEG datasets when training BrainCodec on iEEG or on EEG. The EEG-trained
compressor performs slightly better at lower compression ratios, while the iEEG-trained model
becomes competitive and even achieves higher performance at higher compression ratios. Aside
from the pure compression advantage, variational autoencoders have been shown to produce bet-
ter representations when the information bottleneck becomes more restrictive and learning pressure


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 BrainCodec trained on iEEG                                                                   BrainCodec trained on iEEG
                                 BrainCodec trained on EEG                                                                    BrainCodec trained on EEG
                                                                                                                     20
                        40


                                                                                            Compressing iEEG [PRD]
Compressing EEG [PRD]


                        30                                                                                           15


                        20                                                                                           10


                        10                                                                                           5



                        0
                                                                                                                     0

                             2               4            8         16        32   64                                     2               4            8         16        32   64
                                                    Compression ratio [log]                                                                      Compression ratio [log]


                   (a) Testing cross-modal BrainCodec on scalp EEG.                         (b) Testing cross-modal BrainCodec on intracranial
                                                                                            EEG (iEEG).

Figure 2: Cross-modality signal reconstruction fidelity of BrainCodec. BrainCodec trained on
iEEG (higher SNR) always performs better at moderate and higher compression ratios compared to
BrainCodec trained on scalp EEG (lower SNR), even when compressing EEG.


increases (Burgess et al., 2018). In this region of interest, high-SNR iEEG also becomes a better
data source than low-SNR EEG. We hypothesize that the increased performance of the cross-modal
BrainCodec (i.e., from iEEG to EEG) at above moderate compression ratios can be traced back to
the effect of the noise content of the lower SNR EEG with respect to the higher SNR iEEG (see
App. C.1 for more details).
Conversely, we train an instance of BrainCodec on the EEG CHB-MIT dataset and use it to com-
press the SWEC iEEG dataset. As expected, Figure 2b shows that the EEG to iEEG cross-modal
BrainCodec performs worse than the within-modality model, indicating that a lower-quality signal
is less effective at generalizing than a higher-quality one.
In summary, by characterizing the behavior of BrainCodec when trained across modality, we have
corroborated previous reports about data quality from natural language processing. In particular, we
have shown that training with higher quality data sources yields improved performance even when
generalizing to lower quality ones. The converse is, expectedly, not true. App. C.1 provides more
details.

                        40       BrainCodec trained on EEG + iEEG                                                             BrainCodec trained on EEG+iEEG
                                                                                                                     14
                                 BrainCodec trained on EEG                                                                    BrainCodec trained on iEEG

                        35
                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                            Compressing iEEG [PRD]
Compressing EEG [PRD]


                        30
                                                                                                                     10
                        25
                                                                                                                     8
                        20

                                                                                                                     6
                        15


                        10                                                                                           4


                        5                                                                                            2

                        0
                                                                                                                     0
                             2               4            8         16        32   64                                     2               4            8         16        32   64
                                                    Compression ratio [log]                                                                      Compression ratio [log]


            (a) Testing mixed-modal BrainCodec on scalp EEG.                                (b) Testing mixed-modal BrainCodec on intracranial
                                                                                            EEG (iEEG).

Figure 3: Mixed-modality signal reconstruction fidelity of BrainCodec. BrainCodec trained on
both intracranial EEG and scalp EEG maintains the reconstruction fidelity of an iEEG-model when
compressing iEEG. At the same time, it improves performance at high compression ratios with
respect to a scalp EEG-trained model compressing scalp EEG.



                                                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 5.2                         B RAIN C ODEC MIXED - MODAL COMPRESSION

Given the promising results shown by BrainCodec when transferring across modalities, we now
investigate the performance of our neural compressor when trained with both modalities — scalp
EEG and intracranial EEG — at the same time.
To evaluate the effect of mixed-modal compression, we train BrainCodec on both the SWEC iEEG
dataset and the CHB EEG dataset, for the same overall amount of data as the previous models to
keep the evaluation balanced. Figure 3a shows that the median PRD of our mixed model is notably
superior to the EEG-only model when compressing EEG signals, indicating that the performance
benefits of iEEG training have transferred successfully. In line with the previous cross-modal results,
this improvement is more marked at high compression ratios. At the same time, the mixed model
also performs on par with the EEG-only model at lower compression ratios, mitigating the drawback
we had reported in the previous cross-modal results.
On the other hand, we also test mixed BrainCodec on iEEG recordings. In this case, we do not
observe any benefit of mixed-modal training in reconstruction fidelity. However, we also do not
observe any notable reduction in performance.

 5.3                         B RAIN C ODEC COMPRESSION PERFORMANCE

                                 BrainCodec                                                                                BrainCodec
                        20       AAC                                                                              20       AAC
                                 NLSPIHT                                                                                   NLSPIHT



                        15                                                                                        15
PRD [lower is better]


                                                                                          PRD [lower is better]


                        10                                                                                        10


                        5                                                                                         5


                        0                                                                                         0

                             2                4        8          16        32   64                                    2                4        8          16        32   64
                                                  Compression ratio [log]                                                                   Compression ratio [log]


                                    (a) Testing on the SWEC dataset.                                                            (b) Testing on the MC dataset.

Figure 4: Within-modality signal reconstruction fidelity of BrainCodec on intracranial EEG
(iEEG). BrainCodec trained only on the SWEC dataset shows increased performance across the
board both on the SWEC and MC dataset, and also reaches higher compression ratios while main-
taining a moderate PRD.

Next, we train BrainCodec exclusively on iEEG data to compress other iEEG datasets. Likewise, we
train BrainCodec on EEG data to compress other EEG datasets, ensuring compression is performed
within the same modality. We then compare the results with baseline methods.
We compress iEEG and EEG signals with a varying compression ratios from 2× to 64×. We com-
pare BrainCodec with multiple state-of-the-art methods found in the literature, both neural network-
based and classical. The full set of results can be found in App. D.
We choose two iEEG datasets to test the performance of BrainCodec with iEEG compression:
SWEC and MC. We train all models that require training on a subset of the respective dataset and
test on the remaining part. The results of the best performing BrainCodec model on the SWEC
dataset are shown in Figure 4a. At lower compression ratios, BrainCodec improves on the PRD
compared to both AAC and NLSPIHT, but the baselines remain competitive. At higher compression
ratios, however, BrainCodec is notably better, with a lower PRD at almost twice the compression.
In particular, BrainCodec remains in the high-fidelity regime even with a 64× compression ratio.
Figure 4b paints a similar picture for the iEEG MC dataset. BrainCodec surpasses all baselines at
lower compression ratios and reaches much higher ratios overall. Performance is high when trained
with the iEEG SWEC dataset, indicating that BrainCodec generalizes well across iEEG datasets
within the same modality.


                                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        40       BrainCodec                                                                       40       BrainCodec
                                 AAC                                                                                       ANN
                        35       NLSPIHT                                                                          35       NLISPHT
                                                                                                                           AAC

                        30                                                                                        30
PRD [lower is better]


                                                                                          PRD [lower is better]
                        25                                                                                        25


                        20                                                                                        20


                        15                                                                                        15


                        10                                                                                        10


                        5                                                                                         5


                        0                                                                                         0
                             2                4        8          16        32   64                                    2                4        8          16        32   64
                                                  Compression ratio [log]                                                                   Compression ratio [log]


                                     (a) Testing on the CHB dataset.                                                        (b) Testing on the BONN N dataset.

Figure 5: Within-modality signal reconstruction fidelity of BrainCodec on scalp EEG. Brain-
Codec trained only on the CHB dataset, shows increased performance across the board both on
the CHB and the BONN dataset, and also reaches higher compression ratios while maintaining a
moderate PRD.


We test BrainCodec’s performance on EEG data with three EEG datasets, CHB-MIT, BONN, and
BCI IV-2a. Figure 5a shows that BrainCodec improves on the PRD compared to all other methods
on the EEG CHB-MIT dataset. Moreover, it can also achieve much higher compression ratios. The
model BrainCodec Base is trained on a subset of the CHB-MIT dataset and tested on the remaining
part, to ensure no contamination between the subjects. The same trend holds for the EEG BONN N
dataset (Figure 5b). The BONN dataset is too small to both train and test the two neural network-
based approaches, BrainCodec and ANN. Therefore, we first train them on other EEG datasets and
then test them on BONN. As seen previously with iEEG, the performance of BrainCodec is notably
better than the baselines even when trained across EEG datasets within the same modality. The
results of BrainCodec on BCI can be found in Figure A6.
Finally, we also provide a subjective evaluation by an expert neurologist of the SWEC iEEG and
the CHB-MIT EEG datasets as compressed by BrainCodec. The evaluation subjectively confirms
that BrainCodec achieves a high-fidelity reconstruction both on iEEG and EEG. More details can be
found in App. E.
We find that BrainCodec shows superior performance compared to all baselines across our suite of
benchmarks both on iEEG and EEG, as can be seen in App. D. Overall, these results indicate that
BrainCodec is an efficient iEEG and EEG compressor, both within and across datasets.

 5.4                         D OWNSTREAM CLASSIFICATION TASKS

As another objective measurement of reconstruction quality, we validate the reconstruction fidelity
on two downstream classification tasks: the iEEG seizure detection task, and the EEG motor imagery
task.
First, we evaluate BrainCodec on the iEEG seizure detection task, by testing a subject-specific EEG-
WaveNet (Thuwajit et al., 2022) seizure classifier on the reconstructed signal. We test the EEG-
WaveNet across all subjects with a leave-one-out cross-validation scheme, training for each subject
on all seizures but one and testing on the remaining seizure. Table 1 provides the compression
ratio, PRD, and resulting F1-score for the signals reconstructed by BrainCodec. Even at a 64×
compression, there is no loss of performance in the seizure detection task. Moreover, the F1-score
of the BrainCodec GAN model degrades only by 8% at 256× compression, likely due to its better
reconstruction of the higher frequencies with respect to the Base model (see App. C.3). Thus, the
relevant information content is preserved by BrainCodec while providing significant storage and
transmission savings.
Second, we evaluate BrainCodec on the EEG motor imagery task using the MI-BMInet (Wang et al.,
2024b) classifier. The training and testing setup is analogous to the seizure detection task. Specif-


                                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Original iEEG           BrainCodec Base                 BrainCodec GAN
        CR ↑      n.a.             8        64      128     256    8        64     128    256
        F1 ↑      0.79             0.79     0.78    0.72    0.62   0.78     0.78   0.72   0.72
        PRD ↓     n.a              1.88     15.7    26.3    40.7   2.37     17.6   30.0   47.4

Table 1: Performance of the BrainCodec compressor on the iEEG seizure detection task. The
PRD remains low (< 30) even at 64× compression, and the F1-score remains high when a standard
subject-dependent EEGWaveNet makes inferences with the reconstructed data instead of the original
iEEG (< 1% drop).


ically, we train the compressor on the first subject of the BCI dataset, and then report the average
test accuracy across all remaining 8 subjects. BrainCodec shows high-fidelity reconstructions up to
a 4× compression ratio, and maintains a useful classification performance up to 16×. This rate of
compression is expectedly lower than iEEG, as EEG has intrinsically lower SNR and is thus less
amenable to compression.

                 Original EEG            BrainCodec Base                  BrainCodec GAN
       CR ↑      n.a.             4        8       16      64      4        8      16      64
       Acc. ↑    77%              76%      73%     72%     63%     74%      73%    73%     57%
       PRD ↓     n.a              3.44     10.4    29.0    45.5    8.04     39.2   45.3    73.8

Table 2: Performance of the BrainCodec compressor on the EEG motor imagery task (BCI
IV-2a). Subject 1 has been excluded from the evaluation, as it has been used to train BrainCodec.
The PRD remains moderate even at high compression ratios, and the accuracy remains high when a
standard subject-dependent MI-BMInet makes inferences with the reconstructed data instead of the
original EEG.

Overall, we confirm that BrainCodec can achieve high compression ratios both on iEEG and EEG
signals without notably impacting downstream task performance. Therefore, we have sufficiently
characterized and validated BrainCodec as an efficient iEEG and EEG compressor.


6   D ISCUSSION

In this work, we present BrainCodec, a high-fidelity neural compressor for EEG and iEEG signals.
BrainCodec is effective across both modalities and a variety of datasets, indicating that it can suc-
cessfully replace existing methods and be introduced in any EEG processing pipeline. Compression
by BrainCodec up to 64× does not affect downstream seizure detection performance as evaluated
both by human experts and deep learning models. We also observe that BrainCodec performs bet-
ter when trained with high SNR iEEG. This performance increase is maintained when compressing
the noisier EEG signal, compared to the same model trained on the very same EEG modality. We
therefore highlight the importance of training deep learning models on high-quality signals also in
the medical domain.
Overall, BrainCodec is an immediate compression replacement for many EEG and iEEG applica-
tions, enabling transmission and storage cost savings in critical clinical environments. We expect
the adoption of BrainCodec to increase the feasibility of long-term recordings and wearable devices.
Further work is necessary to assess whether the intermediate representations of BrainCodec can
be directly used by other deep learning models, to increase performance and provide an additional
speed-up. Architectural changes to BrainCodec could be made, for example by utilising decoder
models specifically developed for biosignals (Zhang et al., 2023). Moreover, the RVQ quantiza-
tion schema of BrainCodec is known to be not necessarily codebook efficient, and improvements
are already being developed in the field (Kumar et al., 2024). On this front, more venues are be-
ing explored to replace RVQ with another quantization schema, such as Finite Scalar Quantiza-
tion (Mentzer et al., 2024).


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the Swiss National Science foundation (SNF), grant no. 200800.

R EPRODUCIBILITY
The training setup, losses, and optimizers are described in detail in Sec. 4 and App. A. All datasets
used are listed and are publicly available for download, and the data selection for the generation of
the results is also explained in detail. Finally, the code is available at https://github.com/
IBM/eeg-ieeg-brain-compressor.


R EFERENCES
Kahlaa K. Al-Nassrawy, Ali Kadhum Idrees, and Dhiah Al-Shammary. A novel lossless eeg com-
  pression model using fractal combined with fixed-length encoding technique. In Lecture Notes
  on Data Engineering and Communications Technologies. 2022.

Madyan Alsenwi, Tawfik Ismail, and M. Saeed Darweesh. Hybrid compression techniques for EEG
 data based on lossy/lossless compression algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02713, 2018.

Ralph G. Andrzejak, Klaus Lehnertz, Florian Mormann, Christoph Rieke, Peter David, and Chris-
  tian E. Elger. Indications of nonlinear deterministic and finite-dimensional structures in time se-
  ries of brain electrical activity: Dependence on recording region and brain state. Physical Review
  E, 64(6), 2001.

Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients
  through stochastic neurons for conditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432, 2013.

Christopher P. Burgess, Irina Higgins, Arka Pal, Loic Matthey, Nick Watters, Guillaume Des-
  jardins, and Alexander Lerchner. Understanding disentangling in β-vae. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1804.03599, 2018.

Alessio Burrello, Lukas Cavigelli, Kaspar Schindler, Luca Benini, and Abbas Rahimi. Laelaps: An
  energy-efficient seizure detection algorithm from long-term human iEEG recordings without false
  alarms. In Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), 2019.

Alessio Burrello, Simone Benatti, Kaspar Schindler, Luca Benini, and Abbas Rahimi. An ensemble
  of hyperdimensional classifiers: Hardware-friendly short-latency seizure detection with automatic
  ieeg electrode selection. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 25(4):935–946,
  2021. doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2020.3022211.

Alexander J. Casson, David C. Yates, Shelagh J.M. Smith, John S. Duncan, and Esther Rodriguez-
  Villegas. Wearable electroencephalography. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Maga-
  zine, 29(3), 2010.

Alexander Craik, Yongtian He, and Jose L Contreras-Vidal. Deep learning for electroencephalogram
  (EEG) classification tasks: a review. Journal of Neural Engineering, 16(3), 2019.

Jigar Dani and Sriram Srinivasan. Satin: Microsoft’s latest ai-powered audio codec for real-time
   communications. https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/microsoft-teams-blog/satin-microsoft-
   s-latest-ai-powered-audio-codec-for-real-time/ba-p/2141382, February 2021.

Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Yossi Adi. High fidelity neural audio
  compression. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.

Prafulla Dhariwal, Heewoo Jun, Christine Payne, Jong Wook Kim, Alec Radford, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Jukebox: A generative model for music. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00341, 2020.

XiuLi Du, KuanYang Liang, YaNa Lv, and ShaoMing Qiu. Fast reconstruction of EEG signal
  compression sensing based on deep learning. Scientific Reports, 14(1), 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth
  Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, Adil Salim, Shital
  Shah, Harkirat Singh Behl, Xin Wang, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Adam Tauman Kalai,
  Yin Tat Lee, and Yuanzhi Li. Textbooks are all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11644,
  2023.

Ling Guo, Daniel Rivero, Julián Dorado, Juan R. Rabuñal, and Alejandro Pazos. Automatic epileptic
  seizure detection in EEGs based on line length feature and artificial neural networks. Journal of
  Neuroscience Methods, 191(1), 2010.

Hend A. Hadi, Loay E. George, and Enas Kh. Hassan. Lossless EEG data compression using delta
  modulation and two types of enhanced adaptive shift coders. In New Trends in Information and
  Communications Technology Applications. 2021.

Sten Hanke, Francesca Mangialasche, Markus Bödenler, Bernhard Neumayer, Tiia Ngandu, Patrizia
  Mecocci, Helena Untersteiner, and Elisabeth Stögmann. Ai-based predictive modelling of the
  onset and progression of dementia. Smart Cities, 5(2), 2022.

Behzad Hejrati, Abdolhossein Fathi, and Fardin Abdali-Mohammadi. A new near-lossless EEG
  compression method using ANN-based reconstruction technique. Computers in Biology and
  Medicine, 87, 2017.

G Higgins, S Faul, R P McEvoy, B McGinley, M Glavin, W P Marnane, and E Jones. EEG com-
  pression using JPEG2000: How much loss is too much? In Annual International Conference of
  the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology, 2010.

Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae. HiFi-GAN: Generative adversarial networks for
  efficient and high fidelity speech synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 33, 2020.

Levin Kuhlmann, Klaus Lehnertz, Mark P. Richardson, Björn Schelter, and Hitten P. Zaveri. Seizure
  prediction — ready for a new era. Nature Reviews Neurology, 14(10), 2018.

Kundan Kumar, Rithesh Kumar, Thibault De Boissiere, Lucas Gestin, Wei Zhen Teoh, Jose Sotelo,
  Alexandre De Brebisson, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron C Courville. MelGAN: Generative adver-
  sarial networks for conditional waveform synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 32, 2019.

Rithesh Kumar, Prem Seetharaman, Alejandro Luebs, Ishaan Kumar, and Kundan Kumar. High-
  fidelity audio compression with improved RVQGAN. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 36, 2024.

Katherine Lee, Daphne Ippolito, Andrew Nystrom, Chiyuan Zhang, Douglas Eck, Chris Callison-
  Burch, and Nicholas Carlini. Deduplicating training data makes language models better. In
  Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings of the 60th An-
  nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Dublin,
  Ireland, 2022.

Adam Li, Chester Huynh, Zachary Fitzgerald, Iahn Cajigas, Damian Brusko, Jonathan Jagid, An-
  gel O. Claudio, Andres M. Kanner, Jennifer Hopp, Stephanie Chen, Jennifer Haagensen, Emily
  Johnson, William Anderson, Nathan Crone, Sara Inati, Kareem A. Zaghloul, Juan Bulacio, Jorge
  Gonzalez-Martinez, and Sridevi V. Sarma. Neural fragility as an EEG marker of the seizure onset
  zone. Nature Neuroscience, 24(10), 2021.

Fabian Mentzer, David Minnen, Eirikur Agustsson, and Michael Tschannen. Finite scalar quantiza-
  tion: VQ-VAE made simple. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions (ICLR), 2024.

Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander M Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Nouamane Tazi, Aleksandra
  Piktus, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin Raffel. Scaling data-constrained language mod-
  els. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Binh Nguyen, Dang Nguyen, Wanli Ma, and Dat Tran. Wavelet transform and adaptive arithmetic
  coding techniques for EEG lossy compression. In International Joint Conference on Neural Net-
  works (IJCNN), 2017.
Binh Nguyen, Wanli Ma, and Dat Tran. A study of combined lossy compression and seizure detec-
  tion on epileptic EEG signals. Procedia Computer Science, 126, 2018.
K Schindler, R Wiest, M Kollar, and F Donati. Using simulated neuronal cell models for detection of
  epileptic seizures in foramen ovale and scalp eeg. Clinical Neurophysiology, 112(6):1006–1017,
  June 2001. ISSN 1388-2457. doi: 10.1016/s1388-2457(01)00522-3.
Ali Shoeb. CHB-MIT scalp EEG database. 2010. doi: 10.13026/C2K01R.
Ali Hossam Shoeb. Application of machine learning to epileptic seizure onset detection and treat-
  ment. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2009.
Michael Tangermann, Klaus-Robert Müller, Ad Aertsen, Niels Birbaumer, Christoph Braun,
 Clemens Brunner, Robert Leeb, Carsten Mehring, Kai J. Miller, Gernot R. Müller-Putz, Guido
 Nolte, Gert Pfurtscheller, Hubert Preissl, Gerwin Schalk, Alois Schlögl, Carmen Vidaurre,
 Stephan Waldert, and Benjamin Blankertz. Review of the BCI competition IV. Frontiers in
 Neuroscience, 2012.
Punnawish Thuwajit, Phurin Rangpong, Phattarapong Sawangjai, Phairot Autthasan, Rattanaphon
  Chaisaen, Nannapas Banluesombatkul, Puttaranun Boonchit, Nattasate Tatsaringkansakul, Tha-
  panun Sudhawiyangkul, and Theerawit Wilaiprasitporn. EEGWaveNet: Multiscale CNN-based
  spatiotemporal feature extraction for EEG seizure detection. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
  Informatics, 18(8), 2022.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 30, 2017.
Christopher Wang, Adam Uri Yaari, Aaditya K Singh, Vighnesh Subramaniam, Dana Rosenfarb, Jan
  DeWitt, Pranav Misra, Joseph R. Madsen, Scellig Stone, Gabriel Kreiman, Boris Katz, Ignacio
  Cases, and Andrei Barbu. Brain treebank: Large-scale intracranial recordings from naturalistic
  language stimuli. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2024a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  KZlJF8kguO.
Xiaying Wang, Michael Hersche, Michele Magno, and Luca Benini. MI-BMInet: An efficient
  convolutional neural network for motor imagery brain–machine interfaces with EEG channel se-
  lection. IEEE Sensors Journal, 24(6), 2024b.
Webex. Webex AI codec: The AI-powered codec for modern communications. Whitepaper, 2022.
 URL https://www.webex.com/gp/webex-ai-codec.html.
Gaowei Xu, Jun Han, Yao Zou, and Xiaoyang Zeng. A 1.5-D multi-channel EEG compression
  algorithm based on nlspiht. IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 22(8), 2015.
Ryuichi Yamamoto, Eunwoo Song, and Jae-Min Kim. Parallel WaveGAN: A fast waveform genera-
  tion model based on generative adversarial networks with multi-resolution spectrogram. In IEEE
  International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2020.
Gürkan Yilmaz, Andrea Seiler, Olivier Chételat, and Kaspar A. Schindler. Ultra-Long-Term-EEG
  Monitoring (ULTEEM) systems: Towards user-friendly out-of-hospital recordings of electrical
  brain signals in epilepsy. Sensors, 24(6), 2024.
Neil Zeghidour, Alejandro Luebs, Ahmed Omran, Jan Skoglund, and Marco Tagliasacchi. Sound-
  Stream: An end-to-end neural audio codec. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
  Language Processing, 30, 2022.
Yukun Zhang, Shuang Qiu, and Huiguang He. Multimodal motor imagery decoding method based
  on temporal spatial feature alignment and fusion. Journal of Neural Engineering, 20(2):026009,
  March 2023. ISSN 1741-2552. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/acbfdf.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     N EURAL COMPRESSOR DETAILS
A.1   T RAINING OBJECTIVE

We apply multiple losses to capture properties of both the time and frequency domain. The recon-
struction loss over the time domain ℓt measures the L1 -distance between the original signal (x) and
the reconstructed signal (x̂):
                                       ℓt (x, x̂) = ∥x − x̂∥1 .                                   (2)

The reconstruction loss over the frequency domain ℓs consists of a linear combination between L1 -
and L2 -distance computed over different scales of the spectrogram. In particular,
                             X      1
                ℓs (x, x̂) =             (∥Si (x) − Si (x̂)∥1 + α∥Si (x) − Si (x̂)∥2 ),       (3)
                                |Si (x)|
                               i∈I

where Si (·) is the output of an STFT with a window size of 2i and a hop length of 2i−2 . We choose
I = {5, 6, ..., 11} and α = 1.
We further introduce a new relative line length loss that accounts for large differences in amplitude.
Often the amplitude of a seizure sample is much larger than the amplitude of a non-seizure sample.
When reconstructing such a seizure sample, a relatively small deviation can cause a large L1 - or
L2 -distance. In these cases, the weight updates are mainly driven by seizure samples, since they
contribute much more to the overall loss than non-seizure samples. To address this imbalance,
we compute the relative difference in line length of the original and reconstructed signal, which is
independent of the amplitude. Formally,

                               W −1 X
                                    T
                               X       ||xt+wS − xt−1+wS | − |x̂t+wS − x̂t−1+wS ||
                ℓl (x, x̂) =                                                       ,                (4)
                               w=0 t=1
                                                  |xt+wS − xt−1+wS |

with TW windows of size W and stride S. We choose T = 128 and S = 64.
To improve the reconstruction of high frequencies, we apply perceptual losses that are based on the
MS-STFT discriminator. The discriminator network is trained by minimizing the adversarial loss of
the generator ℓg as well as the adversarial loss of the discriminator ℓd . The two losses are defined as
follows:
                                        K
                                        X
                              ℓg (x̂) =     mean(max(0, 1 − Dk (x̂))),                               (5)
                                          k=1

                           K
                           X
            ℓd (x, x̂) =         mean(max(0, 1 − Dk (x))) + mean(max(0, 1 + Dk (x̂))),              (6)
                           k=1

where K is the number of discriminators and Dk is the output of the respective discriminator.
At the same time, we exploit the multi-scale features learned by the discriminators to compute a
feature loss,

                                                K X
                                                  L
                                                X   ∥Dl (x) − Dl (x̂)∥1
                                                               k          k
                                 ℓf (x, x̂) =                                    ,                  (7)
                                                k=1 l=1
                                                                   ∥Dkl (x)∥1

where K is the number of discriminators, L is the number of layers of a discriminator, and Dkl is
the output of the respective layer.
We further add a quantization loss ℓq that computes the MSE between the latent representation (z)
and its quantized version (zq ):
                                                      C
                                                      X
                                      ℓq (z, zq ) =         ∥zc − (zq )c ∥22 ,                      (8)
                                                      c=1


                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where C is the number of codebooks. Since the codebook entries are updated using an exponential
moving average, we compute the gradients only with respect to the latent representation (z).
With the exception of ℓd , all losses are added up to the overall generator loss,


                     LG = λt · ℓt + λs · ℓs + λl · ℓl + λf · ℓf + λg · ℓg + λq · ℓq ,              (9)

where λt , λs , λl , λf , λg , and λq are the weights to balance between the loss terms. We further use
a loss balancer introduced by Défossez et al. (2023) to deal with the varying scale of the gradients
and to stabilize training between generator and discriminator.

A.2   T RAINING SCHEMA

For the iEEG compression task, we use the recordings from subject ID1, which have 47 channels
for a total duration of 5604 seconds, and contain 13 seizures. We randomly sample 80% of that data
for training and use the remaining 20% for validation. For the seizure detection task, we exclude
ID1 from the dataset and use the recordings from the remaining 15 subjects of the database.
For the leave-one-out cross-validation, we train N classifiers per subject, where N is the number of
seizures of the respective subject. We use the original recordings of N − 1 seizures for training, and
the reconstructed recording of the remaining seizure for validation. The performance for a subject
is the average across N trials. The final performance is the average across all subjects, weighted by
the number of seizures. All classifiers are trained for 50 epochs with a learning rate of 3 · 10−4 . We
use samples of 5 seconds and a batch size of 128.


B     A BLATIONS

B.1   R EFERENCE SCHEMA

The reference schema is an often underappreciated aspect of data collection. To evaluate how
BrainCodec’s performance varies with different references, we use the unprocessed Brain Treebank
dataset and reference it in post-processing. Laplacian refers to referencing each electrode with the
mean within its electrode group.

            Reference       CR ↑    PRD ↓     PRD-spec ↓      RMSE ↓      SNR ↑         PSNR ↑
           None             64      15.21     10.27           10400       18.49         27.81
           Median           64      14.67     9.89            8440        18.36         27.95
           Bipolar          64      14.36     9.19            8439        18.89         28.38
           Laplacian        64      16.56     11.75           1160        18.96         27.53

                             Table A1: Ablation of the reference schema.

Table A1 shows that BrainCodec is robust to the reference schema. Moreover, variations can most
likely be explained with the changes in SNR of the dataset due to the reference itself.

B.2   E NCODER

Out of the three components of BrainCodec the Encoder is directly in contact with the raw data,
such that its parameters have a noticeable effect on all downstream components. In particular, we
adopt the same choices as SoundStream (Zeghidour et al., 2022) except for the initial kernel size,
which needs to be modulated based on the specific characteristics of EEG and iEEG.
We evaluate the effect of the initial kernel size of the Encoder component on the compression per-
formance in Table A2. We use the Base model at 64× compression trained on the iEEG SWEC
dataset and tested on the same dataset.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Kernel size     PRD ↓         PRD-spec ↓       RMSE ↓      SNR ↑        PSNR ↑
                   3               15.74         10.93            16.14       17.96        36.73
                   5               15.94         11               16.37       17.94        33.86
                   7               15.91         10.91            16.27       17.83        33.87

                          Table A2: Ablation of the Encoder’s initial kernel size.


A value of 7 was chosen in the original architecture; however, in accordance with the decreased
sample rate of our data, our choice of a kernel size of 3 yields increased performance with respect
to all alternatives.

B.3   Q UANTIZER

We evaluate the effects of the parameters of the Quantizer component on the compression perfor-
mance. In particular, we vary the number of residuals in Table A3, and doing so we also change
the compression ratio. In contrast, for our models we choose to change the Encoder’s framerate to
adjust the compression ratio, as it yields superior performance.

              Residuals     CR ↑         PRD ↓        PRD-spec ↓      RMSE ↓       SNR ↑      PSNR ↑
              1             256          38.36        31.75           36.03        9.67       25.72
              4             64           15.74        10.93           16.14        17.96      36.73
              8             32           10.26        6.08            10.95        22.04      37.94
              16            16           8.74         4.32            9.44         23.76      39.57

                       Table A3: Ablation of the Quantizer’s number of residuals.

The compression ratio is also affected, albeit in a minor way, by the size of the codebook. Therefore,
we also perform an ablation on the codebook size, as shown in Table A4.

         Codebook size           CR ↑      PRD ↓         PRD-spec ↓       RMSE ↓      SNR ↑        PSNR ↑
         64                      85.33     21.09         17.82            21.58       15.47        31.26
         128                     73.14     18.16         14.40            18.70       16.79        32.63
         256                     64        15.74         10.93            16.14       17.96        36.73
         512                     56.89     13.95         9.02             14.34       19.02        35.02
         1024                    51.20     12.74         7.85             13.09       19.77        35.83

                          Table A4: Ablation of the Quantizer’s codebook size.

Our choice of 256 represents an effective compromise between reconstruction fidelity and compres-
sion, requiring only log2 256 = 8 bits to store.

B.4   L INE LENGTH LOSS

One of the major improvements we adopt over the original SoundStream to better suit our data’s
characteristics is an additional line length loss term. This term is informed by the existing consensus
that line length can be a useful indicator of seizures and other pathological states. Considering that
most collected iEEG data is pathological by nature, considering its line length can yield effective
improvement in compression and in downstream classification tasks. Therefore, we evaluate the ef-
fect of our additional line length loss on the reconstruction fidelity. Table A5 shows the performance
of a Base model trained both with and without line length loss. Results show that there is a net
improvement both in PRD and SNR.


                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Line length          CR ↑      PRD ↓         PRD-spec ↓                          RMSE ↓       SNR ↑        PSNR ↑
                               Yes                  64        15.74         10.93                               16.14        17.96        36.73
                               No                   64        15.95         10.87                               16.26        17.93        33.84

                                                         Table A5: Ablation of the line length loss.


However, a larger effect can be appreciated in the spectrogram of signals reconstructed by the GAN
model.


                 250                                                         200                      250                                                 200



                                                                             180                                                                          180

                 200                                                                                  200
                                                                             160                                                                          160
Frequency [Hz]


                                                                                     Frequency [Hz]
                 150                                                         140                      150                                                 140



                                                                             120                                                                          120

                 100                                                                                  100
                                                                             100                                                                          100



                 50                                                          80                       50                                                  80



                                                                             60                                                                           60

                   0                                                                                    0
                       0       1     2   3      4         5     6     7                                     0    1      2     3      4    5       6   7
                                         Time [s]                                                                             Time [s]


            (a) Ictal sample reconstructed with line length loss.                    (b) Ictal sample reconstructed without line length loss.

Figure A1: Difference in reconstruction fidelity of GAN BrainCodec trained with and without line
length loss. The performance on high frequencies notably improves with the line length loss.


Figure A1 shows that the line length loss improves the reconstruction fidelity of high frequencies,
especially on ictal samples. In particular, the model without line length loss shows clear artifacting
above 40 Hz.


B.5                        N UMBER OF TRAINING SUBJECTS

As detailed in Section A.2 we only use one subject to train each compression model, which show-
cases our model cross-subject generalisability. In Table A6 we report that, while the performance
of BrainCodec increases as the number of training subjects increases, there are diminishing returns.
In particular, we train two additional models on subjects ID01, ID03, and ID01, ID03, ID04, ID05,
and always test on all subjects except ID01, ID03, ID04, ID05. Therefore, our model presents the
best compromise between training data, training complexity, and reconstruction fidelity.


                           Training patients             CR ↑       PRD ↓         PRD-spec ↓                         RMSE ↓       SNR ↑       PSNR ↑
                           1                             64         15.56         10.73                              16.83        18.26       34.41
                           2                             64         14.31         7.36                               13.56        18.58       34.97
                           4                             64         13.96         7.37                               13.45        18.79       35.2

                                             Table A6: Ablation of the number of training subjects.



                                                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     A DDITIONAL RESULTS
C.1   C ROSS - DATASET AND CROSS - MODALITY COMPRESSION

We test the performance of BrainCodec both in a cross-dataset and a cross-modality scenario. We
evaluate the iEEG to EEG and EEG to iEEG generalization by training BrainCodec on the SWEC,
CHB-MIT, and BCI IV-2a datasets and using those same models to compress the SWEC, MC, CHB-
MIT, BCI IV-2a, and finally all the subsets of the BONN dataset.
On the iEEG SWEC dataset (see Figure A2) the neural compressor trained on the same SWEC
dataset performs notably better for compression ratios above 16, but the CHB model is still compet-
itive with the other baselines even across modalities. For lower compression ratios, the CHB-MIT
and the SWEC models both perform on par. Finally, the BCI model is never competitive, likely
because the BCI dataset does not contain any seizures and the model is thus unable to compress
them well.
On the iEEG MC dataset (see Figure A3) the neural compressor trained on SWEC surpasses all
baselines that are trained on the same MC dataset.
On the iEEG Brain Treebank dataset (see Figure A4) the neural compressor trained on SWEC per-
forms at a comparable level to testing on SWEC itself. Due to the challenging nature of train-
ing GAN models, some of the results obtained by training on the combined SWEC and TreeBank
datasets are not favourable.
On the CHB-MIT dataset (see Figure A5), the three models paint a different pictures. While the
CHB model performs the best, being trained on the same dataset as it is tested on, the SWEC
models is very competitive across the board, even beating the native model at the 64× compression
ratio. On the other hand, the BCI model still performs the worst, but the gap is smaller than on the
SWEC dataset.
Next, we test on the BCI IV-2a dataset. Figure A6 indicates that, like previous results, cross-testing
with different datasets and modalities generally lowers performance. However, the distance between
the two models train on EEG datasets is less significant here, presumably due to the fact that the
testing dataset is large enough to lessen the effects of overfitting. In fact, when training on a different
modality, the lower compression scenario is most affected, where the specific information content of
the signal is more relevant to a better compression. On the contrary, with a higher compression ratio
fidelity suffers as a consequence, and hence the differences between EEG and iEEG also become
less impactful.
Finally, we test the cross-dataset and cross-modalities generalization performance on the BONN
dataset. Figure A7 shows that the CHB (same modality) and SWEC (different modalities) models
are competitive. In particular, the model trained on CHB-MIT tends to perform better at lower com-
pression ratios. The opposite is true for the model trained on SWEC, which scales more gracefully
with the compression ratio.
Across all the different datasets we observe similar trends: the EEG models perform better at lower
compression while the iEEG model performs better at higher compression. One possible interpre-
tation is that EEG models are exposed to a sufficient amount of noise and are able to compress it
at low compression ratios, while they tend to overfit on that same noise and are less effective in a
higher compression scenario. On the contrary, iEEG models are less exposed to noise and thus do
not compress it as efficiently, but also do not lose performance because of it with high compression
ratios.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Model
                                    BrainCodec Base
                        60
                                    BrainCodec GAN
                                    AAC
                                    NLSPIHT
                        50
                             Training dataset
PRD [lower is better]


                                    SWEC
                        40          CHB-MIT
                                    BCI
                                    SWEC+CHB
                        30



                        20



                        10



                         0

                                2                4            8             16             32             64

                                                          Compression ratio [log]

                             Figure A2: Reconstruction fidelity of BrainCodec on the iEEG SWEC dataset.

                        18
                             Model
                                    BrainCodec Base
                        16
                                    BrainCodec GAN
                                    AAC
                        14
                                    NLSPIHT

                        12   Training dataset
PRD [lower is better]


                                    SWEC
                                    SWEC+CHB
                        10


                         8


                         6


                         4


                         2


                         0

                                2                4            8             16             32             64

                                                          Compression ratio [log]

                               Figure A3: Reconstruction fidelity of BrainCodec on the iEEG MC dataset.


                                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Model
                                          BrainCodec Base
                        100
                                          BrainCodec GAN

                                  Training dataset
                                          SWEC
                         80
                                          SWEC+Treebank
PRD [lower is better]


                         60


                         40


                         20


                             0

                                      2                  4        8             16             32             64

                                                              Compression ratio [log]

                        Figure A4: Reconstruction fidelity of BrainCodec on the iEEG Brain Treebank dataset.


                        80       Model
                                        BrainCodec Base
                                        BrainCodec GAN
                        70
                                        AAC
                                        NLSPIHT
                        60
                                 Training dataset
PRD [lower is better]


                                        SWEC
                        50              CHB
                                        BCI
                        40              SWEC+CHB


                        30


                        20


                        10


                         0


                                    2                 4           8             16             32             64

                                                              Compression ratio [log]

                                   Figure A5: Reconstruction fidelity of BrainCodec on the EEG CHB dataset.


                                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Model
                                     BrainCodec Base
                        70
                                     BrainCodec GAN
                                     CS
                        60           AAC

                             Training dataset
PRD [lower is better]


                        50           SWEC
                                     CHB-MIT
                                     BCI
                        40
                                     SWEC+CHB


                        30


                        20


                        10


                         0

                                 2                4                8              16               32         64

                                                       Compression ratio [log, higher is better]

                             Figure A6: Reconstruction fidelity of BrainCodec on the EEG BCI IV-2a dataset.


                                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Model                                                                                 80 Model
                        50             BrainCodec Base                                                                       BrainCodec Base
                                       BrainCodec GAN                                                                  70    BrainCodec GAN
                                       NLISPHT                                                                               NLISPHT
                                       ANN                                                                                   ANN
                        40                                                                                             60
PRD [lower is better]


                                                                                               PRD [lower is better]
                                       AAC                                                                                   AAC

                                 Training dataset                                                                      50 Training dataset
                        30             SWEC                                                                                       SWEC
                                       CHB-MIT                                                                         40         CHB-MIT
                                       BCI                                                                                        BCI
                        20                                                                                             30


                                                                                                                       20
                        10
                                                                                                                       10


                        0                                                                                              0

                                   2              4            8          16        32   64                                   2              4           8          16        32   64
                                                          Compression ratio [log]                                                                   Compression ratio [log]


                                                    (a) BONN Z dataset.                                                                        (b) BONN O dataset.

                                                                                                                       45
                                 Model                                                                                      Model
                        40
                                       BrainCodec Base                                                                            BrainCodec Base
                                                                                                                       40
                                       BrainCodec GAN                                                                             BrainCodec GAN
                        35
                                       NLISPHT                                                                         35         NLISPHT
                                       ANN                                                                                        ANN
                        30
PRD [lower is better]


                                                                                               PRD [lower is better]


                                       AAC                                                                             30         AAC

                        25 Training dataset                                                                                 Training dataset
                                                                                                                       25
                                       SWEC                                                                                       SWEC
                        20             CHB-MIT                                                                                    CHB-MIT
                                                                                                                       20
                                       BCI                                                                                        BCI
                        15
                                                                                                                       15

                        10                                                                                             10

                        5                                                                                              5

                        0                                                                                              0

                                   2              4            8          16        32   64                                   2              4           8          16        32   64
                                                          Compression ratio [log]                                                                   Compression ratio [log]


                                                    (c) BONN N dataset.                                                                        (d) BONN F dataset.

                        250
                                  Model
                                        BrainCodec Base
                                        BrainCodec GAN
                        200             NLISPHT
                                        ANN
PRD [lower is better]


                                        AAC

                        150 Training dataset
                                        SWEC
                                        CHB-MIT
                        100             BCI


                         50


                             0

                                    2               4          8          16        32   64
                                                          Compression ratio [log]


                                                      (e) BONN S dataset.

                                            Figure A7: Reconstruction fidelity of BrainCodec on the EEG BONN dataset.


                                                                                              22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   S EIZURE DETECTION AT EXTREME COMPRESSION RATIOS

We analyze the performance of BrainCodec in retaining the information content of the iEEG signal
necessary to perform seizure detection.
Figure A8a shows the same scenario as in the main Results, i.e., when an EEGWaveNet model
trained on the original signal is tested on the reconstructed signal. Both F1-score and accuracy are
stable up to a 64× ratio, and then start to decrease significantly. Interestingly, the GAN model loses
performance more gracefully than the base model, indicating that it retains more of the information
used by the automated seizure detection model. This is in contrast to human preference, as the expert
evaluates the Base model as better than the GAN model for seizure detection (see App. E).
The opposite scenario, i.e., when an EEGWaveNet model trained on the reconstructed signal is tested
on the original signal, shows similar results in Figure A8b. Here, the GAN model keeps the same
performance up to a 128× compression ratio, but then also decreases rapidly. The Base model still
reaches a 64× compression at the same F1-score level.
Finally, Figure A8c shows a significantly different behavior. When the models are both trained
and tested on the reconstructed signal, only minor degradation in performance can be observed
even at a 512× compression ratio. This result suggests that the neural compressor is preserving
some of the necessary information to perform seizure detection even at such high compression, but
the EEGWaveNet model relies on other, not maintained, information when trained on the original
signal. Only when trained with this new implicit set of features is the classification model able to
fully make use of it.


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           0.8


           0.7
F1-score


           0.6


           0.5           BrainCodec Base
                         BrainCodec GAN

                     8             16        32            64         128        256          512

                                                  Compression ratio
(a) EEGWaveNet is trained on the original iEEG signal, and then the compressed signal is used to perform
classification.


            0.8


           0.75
F1-score


            0.7


           0.65           BrainCodec Base
                          BrainCodec GAN

                      8             16       32            64         128        256            512

                                                  Compression ratio
(b) Seizure classification performance of BrainCodec with EEGWaveNet. EEGWaveNet is trained on the orig-
inal iEEG signal, and then the compressed signal is used to perform classification.


            0.8

           0.79
F1-score


           0.78

           0.77
                          BrainCodec Base
           0.76           BrainCodec GAN

                      8             16       32            64         128        256            512

                                                  Compression ratio
(c) Seizure classification performance of BrainCodec with EEGWaveNet. EEGWaveNet is trained on the com-
pressed iEEG signal, and then the same compressed signal is used to perform classification.

                 Figure A8: Seizure classification performance of BrainCodec with EEGWaveNet.


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3   BASE VS GAN NEURAL COMPRESSOR

The architecture of BrainCodec allows us to introduce an adversarial training routine using a GAN,
which has empirically shown better performance in compressing audio (Défossez et al., 2023). We
observe that the effect of GAN on EEG is more mixed, improving results in some aspects and
worsening in others. On the one hand, as seen in the main Results and in App. C.2, the GAN
model better compresses the information content required by the EEGWaveNet model to perform
seizure detection. Moreover, Figure A9 shows that the reconstruction of the higher frequencies is
significantly better for the GAN model. In fact, with an increasing compression ratio, the Base
model suppresses frequencies above ∼ 40Hz. The GAN, on the other hand, recovers the entire
range of frequencies even at high compression. Figure A9 further illustrates the trade-off between
the time and frequency domain. Comparing Figure A9c and Figure A9d, it is clear that by increasing
the weight λt , the output of the GAN converges to the output of the Base model.
On the other hand, the Base model obtains a higher PRD overall, indicating that the EEG signal
contains predominantly lower frequency information. Given that the Base model does not hinder
seizure detection even at 64× compression, this indicates that EEGWaveNet mostly focuses on the
lower frequency components to make its prediction even when the full signal is available. However,
the GAN model with a fuller spectrum of frequency reconstruction still outperforms the Base model
on the downstream task. This observation might extend to human experts as well, as our neurologist
subjectively evaluated the signal compressed by the Base model as higher fidelity than the GAN
model and more useful for seizure classification (see App. E).


                                               25
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 250                                          200                     250                                           200



                                                              180                                                                   180

                 200                                                                  200
                                                              160                                                                   160
Frequency [Hz]


                                                                     Frequency [Hz]
                 150                                          140                     150                                           140



                                                              120                                                                   120

                 100                                                                  100
                                                              100                                                                   100



                  50                                          80                       50                                           80



                                                              60                                                                    60

                   0                                                                    0
                       0   0.2       0.4      0.6   0.8   1                                 0   0.2   0.4      0.6   0.8   1
                                       Time [s]                                                         Time [s]


                                 (a) Original sample.                                  (b) BrainCodec Base with 128× compression.


                 250                                          200                     250                                           200



                                                              180                                                                   180

                 200                                                                  200
                                                              160                                                                   160
Frequency [Hz]


                                                                     Frequency [Hz]


                 150                                          140                     150                                           140



                                                              120                                                                   120

                 100                                                                  100
                                                              100                                                                   100



                  50                                          80                       50                                           80



                                                              60                                                                    60

                   0                                                                    0
                       0   0.2       0.4      0.6   0.8   1                                 0   0.2   0.4      0.6   0.8   1
                                       Time [s]                                                         Time [s]


                  (c) BrainCodec GAN with 128× and λt = 0.1                             (d) BrainCodec GAN with 128× and λt = 3

                  Figure A9: Comparison among the spectrograms generated by different BrainCodec models.


                                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    F ULL COMPRESSION RESULTS


 SWEC               CR ↑    PRD ↓   PRD-spec ↓   RMSE ↓   SNR ↑   PSNR ↑   Source
                    2       0.66    0.81         1.67     57.60   70.14
                    4       0.94    1.05         2.12     50.95   64.89
 Base               8       1.88    1.46         3.11     39.86   55.12    Ours
                    16      4.60    3.39         6.33     31.08   46.00
                    64      15.74   10.93        16.14    17.96   36.73
                    2       0.65    0.88         1.78     61.76   73.64
                    4       1.35    1.20         3.04     51.11   63.26
 Base [CHB]         8       3.56    3.02         5.67     36.60   49.93    Ours
                    16      7.79    7.57         10.90    28.63   42.01
                    64      22.17   22.54        25.08    16.23   31.19
                    2       30.74   51.56        36.53    26.35   29.58
                    4       28.27   47.78        33.39    22.74   29.90
 Base [BCI]         8       29.45   47.94        34.44    18.34   29.08    Ours
                    16      32.45   49.87        36.49    14.99   27.61
                    64      55.31   76.93        55.54    7.24    22.23
                    2       0.89    0.86         1.83     54.63   63.58
                    4       0.95    0.85         1.91     47.78   62.53
 Base [SWEC+CHB]    8       2.16    1.69         3.64     39.29   53.88    Ours
                    16      4.78    3.51         6.33     30.35   45.36
                    64      16.21   13.00        16.98    17.63   33.62
                    2       1.20    1.13         2.41     49.92   60.72
                    4       1.49    1.15         2.68     44.51   57.67
 GAN                8       2.37    1.57         3.49     37.20   52.23    Ours
                    16      4.79    2.15         5.83     29.15   44.98
                    64      17.60   7.82         16.52    16.31   32.79
                    2       0.84    1.04         2.14     54.33   68.50
                    4       1.42    2.32         3.17     47.13   61.30
 GAN [CHB]          8       3.18    1.57         4.34     34.23   49.25    Ours
                    16      12.86   30.72        17.73    27.71   41.40
                    64      22.79   71.43        26.09    15.88   31.41
                    2       33.78   56.68        38.63    20.16   28.02
                    4       26.39   46.92        30.14    18.80   29.64
 GAN [BCI]          8       63.35   61.97        70.76    12.33   22.34    Ours
                    16      62.43   63.04        69.80    11.51   22.46
                    64      54.25   63.29        52.04    6.54    22.30
                    2       2.78    1.91         3.99     36.76   53.00
                    4       1.25    1.00         2.30     45.19   59.32
 GAN [SWEC+CHB]     8       15.80   3.79         14.58    17.80   36.31    Ours
                    16      7.67    2.91         7.87     24.51   43.11
                    64      16.97   7.08         16.09    16.56   33.12
                    6.93    1.64    /            /        /       /
 AAC                8.65    2.95    /            /        /       /        Reproduced (Nguyen et al., 2017)
                    11.15   5.36    /            /        /       /
                    22.71   18.27   /            /        /       /
 NLSPIHT            8       3.69    /            /        /       /        Reproduced (Xu et al., 2015)
                    16      21.09   /            /        /       /

                Table A7: Full compression results on the SWEC iEEG dataset.


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 MC                 CR ↑    PRD ↓   PRD-spec ↓   RMSE ↓   SNR ↑   PSNR ↑   Source
                    2       0.62    0.11         1.07     47.49   61.83
                    4       0.88    0.37         1.77     44.60   58.28
 Base [SWEC]        8       1.48    0.64         3.07     39.43   53.45    Ours
                    16      4.29    5.01         11.80    32.59   44.80
                    64      13.76   19.31        37.43    21.03   34.12
                    2       0.26    0.22         0.64     56.44   67.82
                    4       0.54    0.36         1.39     48.54   61.87
 Base [SWEC+CHB]    8       1.58    1.14         3.95     39.36   52.70    Ours
                    16      3.86    3.81         9.93     32.09   45.14
                    64      13.91   19.38        37.25    20.31   33.83
                    2       1.03    0.54         2.14     43.87   56.84
                    4       1.23    0.63         2.69     41.85   55.20
 GAN [SWEC]         8       1.88    1.23         4.09     37.75   51.43    Ours
                    16      3.89    3.08         9.68     31.81   45.02
                    64      12.12   10.38        29.19    20.70   34.73
                    2       1.85    1.91         4.75     38.86   52.65
                    4       0.74    0.32         1.85     45.61   58.92
 GAN [SWEC+CHB]     8       9.21    4.64         19.98    22.97   38.37    Ours
                    16      5.14    3.40         11.07    28.50   43.84
                    64      11.89   8.49         28.06    20.70   34.89
                    3.96    3.52
 AAC                                                                       Reproduced (Nguyen et al., 2017)
                    13.93   11.38
                    8       2.52
 NLSPIHT                                                                   Reproduced (Xu et al., 2015)
                    16      16.78

                   Table A8: Full compression results on the MC iEEG dataset.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Treebank                  CR ↑   PRD ↓    PRD-spec ↓    RMSE ↓     SNR ↑   PSNR ↑   Source
                            2      3.32     1.51          8418.56    34.58   44.10
                            4      3.54     1.63          8417.44    33.70   43.23
  Base [SWEC]               8      3.89     1.80          8418.83    32.56   42.10    Ours
                            16     5.26     3.16          8422.62    28.92   38.45
                            64     14.36    9.19          8438.63    18.89   28.38
                            2      2.78     1.91          3.99       36.76   53.00
                            4      1.25     1.00          2.30       45.19   59.32
  Base [SWEC+Treebank]      8      15.80    3.79          14.58      17.80   36.31    Ours
                            16     7.67     2.91          7.87       24.51   43.11
                            64     16.97    7.08          16.09      16.56   33.12
                            2      1.20     1.13          2.41       49.92   60.72
                            4      1.49     1.15          2.68       44.51   57.67
  GAN [SWEC]                8      2.37     1.57          3.49       37.20   52.23    Ours
                            16     4.79     2.15          5.83       29.15   44.98
                            64     17.60    7.82          16.52      16.31   32.79
                            2      8.52     3.74          6312.93    23.08   32.41
                            4      65.14    65.24         7145.75    4.62    13.81
  GAN [SWEC+Treebank]       8      70.19    66.90         7166.63    3.53    12.73    Ours
                            16     89.24    76.40         7634.31    1.01    10.19
                            64     105.87   105.57        10410.84   -0.41   8.76

             Table A9: Full compression results on the Brain Treebank iEEG dataset.


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  CHB               CR ↑    PRD ↓   PRD-spec ↓   RMSE ↓   SNR ↑   PSNR ↑   Source
                    2       0.61    0.44         0.90     55.30   70.21
                    4       3.10    2.73         4.90     42.22   57.80
  Base              8       7.10    4.11         6.82     28.32   44.88    Ours
                    16      13.97   7.99         12.07    21.01   37.74
                    64      33.66   20.21        24.69    10.96   28.20
                    2       6.65    2.67         5.25     30.66   46.53
                    4       8.82    3.92         7.27     27.36   43.96
  Base [SWEC]       8       11.42   5.14         9.12     23.70   40.75    Ours
                    16      14.88   6.74         11.64    19.99   37.21
                    64      32.00   16.41        22.47    11.17   28.69
                    2       22.65   38.81        20.08    34.25   35.14
                    4       21.80   35.30        18.98    26.35   34.12
  Base [BCI]        8       27.11   38.01        22.51    18.22   30.94    Ours
                    16      34.43   44.01        26.82    13.86   28.02
                    64      55.37   66.13        39.41    6.66    22.99
                    2       1.04    0.34         0.72     46.81   58.77
                    4       1.78    0.55         1.28     37.49   54.62
  Base [SWEC+CHB]   8       5.51    1.91         4.15     28.13   45.36    Ours
                    16      10.98   4.09         7.94     21.54   38.84
                    64      28.73   14.79        19.60    11.71   29.35
                    2       0.77    0.52         1.02     49.61   65.74
                    4       3.48    35.17        3.89     39.77   55.94
  GAN               8       8.43    3.24         6.86     25.63   42.70    Ours
                    16      18.78   74.91        16.00    19.01   35.95
                    64      78.70   10214.30     64.54    9.76    27.07
                    2       9.25    4.02         7.40     27.03   42.91
                    4       10.30   4.40         8.32     25.11   41.77
  GAN [SWEC]        8       12.97   5.12         10.01    22.23   39.35    Ours
                    16      16.76   6.56         12.36    18.67   36.11
                    64      36.96   13.44        24.91    9.42    27.39
                    2       26.22   43.68        22.09    24.60   32.26
                    4       23.22   36.67        19.39    19.99   32.13
  GAN [BCI]         8       43.47   47.88        34.92    12.73   26.24    Ours
                    16      46.73   50.64        36.91    11.20   25.47
                    64      59.94   55.57        39.82    4.74    22.11
                    2       6.79    1.85         4.85     26.42   43.65
                    4       2.28    0.59         1.59     34.89   52.03
  GAN [SWEC+CHB]    8       31.50   9.82         21.50    11.02   29.07    Ours
                    16      21.01   4.90         14.33    15.61   33.55
                    64      36.80   9.99         25.47    9.63    27.58
                    6       7
  AAC               11.07   10.44                                          Reported (Nguyen et al., 2017)
                    14      12
                    8       11.76
  NLSPIHT                                                                  Reported (Xu et al., 2015)
                    16      21.83

                 Table A10: Full compression results on the CHB EEG dataset.


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  BCI                 CR ↑   PRD ↓   PRD-spec ↓   RMSE ↓   SNR ↑   PSNR ↑   Source
                      2      1.50    0.88         0.23     40.73   51.20
                      4      3.44    1.79         0.52     31.83   44.29
  Base                8      10.36   5.98         1.78     19.81   34.86    Ours
                      16     29.05   11.73        4.41     12.38   25.66
                      64     45.51   25.37        7.34     6.65    22.31
                      2      20.40   5.74         3.04     15.65   28.93
                      4      23.00   6.14         3.44     14.10   27.83
  Base [SWEC]         8      25.46   7.18         4.05     13.01   26.83    Ours
                      16     29.82   9.99         6.36     11.05   25.21
                      64     49.29   24.52        10.53    5.42    21.48
                      2      0.71    0.71         1.00     46.29   60.51
                      4      2.19    0.91         1.13     33.07   48.19
  Base [CHB]          8      11.44   5.08         3.11     17.63   33.41    Ours
                      16     27.50   11.36        7.85     11.26   25.95
                      64     47.81   23.80        11.56    5.93    21.81
                      2      1.97    0.92         0.53     35.12   48.41
                      4      4.55    1.74         0.94     25.68   41.10
  Base [SWEC+CHB]     8      12.56   5.56         2.45     16.60   32.41    Ours
                      16     27.35   10.08        5.09     10.81   25.84
                      64     47.55   25.33        9.88     5.44    21.79
                      2      3.77    2.12         0.55     29.23   43.14
                      4      8.04    6.24         1.17     22.13   36.70
  GAN                 8      39.18   10.84        21.53    9.72    23.46    Ours
                      16     45.35   11.62        22.24    8.27    21.95
                      64     73.78   34.63        11.22    2.05    17.88
                      2      25.22   7.90         3.79     13.60   26.99
                      4      24.94   6.87         3.73     13.20   27.08
  GAN [SWEC]          8      28.14   7.30         4.38     12.10   25.93    Ours
                      16     33.60   10.16        6.29     9.63    24.11
                      64     64.42   25.23        11.18    2.39    19.06
                      2      0.84    0.49         0.42     41.08   56.14
                      4      3.19    12.46        0.93     29.63   44.97
  GAN [CHB]           8      23.34   6.27         3.74     13.35   27.53    Ours
                      16     32.55   9.53         7.17     10.21   24.52
                      64     55.64   28.73        17.46    4.36    20.46
                      2      19.31   6.99         3.52     14.55   30.14
                      4      5.53    1.84         1.04     23.54   39.31
  GAN [SWEC+CHB]      8      46.38   14.64        8.04     6.69    22.06    Ours
                      16     44.57   13.24        7.35     7.01    22.81
                      64     58.81   23.49        10.16    3.32    19.88
                      5      7
  AAC                 7.5    10                                             Reported (Nguyen et al., 2017)
                      15     22
                      5      20.19
  CS                                                                        Reported (Du et al., 2024)
                      10     30.23

                    Table A11: Full compression results on the BCI EEG dataset.


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  BONN Z        CR ↑    PRD ↓   PRD-spec ↓   RMSE ↓       SNR ↓   PSNR ↓   Source
                2       4.15    0.51         1.91         28.63   39.67
                4       4.60    0.69         2.11         27.55   38.75
  Base [SWEC]   8       5.97    1.75         2.74         25.20   36.26    Ours
                16      10.97   5.14         5.05         20.07   30.85
                64      42.42   20.82        19.41        8.21    19.00
                2       0.18    0.12         0.08         57.12   66.63
                4       0.98    0.38         0.45         42.52   51.95
  Base [CHB]    8       6.28    2.68         2.90         25.56   35.72    Ours
                16      13.75   6.15         6.33         18.17   28.87
                64      53.02   24.89        24.61        6.49    17.07
                2       2.64    2.75         1.36         43.37   44.69
                4       6.20    3.99         2.98         30.30   35.90
  Base [BCI]    8       21.71   17.09        10.21        17.08   24.99    Ours
                16      32.19   23.89        14.98        11.80   21.44
                64      58.33   46.19        27.08        5.25    16.07
                2       5.16    1.17         2.37         27.58   37.75
                4       5.19    0.94         2.38         26.54   37.61
  GAN [SWEC]    8       6.73    1.38         3.07         23.86   35.12    Ours
                16      12.21   3.62         5.61         18.84   29.89
                64      51.84   19.67        23.67        5.90    17.23
                2       0.37    0.26         0.17         50.14   60.28
                4       1.09    0.57         0.50         40.84   50.95
  GAN [CHB]     8       7.84    1.57         3.59         22.84   33.85    Ours
                16      15.51   4.34         7.10         16.88   27.87
                64      51.00   23.91        23.36        6.09    17.38
                2       6.79    6.00         3.33         29.15   35.09
                4       12.79   11.02        6.09         21.25   29.38
  GAN [BCI]     8       27.93   21.00        13.08        12.88   22.70    Ours
                16      35.83   22.84        16.69        10.26   20.51
                64      69.00   37.75        31.51        3.39    14.67
                3.44    4.31
  AAC           6.67    13.93                                              Reproduced (Nguyen et al., 2017)
                15.71   44.38
                8       8.64
  NLSPIHT                                                                  Reproduced (Xu et al., 2015)
                16      29
  ANN [BCI]     3.96    6.64                                               Reported (Hejrati et al., 2017)

          Table A12: Full compression results on the Z subset of the BONN EEG dataset.


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  BONN O        CR ↑    PRD ↓   PRD-spec ↓   RMSE ↓       SNR ↓   PSNR ↓   Source
                2       2.57    0.49         1.70         33.20   42.19
                4       3.13    0.78         2.07         31.45   40.57
  Base [SWEC]   8       5.48    2.28         3.65         26.48   35.48    Ours
                16      13.44   8.84         9.23         18.92   27.37
                64      49.93   37.88        33.93        6.93    15.88
                2       0.18    0.12         0.12         57.50   64.88
                4       1.06    0.45         0.74         42.48   49.41
  Base [CHB]    8       8.32    5.33         5.85         24.20   31.67    Ours
                16      18.43   14.43        13.07        16.68   24.71
                64      70.19   53.87        48.72        3.93    12.92
                2       8.52    10.22        6.77         39.43   33.01
                4       12.02   12.10        9.01         26.12   28.61
  Base [BCI]    8       34.94   39.01        24.89        12.87   19.04    Ours
                16      46.80   48.75        32.80        8.52    16.42
                64      76.50   117.39       53.85        3.13    12.09
                2       3.52    1.07         2.33         31.26   39.49
                4       4.02    1.11         2.67         29.31   38.26
  GAN [SWEC]    8       6.61    1.75         4.36         24.63   34.07    Ours
                16      13.13   5.07         8.85         18.45   27.56
                64      58.62   37.89        39.84        5.02    14.48
                2       0.40    0.26         0.28         49.93   57.72
                4       1.14    0.56         0.77         41.24   48.77
  GAN [CHB]     8       7.61    2.22         5.15         23.61   32.42    Ours
                16      42.66   315.81       36.42        16.47   23.75
                64      79.69   450.99       57.10        3.76    12.81
                2       13.42   17.12        10.27        25.60   27.80
                4       19.14   24.02        13.92        18.49   24.27
  GAN [BCI]     8       40.33   46.75        28.54        9.95    17.71    Ours
                16      53.15   56.85        37.60        7.33    15.33
                64      81.31   67.09        55.69        1.99    11.55
                3.52    4.53
  AAC           6.79    14.56                                              Reproduced (Nguyen et al., 2017)
                16.13   46.79
                8       7.58
  NLSPIHT                                                                  Reproduced (Xu et al., 2015)
                16      27.3
  ANN [BCI]     2.84    2                                                  Reported (Hejrati et al., 2017)

         Table A13: Full compression results on the O subset of the BONN EEG dataset.


                                                     33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  BONN N        CR ↑   PRD ↓   PRD-spec ↓   RMSE ↓       SNR ↓   PSNR ↓   Source
                2      2.97    0.24         1.70         31.34   43.06
                4      3.30    0.34         1.89         30.25   42.14
  Base [SWEC]   8      3.83    0.81         2.20         28.84   40.77    Ours
                16     6.05    2.33         3.55         25.01   36.74
                64     23.18   12.17        13.58        13.24   24.83
                2      0.11    0.09         0.06         59.97   70.89
                4      0.53    0.19         0.32         47.21   57.96
  Base [CHB]    8      3.12    1.07         1.88         31.40   42.70    Ours
                16     7.07    2.58         4.22         23.84   35.45
                64     25.07   13.91        14.89        12.77   24.24
                2      6.74    9.41         4.85         46.02   40.34
                4      7.80    9.52         5.36         35.87   36.49
  Base [BCI]    8      13.20   12.78        8.68         24.30   30.74    Ours
                16     20.84   19.55        13.05        17.77   26.21
                64     48.97   52.07        29.16        7.47    18.13
                2      3.68    0.63         2.10         30.33   41.20
                4      3.63    0.43         2.07         29.47   41.28
  GAN [SWEC]    8      4.31    0.72         2.44         27.64   39.65    Ours
                16     6.85    1.32         3.95         23.66   35.55
                64     27.88   8.74         16.00        11.16   23.16
                2      0.23    0.17         0.13         53.61   64.86
                4      0.67    0.40         0.38         44.30   55.68
  GAN [CHB]     8      4.40    0.64         2.56         27.68   39.53    Ours
                16     7.88    1.62         4.60         22.45   34.37
                64     26.25   9.50         15.19        11.76   23.71
                2      10.38   13.99        7.13         33.77   33.97
                4      11.51   13.76        7.50         26.42   31.67
  GAN [BCI]     8      22.17   23.59        14.18        17.60   25.73    Ours
                16     26.17   24.44        16.55        15.31   24.20
                64     55.56   42.30        31.92        5.40    16.93
                3.63   3.95
  AAC           6.96   12.08                                              Reproduced (Nguyen et al., 2017)
                15.3   40.17
                8      6.13
  NLSPIHT                                                                 Reproduced (Xu et al., 2015)
                16     23.55
  ANN [BCI]     5.23   6.82                                               Reported (Hejrati et al., 2017)

         Table A14: Full compression results on the N subset of the BONN EEG dataset.


                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  BONN F         CR ↑    PRD ↓   PRD-spec ↓   RMSE ↓       SNR ↓   PSNR ↓   Source
                 2       2.63    0.25         1.61         33.16   42.27
                 4       2.92    0.37         1.80         32.10   41.31
  Base [SWEC]    8       3.57    0.91         2.40         30.32   39.24    Ours
                 16      6.53    2.83         5.36         25.78   33.88
                 64      25.00   14.66        18.73        13.43   21.98
                 2       0.14    0.11         0.19         60.50   68.00
                 4       0.75    0.38         1.16         48.11   54.46
  Base [CHB]     8       3.69    1.58         3.79         32.33   39.41    Ours
                 16      8.43    4.14         7.99         24.51   32.01
                 64      28.05   17.80        23.06        12.71   21.07
                 2       12.82   15.81        17.68        44.92   35.97
                 4       12.85   14.89        16.79        35.08   32.39
  Base [BCI]     8       19.13   19.26        20.88        23.88   26.30    Ours
                 16      26.91   27.10        25.90        17.42   22.23
                 64      53.77   54.26        43.01        6.90    15.27
                 2       3.27    0.64         2.04         32.10   40.28
                 4       3.28    0.47         2.07         31.14   40.11
  GAN [SWEC]     8       4.04    0.76         2.67         28.95   38.09    Ours
                 16      6.81    1.54         4.81         24.41   33.34
                 64      29.10   10.84        20.41        11.30   20.61
                 2       0.34    0.31         0.63         54.15   61.99
                 4       0.78    0.52         0.88         45.14   52.78
  GAN [CHB]      8       4.30    0.88         3.35         28.97   37.55    Ours
                 16      11.29   8.53         16.70        23.15   31.33
                 64      28.87   14.65        23.85        11.74   20.76
                 2       16.01   19.79        19.89        33.02   30.22
                 4       15.62   18.81        17.52        25.99   27.97
  GAN [BCI]      8       27.74   28.25        27.50        17.24   22.35    Ours
                 16      32.62   30.71        31.15        14.86   20.58
                 64      60.25   48.45        44.95        4.98    14.12
                 3.73    4.17
  AAC            7.16    12.7                                               Reproduced (Nguyen et al., 2017)
                 15.96   42.84
                 8       5.41
  NLSPIHT                                                                   Reproduced (Xu et al., 2015)
                 16      22.42
  ANN [BCI]      6.57    6.96                                               Reported (Hejrati et al., 2017)

           Table A15: Full compression results on the F subset of the BONN EEG dataset.


                                                      35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  BONN S         CR ↑    PRD ↓    PRD-spec ↓   RMSE ↓       SNR ↓   PSNR ↓   Source
                 2       1.71     0.40         5.54         41.16   45.89
                 4       2.40     1.07         8.56         38.94   43.42
  Base [SWEC]    8       6.72     4.63         26.51        30.91   35.10    Ours
                 16      20.91    18.55        77.48        18.39   24.14
                 64      56.48    50.38        188.22       7.17    14.59
                 2       0.79     0.57         3.47         58.20   56.62
                 4       5.56     2.72         24.41        40.40   39.47
  Base [CHB]     8       19.70    17.29        76.47        22.01   25.24    Ours
                 16      38.51    35.99        138.30       12.83   18.44
                 64      74.53    77.03        246.71       4.25    12.14
                 2       53.88    66.61        179.43       18.66   15.08
                 4       48.06    58.86        161.23       14.29   16.06
  Base [BCI]     8       58.85    66.20        191.14       8.46    14.13    Ours
                 16      67.96    76.13        223.31       5.30    12.86
                 64      90.94    95.46        289.01       1.35    10.23
                 2       2.56     1.06         8.63         38.64   42.38
                 4       3.32     1.34         11.78        35.35   40.06
  GAN [SWEC]     8       6.14     3.64         23.34        30.22   35.25    Ours
                 16      16.14    11.32        60.02        19.46   26.44
                 64      57.16    39.31        187.63       6.45    14.47
                 2       1.18     0.88         4.96         51.26   52.11
                 4       3.84     3.03         16.08        41.12   41.97
  GAN [CHB]      8       12.38    8.79         48.49        24.42   29.51    Ours
                 16      238.57   2555.31      896.74       14.64   12.48
                 64      72.99    83.32        240.56       4.55    12.35
                 2       55.59    71.96        180.73       13.06   14.69
                 4       44.07    58.14        147.30       11.98   16.73
  GAN [BCI]      8       73.77    79.87        243.40       5.88    12.21    Ours
                 16      80.76    88.15        261.84       4.33    11.33
                 64      90.58    92.99        286.55       1.30    10.27
                 3.49    3.65
  AAC            6.44    12.01                                               Reproduced (Nguyen et al., 2017)
                 13.86   40.75
                 8       4.93
  NLSPIHT                                                                    Reproduced (Xu et al., 2015)
                 16      23.03
  ANN [BCI]      4.45    7.22                                                Reported (Hejrati et al., 2017)

           Table A16: Full compression results on the S subset of the BONN EEG dataset.


                                                       36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     S UBJECTIVE EVALUATION OF THE COMPRESSION
We collect the subjective evaluations of an expert epileptologist on the quality of the signal re-
construction for seizure detection. Below we present the evaluations together with the evaluated
samples, both for iEEG and EEG.

E.1   I EEG

The quality of the reconstruction of iEEG signals allows us to push the compression ratio up to 64×
without loss of F1 performance, as shown previously. For this reason, we also subjectively evaluate
the performance in the same regime.
Base model. Both original and reconstruction are plausibly biological signals, with no meaningful
way to distinguish between the two without knowing of the comparison. Nonetheless, BrainCodec
Base model can be seen acting as a low pass filter. This has been judged as not sufficiently influential,
and would not impede seizure classification by a human expert.
GAN model. BrainCodec GAN is more successful in automatic seizure detection but is rated as
having lower quality by the expert. It provides a better reconstruction of higher frequencies but also
introduces some spurious high-frequency oscillations which pollute the signal (especially noticeable
in Figure A19 and A20).

E.2   EEG

EEG signals are noisier than their intracranial counterpart, making their compression more difficult
as well.
In particular, 64× compression on EEG creates a significant low pass effect. Moreover, the signal
obtains a more stylized sinusoidal effect. Overall, 64× compression is rated as having a significant
quality drop with respect to the original signal by the expert.
For this reason, we also evaluate an 8× compression. This achieves a higher fidelity level, compa-
rable to the effects of the 64× compression base model on iEEG. The expert evaluates the low-pass
filtering effect as not influential for seizure classification.


                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure A10: Reconstruction from samples of subject 2 of the CHB-MIT dataset by BrainCodec Base
with 8× compression ratio.


                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure A11: Reconstruction from samples of subject 5 of the CHB-MIT dataset by BrainCodec Base
with 8× compression ratio.


                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure A12: Reconstruction from samples of subject 2 of the CHB-MIT dataset by BrainCodec
GAN with 8× compression ratio.


                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure A13: Reconstruction from samples of subject 5 of the CHB-MIT dataset by BrainCodec
GAN with 8× compression ratio.


                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure A14: Reconstruction from samples of subject 2 of the CHB-MIT dataset by BrainCodec Base
with 64× compression ratio.


                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure A15: Reconstruction from samples of subject 5 of the CHB-MIT dataset by BrainCodec Base
with 64× compression ratio.


                                               43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure A16: Reconstruction from samples of subject 2 of the CHB-MIT dataset by BrainCodec
GAN with 64× compression ratio.


                                               44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure A17: Reconstruction from samples of subject 5 of the CHB-MIT dataset by BrainCodec
GAN with 64× compression ratio.


                                               45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure A18: Reconstruction from samples of subject 2 of the SWEC dataset by BrainCodec GAN
with 64× compression ratio.


Figure A19: Reconstruction from samples of subject 4 of the SWEC dataset by BrainCodec GAN
with 64× compression ratio.


Figure A20: Reconstruction from samples of subject 6 of the SWEC dataset by BrainCodec GAN
with 64× compression ratio.


                                               46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure A21: Reconstruction from samples of subject 7 of the SWEC dataset by BrainCodec GAN
with 64× compression ratio.


Figure A22: Reconstruction from samples of subject 2 of the SWEC dataset by BrainCodec Base
with 64× compression ratio.


Figure A23: Reconstruction from samples of subject 4 of the SWEC dataset by BrainCodec Base
with 64× compression ratio.


                                               47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure A24: Reconstruction from samples of subject 6 of the SWEC dataset by BrainCodec Base
with 64× compression ratio.


Figure A25: Reconstruction from samples of subject 7 of the SWEC dataset by BrainCodec Base
with 64× compression ratio.


                                               48
