Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G ENERATIVE A DAPTER : C ONTEXTUALIZING L AN -
GUAGE M ODELS IN PARAMETERS WITH A S INGLE
F ORWARD PASS
                  ∗
 Tong Chen♣ , Hao Fang♡ , Patrick Xia♡ , Xiaodong Liu♠ , Benjamin Van Durme♡ ,
 Luke Zettlemoyer♣ , Jianfeng Gao♠ , Hao Cheng♠†
 ♣                             ♡              ♠
   University of Washington      Microsoft      Microsoft Research



                                              A BSTRACT
            Large language models (LMs) are typically adapted to improve performance on
            new contexts (e.g., text prompts that define new tasks or domains) through fine-
            tuning or prompting. However, there is an accuracy compute tradeoff—fine-
            tuning incurs significant training cost and prompting increases inference over-
            head. We introduce Generative Adapter, an effective and efficient adaptation
            method that directly maps new contexts to low-rank LM adapters, thereby sig-
            nificantly reducing inference overhead with no need for finetuning. The adapter
            generator is trained via self-supervised learning, and can be used to adapt a single
            frozen LM for any new task simply by mapping the associated task or domain
            context to a new adapter. We apply Generative Adapter to two pretrained LMs
            (Mistral-7B-Instruct and Llama2-7B-Chat) and evaluate the adapted models in
            three adaption scenarios: knowledge acquisition from documents, learning from
            demonstrations, and personalization for users. In StreamingQA, our approach
            is effective in injecting knowledge into the LM’s parameters, achieving a 63.5%
            improvement in F1 score over the model with supervised fine-tuning (from 19.5
            to 31.5) for contexts as long as 32K tokens. In the MetaICL in-context learn-
            ing evaluation, our method achieves an average accuracy of 44.9 across 26 tasks,
            outperforming the base model. On MSC, our method proves to be highly com-
            petitive in memorizing user information from conversations with a 4x reduction
            in computation and memory costs compared to prompting with full conversation
            history. Together, these results suggest that Generative Adapter should allow for
            general adaption to a wide range of different contexts. The code is available at
            §https://github.com/chentong0/generative-adapter.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Adaptation is essential for language models (LMs) to acquire new world knowledge (Jiang et al.,
2024; Hu et al., 2023; Mecklenburg et al., 2024), learn new tasks (Min et al., 2022), and person-
alize to individual users (Salemi et al., 2024). Existing adaptation methods typically involve either
prompting or fine-tuning (Brown et al., 2020). As the scale of LMs continues to increase, adapting
them becomes increasingly difficult due to efficiency constraints during both training and infer-
ence (Hu et al., 2022).
Prompting with task-specific demonstrations (i.e., in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020)) or back-
ground knowledge (i.e., retrieval-augmented generation (Lewis et al., 2020)) is one way to enable
models to temporarily encode such relevant information, allowing flexible adaptation to various
tasks. However, to maintain additional memory across sessions, some extra prompts must be added
to the input, which incur an inference-time or storage overhead (Chevalier et al., 2023). Fine-
tuning is another way to embed new information into the LM’s parameters, retaining long-term
memory. Nevertheless, it requires a training phase that is more computationally expensive than a
single forward pass, and acquiring knowledge through continual pretraining has shown to be data-
inefficient (Yang et al., 2024; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2024). Thus, we are interested in exploring alternative
approaches for effectively and efficiently adapting pretrained LMs.
    ∗
        Work done during internship at Microsoft Research.
    †
        Correspondence to {chentong@cs.washington.edu, chehao@microsoft.com}


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In this work, we present Generative Adapter, a novel method for training a neural network (adapter
generator) to generate adapters that contextualize pretrained LMs on-the-fly with temporary knowl-
edge from incoming contexts. Inspired by fast weights (Ba et al., 2016; Schmidhuber, 1992, inter
alia), our approach incorporates a lightweight adapter generator on top of pretrained LM as the slow
network to produce updated parameters for the fast network (the adapted LM). As far as we know,
we are the first to explore this direction. Specifically, the pretrained base LM remains frozen while
we train the LM-specific adapter generator to generate layer-by-layer additive updates, similar to
recent parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) techniques (Houlsby et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2022). For
each layer, an adapter generator network uses the outer product of past context hidden states from
the corresponding base LM layer to generate delta weights. These generated delta weights are then
added to the base LM weights to form an adapted LM for future predictions. Similar to previous
work on fast weights, our method achieves test-time adaptation using only forward passes, allowing
dynamic updates as new context arrives in sequential chunks. We train the generator end-to-end in
a self-supervised manner by compressing the context into a generated adapter and then computing
the next-token prediction loss on a target sequence using the adapted LM. Once trained, our method
can produce adapted LMs that effectively capture knowledge from the context to solve multiple
downstream tasks, thus improving the adaptability of off-the-shelf pretrained LMs.
We evaluate our method on three scenarios where on-the-fly contextualizing pretrained LMs is cru-
cial: acquiring new factual knowledge, learning from demonstrations, and personalizing for in-
dividual users. These scenarios involve diverse forms of context with varying lengths, including
documents with background knowledge, task-specific input-output examples and user-specific con-
versations. In the knowledge acquisition scenario, Generative Adapter effectively memorizes fac-
tual knowledge from provided documents, with minimal information loss compared to full-context
prompting at short context lengths. Notably, our method excels in memorizing long-context doc-
uments, managing to handle context lengths up to 32K on StreamingQA (Liska et al., 2022) and
8K on SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) better than continous pretraining. In learning from demon-
strations on MetaICL (Min et al., 2022), Generative Adapter follows demonstrations effectively,
achieving superior accuracy compared to the in-context learning of its base model. This exempli-
fies the model’s ability to adapt to new tasks efficiently. For personalization, Generative Adapter is
highly effective in retaining user information from conversations, achieving a fourfold reduction in
computation and memory costs compared to full conversation prompting. In practical scenarios with
many queries from the same user on edge computing devices, the benefits of our method are even
more evident. This positions Generative Adapter as a highly efficient tool for personalized LMs.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

      1. We introduce Generative Adapter, a novel method for efficiently adapting pretrained LMs
         on-the-fly using test-time contexts. To our knowledge, we are the first to explore retaining
         the relevant temporary knowledge through generated parameter-efficient model updates for
         state-of-the-art pretrained LMs.
      2. We develop an adapter generator network on top of frozen pretrained LMs to transform text
         contexts into updated model parameters (adapted LMs) for future queries. We also design
         an efficient end-to-end training process to enhance the LMs’ adaptability, i.e., the resulting
         generator augmented LM can be used for various downstream tasks using only forward
         passes.
      3. We validate the proposed method on two representative pretrained LMs. Empirically, we
         show the effectiveness of Generative Adapter in various adaptation scenarios, including
         knowledge acquisition from documents, learning from demonstrations, and personalized
         user interactions. Our method proves to be generalizable across different types of contexts
         and applicable to multiple downstream tasks.

2   M ETHOD
We present Generative Adapter, an efficient and effective framework for directly generating additive
weight updates to contextualize the pretrained LM (a frozen base LM) at test time. Unlike continual
pretraining and supervised fine-tuning which update the pretrained LM via gradient descent, our
method achieves adaptation using forward passes only. In the following sections, we first provide a
task formulation and an overview of Generative Adapter (§2.1). Then we describe the the adapter


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Test-Time Contextualization                             Inference


                                                                Δ1                  𝑦     response
                       Θbase       𝑯1         G
             𝐶1        Base LM              Adapter           Adapter
                                           Generator                                Δ𝑡

                                                𝑯1 , … , 𝑯𝑡−1
                                                                                  Θbase
                                                                        Δ𝑡
                               Θbase     𝑯𝑡            G
                  𝐶𝑡        Base LM                Adapter           Adapter        𝑥     prompt
                                                  Generator


Figure 1: Overview of Generative Adapter. Left: During test-time contextualization, the adapters
∆1 , . . . , ∆t are generated sequentially for the stream of context chunks C1 , . . . , Ct . At a given time
step t, the context chunk Ct is encoded by the base LM Θbase into hidden state vectors Ht . Then the
generator G produces a new adapter ∆t based on the collection of hidden state vectors H1 , . . . , Ht
representing the accumulated context. Right: During inference, we combine the latest adapter ∆t
with the base LM Θbase to generate responses for input prompts.

generator (§2.2), followed by the self-supervised pretraining tasks (§2.3) and the normalization tech-
niques for improving training stability (§2.4).

2.1   A DAPTATION WITH T EST- TIME C ONTEXTUALIZATION

To contextualize a base model, Θbase , to a given context C, our goal is to obtain an updated model,
ΘC , that can respond to user instructions using the information provided in the context C. In prac-
tice, the context can include different types of data, such as documents, dialogues, or task description
and few-shot demonstrations.
We specifically focus on test-time contextualization, where context arrives incrementally as a stream
of data, such as a continuous flow of documents or dialogue sessions. We represent this streaming
context up to time step t as Σ(t) := (C1 , . . . , Ct ), where Ct is the context chunk arriving at time
step t. In this online adaptation scenario, the model must be efficiently adapted to each new context
chunk as it becomes available.
As shown in Figure 1, we propose Generative Adapter as a framework that adapts the base model
Θbase to new contexts through a single forward pass as each context chunk arrives. Specifically,
given test-time context Σ(t), we adapt the base model Θbase to a new model ΘΣ(t) using a context-
dependent additive adapter ∆t , i.e., ΘΣ(t) = Θbase + ∆t . More details regarding the adapter ∆t
will be provided in §2.2. After this adaptation, the modified model ΘΣ(t) can be utilized for any test
input relevant to the context Σ(t) during inference. For example, if the context Σ(t) consists of a
user’s past conversations, the modified model ΘΣ(t) can effectively summarize or answer questions
about these conversations.

2.2   G ENERATIVE A DAPTER

In this paper, we propose using a learned adapter generator G to directly produce the adapter ∆ based
on the streaming context Σ. The core idea is to use the adapter generator to project context token
embeddings, encoded by the base language model (LM), into the matrices of each layer in the LM.
Specifically, we consider only adapting the linear projection layers of the base Transformer model,
i.e., the key/query/value/output layers of the multi-head attention unit and the down/up projection
layers of the feed-forward network.
Concretely, a linear projection layer in the l-th Transformer block (l = 1, 2, . . . , L) can be written as
o = W(l) h, where W(l) ∈ Rdout ×din is the weight matrix, h ∈ Rdin is the input vector, o ∈ Rdout

                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is the output vector, and we omit the bias term for simplicity. For the adapted LM, we parameterize
            (l)        (l)          (l)         (l)
W(l) = Wbase + W∆ , where Wbase and W∆ are the corresponding weight matrices in the base
model Θbase and the context-dependent adapter ∆, respectively.
To generate the weights of the context-dependent adapter ∆, we first encode the streaming context Σ
                                                                       (l)  (l)        (l)
using the base model Θbase and obtain the sequence of hidden states h1 , h2 , . . . , hM ∈ Rdh (i.e.,
the outputs of the l-th Transformer block), where M is the number of tokens in the context Σ, and dh
is the dimension of hidden states. These hidden states are packed in a matrix H(l) ∈ RM ×dh . Then
we use the hidden states from the (l − 1)-th Transformer block to generate the adapter’s weights
    (l)                                      (l)
W∆ for the l-th Transformer block, i.e., W∆ = G (l) (H(l−1) ), where G (l) (·): R∗×dh → Rdout ×din
denotes the layer-specific adapter generator which can transform any hidden state sequence of arbi-
trary length into a fixed-dimensional weight matrix. For conciseness, we will omit the superscript
denoting the layer number l when it does not cause ambiguity.
To obtain a generator G(·) without the undesirable dependency on the context length M , we use a
bi-linear function as following,
                                                                     M
                                                                     X
           W∆ = G(H) = (A1 A2 )H⊤ H(B1 B2 ) = (A1 A2 )(                    hm ⊗ hm )(B1 B2 ),           (1)
                                                                     m=1

where ⊗ denotes the outer product operator, A1 ∈ Rdout ×dr , A2 ∈ Rdr ×dh , B1 ∈ Rdh ×dr , B2 ∈
Rdr ×din are all learnable parameters, and we set the dimension dr to be much smaller than din , dout
and dh to keep the number of learnable parameters within an acceptable range.
Dynamic Streaming Update In practice, the context can arrive in chunks sequentially. The matrix
of hidden states Ht at step t is computed based on all previous context chunks Σ(t − 1). This hidden
state is then used to generate an adapter for the current chunk Σ(t), which, in turn, is also used to
compute the hidden states for future context steps. Based on Equation 1, to compute the adapter of
Σ(t) we need to concatenate all hidden states (i.e., [H1 ; . . . ; Ht ] ∈ R(M1 +···+Mt )×dh ) of the context
chunks in Σ(t) to generate the adapter, i.e., W∆t = G([H1 ; . . . ; Ht ]).
Fortunately, our formulation allows an efficient updating mechanism without explicitly storing his-
tory hidden states, noting that
                                                                             Xt
   W∆t = (A1 A2 )([H1 ; . . . ; Ht ]⊤ [H1 ; . . . ; Ht ])(B1 B2 ) = (A1 A2 )(   H⊤
                                                                                 i Hi )(B1 B2 ).        (2)
                                                                              i=1
Thus, the update can be efficiently computed as
                                      St ← St−1 + A2 H⊤
                                                      t Ht B1                                           (3)
                                     W∆t ← A1 St B2                                                     (4)
where Ht ∈ RMt ×dh stores the hidden states for the t-th context chunk, and the partial sum St ∈
Rdr ×dr acts as the memory ofPhistory context chunks with S0 initialized as all zeros. Note directly
storing W∆t ∈ Rdout ×din or i H⊤    i Hi ∈ R
                                             dh ×dh
                                                    would require much more memory because we
control dr ≪ min{din , dout , dh }.
Our preliminary experiments find that this architecture exhibits some empirical instability because
the generated matrix W∆t can transform an input vector x into a vector containing values with
either extremely large or near-zero magnitudes, due to its skewed distribution of its singular values.
In §2.4, we will explain how normalization can address the instability issue.

2.3   L EARNING TO U PDATE WITH S ELF - SUPERVISED P RETRAINING

To preserve the language modeling capability of the adapted models ΘΣ(t) for t ∈ {1, 2, . . .}, we
pretrain the weight generator G using the next-token prediction loss of ΘΣ(t) in a self-supervised
manner on web corpora. In other words, the adapter generator is trained on top of the frozen base
model Θbase in an end-to-end fashion. Specifically, we use two self-supervision pretraining tasks:
reconstruction and completion.
The reconstruction task (Ge et al., 2024) draws inspiration from autoencoders and aims to train
the weight generator G to embed contextual information into the generated weights. This process


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


compresses the input context (x1 , . . . , xm ) into a generated adapter, G(x1:m ), which is subsequently
used to reconstruct the input. Formally, this is accomplished by maximizing the log-likelihood of the
input tokens with the adapted LM, using weights updated from the same text: Lreconstruction (G) =
log P (x1 , . . . , xm | Θbase + G(x1:m )) .
The completion task (Zhang et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024) trains the adapted LM to gener-
ate the continuation of the given context. The goal is to maximize the log-likelihood of to-
kens xm+1 , . . . , xn , which represent the continuation of the context x1 , . . . , xm in the dataset:
Lcompletion (G) = log P (xm+1 , . . . , xn | Θbase + G(x1:m )) .
We observe using both of the task can make the generated adapter memorize and utilize the contex-
tual information. Similar to prior work (Ge et al., 2024), the generator is trained to maximize the
sum of the objective functions of the two task:
                              max Lreconstruction (G) + Lcompletion (G)                              (5)
                                G


2.4   N ORMALIZATION FOR G ENERATED W EIGHTS

In preliminary experiments, we find that using the naive outer product for generating weights led to
instability during training, causing convergence issues. When multiplying the generated matrix with
the input vector, the resulting output can either diminish to near-zero or grow excessively large.
To address this instability, we introduce normalization into the formulation, i.e.,
                                                                t
                                                                                !
                                                               X
                                                                     ⊤

                W∆t ← A1 norm(St )B2 = A1 norm A2                   Hi Hi B1 B2 .                    (6)
                                                                i=1

Our pilot experiments find that normalization based on singular value decomposition (SVD) is par-
ticular effective, among other normalization strategies.
SVD Normalization The SVD normalization technique ensures the singular values of the outer
product are normalized to 1. Given a matrix M, we define SVD normalization as:
                                         norm(M) = UV⊤ ,                                             (7)
where M = UΣV⊤ is the SVD factorization. This normalization resets the positive singular values
of the matrix to one, preventing the vectors from excessively shrinking or exploding.
Low-Rank SVD and LoRA An additional benefit of SVD normalization is that it can naturally
produce low-rank matrices. Instead of performing a full-rank decomposition, we approximate the
input matrix with a rank-r SVD decomposition, where r is a hyperparameter set in advance. Con-
sequently, the matrix can be written as the product of two low-rank matrices, similar to a LoRA
adapter (Hu et al., 2022):
                                    W∆t = A1 norm(St )B2                                             (8)
                                                           ⊤
                                         = (A1 U (H))(V (H)B2 ),                                     (9)
where U (H) and V (H) are the matrices resulting from SVD normalization. This low-rank approx-
imation reduces both computational cost and memory usage.

3     E XPERIMENTS S ETTINGS
We experiment with using both Mistral-7B-Instruct (v0.2) (Jiang et al., 2023) and Llama2-7B-Chat
(Touvron et al., 2023) as the base LMs. For efficiency, our main experiments train adapter generators
to only update the output projection layers of the multi-head attention unit in Transformer. We study
a more capable implementation in §5 and defer the full exploration of other modules for future work.
Hyperparameters The intermediate dimension dr and SVD rank r are set to 1,024 and 128, re-
spectively. Approximately, this leads to 500 million parameters for the generator, with the generated
adapter of 32 million parameters.
Training Following the standard training pipeline of LM development (Jiang et al., 2023; Touvron
et al., 2023), the training of our adapter generator includes a pretraining phase described in §2.3


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


followed by instruction tuning. For pretraining, we randomly sample 1 billion tokens from SlimPa-
jama (Soboleva et al., 2023) which are split into segments of 8,192 tokens each. For instruction
tuning, we use a mix of tasks such as question answering, in-context learning, and general instruc-
tion following, which we ensure that there is no overlap with downstream tasks, with a detailed list
provided in the appendix. The context is divided into chunks of 1,024 tokens to utilize the dynamic
updating mechanism described in §2.2.

4     M AIN R ESULTS
We evaluate Generative Adapter on three representative scenarios where contextualizing pretrained
LMs is crucial, i.e., acquiring new factual knowledge (§4.1), learning from demonstrations (§4.2),
and personalizing to individual users (§4.3).

4.1   D OCUMENT- BASED Q UESTION A NSWERING WITH VARYING C ONTEXT L ENGTH

The factual knowledge stored in the parameters of a LM remains static after pretraining. Here, we
consider the scenario where the model needs to adapt to new knowledge based on documents. After
adaptation, it is expected to correctly answer information-seeking questions about these documents.
Setup and Baselines To evaluate the fact recall ability of the adapted model, we use two question
answering (QA) datasets, SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) and StreamingQA (Liska et al., 2022),
where each test case consists of a passage and a corresponding question about some information
from that passage. To analyze the impact of context length on performance, we conduct an evalua-
tion using contexts of varying lengths.
We divide the documents in the corresponding test set evenly into groups, with each group having
an average length of k tokens (k ∈ {512, 1K, 2K, 4K, 8K, 16K, 32K}). Thus, the model should
contextualize on the article in each group and evaluate fact recall by the question associated with the
articles. The QA accuracy is evaluated by comparing the generated output with the gold answer for
all questions associated with the documents within the group. Following Rajpurkar et al. (2016), F1
score is used as the metric for evaluation.
We also analyze the computational and storage requirements of Generative Adapter, which com-
prises three phases: general-purpose pretraining, contextualization, and inference. The generator
is pretrained once and can subsequently be used for any task. During the contextualization phase,
Generative Adapter encodes the context into an adapter with a single forward pass. In the inference
phase, the adapted model generates responses based on the input. Beyond the LM parameters, the
extra storage required includes the parameters of the generative adapter.
Here, we consider both full parameter fine-tuning and full context prompting using the same base
model as baselines. For fine-tuning, we consider two variants. The first approach, supervised fine-
tuning (SFT), trains the base model exclusively on a training set of question-answer pairs sourced
from articles distinct from those in the test set. The second variant, known as continual pretraining
(CPT), involves first training the base model on all documents in the test set, followed by further
adaptation through SFT using the the training set of question-answer pairs. During inference, we
evaluate the fine-tuned model in a closed-book manner, i.e., the model is tasked with directly pro-
ducing the answer to a given question. For prompting, we simply concatenate all documents in
the group as a single context and prompt the base model to respond accordingly. Specifically, for
Llama2-7B-Chat, if the context length exceeds the maximum limit of 4K tokens, we truncate the
prompt to include only the last 4K tokens. For Generative Adapter, we create an adapted model for
each document group, which is similar to how the context is encoded as prompting. After that, the
adapted model is asked to answer the question again in a closed-book fashion, akin to fine-tuning.
Results We present the QA accuracy results for SQuAD and StreamingQA and the computation
costs for StreamingQA in Figure 2 and Figure 3, respectively. Both fine-tuning methods (SFT and
CPT) are evaluated in a closed-book manner, resulting in constant QA performance regardless of
varying context lengths. In contrast, both Generative Adapter and prompting are evaluated on vary-
ing context lengths, where recalling facts can become more difficult as the context length increases.
As expected, both our method and prompting achieve improved QA performance by using relevant
contexts compared to supervised fine-tuning baselines. Notably, Generative Adapter is highly effec-


                                                  6
                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Closed-book Prompting               SupervisedClosed-book
                                               Finetuning PromptingContinual Pretraining
                                                                             Supervised  FinetuningIn-context
                                                                                     Closed-book  Prompting Continual  PretrainingGenerativeAdapter
                                                                                                              PromptingSupervised           In-context Prompting
                                                                                                                                   Finetuning                             GenerativeAdapter
                                                                                                                                                        Continual Pretraining         In-context Prompting                                                                                                       GenerativeAdapter
                                                              SQuAD                                                               SQuAD
                                                                                                                               StreamingQA                                                   StreamingQA
                                                                                                                                                                                                SQuAD                                                                     StreamingQA
                                   50                                                                           50
                                                                                                                50                                                              50                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                   40                                                                           40                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                                                40                                                             50
                                                                                                                                                                                40


                                                                                                           score


                                                                                                                                                                           score
                                                                                                                                                                               40
                        F1 score


                                                                                                      F1F1score


                                                                                                                                                                      F1F1score


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    F1 score
                                                                                                                30                                                                                                                                             40
                                   30                                                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                                30                                                             30                                                                              30
                                   20                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                20                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                10                                                             10
                                   10                                                                                512 1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 32K                                         512 1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 32K                                                   10
                                        512 1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 32K                                                      512 1K Context
                                                                                                                             2K 4KLength
                                                                                                                                      8K 16K 32K                                     512 1K Context
                                                                                                                                                                                             2K 4KLength
                                                                                                                                                                                                      8K 16K 32K                                                    512 1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 32K
                                              Context Length                                                                Context Length                                                  Context Length                                                                Context Length

                                                                          (a) Mistral-7B-Instruct                                                                                                                       (b) Llama2-7B-Chat

                         Figure 2: Document-based QA performance of Generative Adapter across different context lengths.
                         Both fine-tuning methods (supervised fine-tuning and continual pretraining) are evaluated in a
                         closed-book manner and remain consistent F1 across context lengths. Generative Adapter achieves
                         the same inference time as fine-tuning methods while demonstrating higher knowledge recall.
                                                            ContinualContinual
                                                                      Pretraining
                                                                               Pretraining                                 Prompting  wo/wo/KVKVCache
                                                                                                                               Prompting         Cache                                  Prompting
                                                                                                                                                                                      Prompting     w/Cache
                                                                                                                                                                                                w/ KV  KV Cache Generative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Generative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Adapter Adapter

                                                        Contextualization  Computation
                                                               Contextualization Computation                                                               Inference   Computation
                                                                                                                                                             Inference Computation                                                                  Extra Storage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Extra Storage
                                                      105      5          10
                                                                                                                                                   102                                                              104 104
                                                                          104                                                              102
                                                      104


                                                                                                                                                                                                 Floats (Million)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Floats (Million)
                                                              FLOPs (T)


                                                                                                                                       FLOPs (T)


                                                                          103                                                                                                                                       103
                                          FLOPs (T)


                                                                                                                               FLOPs (T)


                                                                                                                                                   101
                                                      103                                                                                  101                                                                                         103
                                                                          102
                                                      102                                                                                          100                                                              102
                                                                          101
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       102
                                                                                512 1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 32K 10
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                      101                                                                                                512 1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 32K                                                       512 1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 32K
                                                                                      Context Length                                                           Context Length                                                                Context Length
                                                             512 1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 32K                                                                   512 1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 32K                                                               512 1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 32K
                                          Context Length
                         Figure 3: Computation                          Context
                                                   and storage requirements forLength                Context
                                                                                Generative Adapter and       Length methods on
                                                                                                       baseline
                         StreamingQA. For Generative Adapter, the context is converted into an adaptor during contextual-
                         ization and then stored for inference. For the prompting method, the key-value (KV) cache can be
                         generated during contextualization and reused during inference.

                         tive when the context is relatively short (< 1K tokens). Moreover, it avoids the additional inference
                         overhead associated with prompting, which requires attention computation over the context input
                         regardless of using key-value (KV) caches (illustrated by the green lines in Figure 3). This overhead
                         issue worsens with longer contexts.
                         In most cases, Generative Adapter outperforms CPT, especially when the context length is less than
                         8K tokens. Importantly, although both approaches adapt model parameters using documents, Gener-
                         ative Adapter requires preprocessing time (forward passes only) that is orders of magnitude smaller
                         than CPT (which involves multiple forward and backward passes), as demonstrated in Figure 3.


                    Zero-shot Prompting                                     Zero-shot Prompting
                                                                          Fine-tuning                     Fine-tuningGenerative
                                                                                          In-context Prompting                  In-context
                                                                                                                                 Prompting Prompting
                                                                                                                       Zero-shotAdapter         Fine-tuning                                                                                        Generative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     In-contextAdapter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Prompting                    Generative Adapter
                                                      Classification Tasks                                         Classification  TasksTasks
                                                                                                                      Non-classification                                                 Non-classification
                                                                                                                                                                                         Classification Tasks Tasks                                                   Non-classification Tasks
                                                                                                               0.150                                                           0.150
                                                                                                                                                                               0.6                                                                            0.10
                                    0.6                                                                        0.125
                                                                                               0.6                                                                             0.125                                                                          0.08
                                                                                                               0.100                                                           0.4
                         Accuracy


                                                                                                    Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                        Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Accuracy


                                    0.4                                                                        0.075                                                           0.100                                                                          0.06
                                                                                    Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                     Accuracy


                                                                                               0.4                                                                             0.075
                                                                                                               0.050                                                           0.2                                                                            0.04
                                    0.2
                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                               0.025                                                           0.050                                                                          0.02
                                    0.0                                                                        0.000                                                           0.0                                                                            0.00
                                            1            2        4             8              16                      1         2            4             8    16
                                                                                                                                                                               0.025
                                                                                                                                                                                   1         2        4                                 8     16                     1     2      4     8       16
                                                               K-shot                          0.0                                         K-shot                              0.000               K-shot                                                                      K-shot
                                                                                       1    2       4                                                  8        16                       1         2                        4     8   16
                                                                          (a) Mistral-7B-InstructK-shot                                                                                                                  K-shot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (b)   Llama2-7B-Chat

                         Figure 4: Accuracy plots on MetaICL with varying K-shot in-context examples. Both fine-tuned and
                         zero-shot prompting baselines are instructed to complete the task without any in-context examples.

                                                                                                                                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.2   I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING WITH VARYING IN - CONTEXT EXAMPLES

In the prompting paradigm, one emerging ability of pretrained LMs is that they can perform a task
with a few task-specific input-output examples as context on unseen cases, also known as in-context
learning (Brown et al., 2020). Here, we are interested to see whether Generative Adapter can provide
further benefits in enhancing the base LM’s in-context learning ability.
Setup and Baselines We conduct experiments using MetaICL (Min et al., 2022), consisting of 26
test tasks. We also ensure that none of these test tasks were seen during the training of adapter
generator. For each task, we use 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 demonstrations randomly sampled from the
corresponding development split following the MetaICL evaluate pipeline. To reduce evaluation
variance, we repeat the sampling process five times for each few-shot setting. We report separate
average accuracy for classification and non-classification tasks. For classification tasks, achieving
high accuracy requires the model to learn both the candidate options and the input-output relation-
ships from the provided examples. For non-classification tasks, the model also needs to learn the
output style.
We consider three baselines: 1) zero-shot prompting with the base LM where only task instruction
is provided; 2) standard few-shot prompting with the base LM (Min et al., 2022) where each test
case is prepend with those few-shot examples; and 3) fine-tuning the base LM on each evaluation
task using 16 input-output pairs, corresponding to the maximum number of shots in our evaluation.
Results Figure 4 summarizes the results for MetaICL with various number of in-context examples
for both classification and non-classification tasks. The performance of fine-tuned models (blue
lines) and zero-shot prompt baselines (grey lines) is evaluated without demonstrations, resulting in
constant performance across different numbers of shots. While fine-tuned models generally achieve
higher accuracy on classification tasks, their performance on non-classification tasks is lower. We
speculate that the few-shot setting (16 shots) is insufficient for the model to learn the desired out-
put style through fine-tuning. In contrast, Generative Adapter outperforms few-shot prompting in
most cases, with more significant improvements observed in the more challenging non-classification
tasks, where the model must adapt to specific output styles. This indicates that the generated adapter
not only retains the in-context learning ability but also enhances the base model.

4.3   P ERSONALIZATION

Using LMs to analyze users’ behaviours and memorize their preferences is the key to unlocking
a tailored and engaging user experience, i.e., personalized LMs. Towards this goal, we focus on
evaluating the LM’s ability to memorize user information in conversations.
Setup and Baselines We use the Multi-Session Conversation (MSC) dataset (Xu et al., 2022) for
our experiments, following Packer et al. (2024). Each test case comprises a multi-session human-
human conversation between two participants, along with a question regarding information men-
tioned within the conversation. The average length of the conversational context is 2.5K tokens,
which makes it inefficient to prompt the model repeatedly with the entire conversation history for
the same user. Similar to document-based QA (§4.1), we evaluate the model quality using the F1
score by comparing the generated answers to the ground truth. We also report computation and
memory costs. Here, we use Mistral-7B-Instruct as the base LM.
As baselines, we include both closed-book and full-conversation prompting based on the base LM,
where the former involves random guesses and the latter incurs higher computation and memory
costs by storing the entire long conversation. We also include the state-of-the-art prompt compres-
sion method, UltraGist (Zhang et al., 2024), which reduces the context into fewer token embeddings,
thereby saving computation and memory costs.
Results The results on MSC are summarized in Table 1. As expected, the closed-book approach,
which does not memorize any user information performs very poorly. In contrast, methods that uti-
lize proper user conversations as context can accurately recall user information, achieving reasonable
answer accuracy. Although using the entire conversation leads to better accuracy, full conversation
prompting incurs significant computation and storage costs, i.e., 4x those of Generative Adapter.
Such costs are highly undesirable for personalizing LMs for individual users, especially since most
computations occur on edge devices without power GPUs. Comparing to UltraGist at the same
level of storage cost (compressed into 512 tokens), Generative Adapter further reduces inference


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Performance comparison on MSC. A higher F1 indicates better performance, and lower
inference computation and extra storage costs are preferable. For Ultragist (Zhang et al., 2024),
fewer compressed tokens (noted in parentheses) correspond to lower computation and memory costs.

                                                                 Inference     Extra
                                    Model               F1     Computation    Storage
                                                                (TFLOPS)     (M floats)
                                  Closed-book            8.1      0.505          0
                          Full-conversation Prompting   66.0      2.059        128+
                            Ultragist (64 Tokens)       26.5      0.514          4
                            Ultragist (128 Tokens)      32.2      0.552          8
                            Ultragist (256 Tokens)      38.3      0.627         16
                            Ultragist (512 Tokens)      40.8      0.772         32
                            Ultragist (1K Tokens)       44.4      1.067         64
                            Ultragist (2K Tokens)       42.4      1.658         128
                              Generative Adapter        40.2      0.505         32


cost without performance drop. In real world scenarios with many queries from the same user, the
benefits of our method are even more pronounced.


5     A NALYSIS

5.1   M ODEL D ESIGN O PTIONS

Here, we exam different Generative Adapter design choices. Specifically, we train adapter gener-
ators for Mistral-7B-Instruct under various configurations and assess their quality based on recon-
struction and completion perplexities on the validation set. Table 2 summarizes the results. These
metrics have shown a strong correlated with model quality, e.g., the default setting (row 1) achieves
an F1 score of 40.2 on MSC, while using the Frobenius norm (row 4) reduces the score to 27.1.
Mixing pretraining tasks improves generalization. Training only on one task degrades perfor-
mance. Without the completion task, completion perplexity deteriorates, suggesting overfitting to
memorization. This highlights its role as a regularizer, helping Generative Adapter distill contextual
information into adapters for better future predictions.
SVD is a more effective normalization. We compare SVD-based normalization (default) to Frobe-
nius norm. While computationally simpler, Frobenius norm exhibits inferior performance, likely
due to excessive shrinkage in certain directions, reducing model expressiveness.
More updatable parameters improve performance. By default, we insert adapters in the attention
output projection layer. Switching to the feedforward down-projection layer (tripling the number of
updated parameters) enhances both perplexities. Due to computational constraints, we leave further
exploration to future work.


5.2   C OMPATIBILITY WITH BASE LM AND RAG

First, we exam whether Generative Adapter preserves the capabilities of the base model by adding
the adapter layers. We generate an adapter using the prompt “You are a helpful AI assistant” and
evaluate it on MMLU (0-shot) (Hendrycks et al., 2021). The base model (Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2)
scores 0.574, and Generative Adapter achieves 0.576, indicating a negligible impact on accuracy.
Generative Adapter can also be seamlessly combined with RAG (Lewis et al., 2020). To illusrate
this, we combine Generative Adapter with RAG by prepending the most relevant 100-token chunk
(retrieved via BM25) to the query at inference. On StreamingQA with a 1K-token context, Genera-
tive Adapter alone achieves an accuracy of 49.3, while Generative Adapter + RAG reaches 63.6 with
only 0.1K additional tokens. In comparison, full-context RAG requires 1K tokens to achieve 67.8
accuracy. This highlights the effectivenss of using Generative Adapter alongside RAG to enhance
performance with minimal additional context. The full results are shown in Table 6 of Appendix.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Table 2: The validation set perplexity of the pretrained model under different design choices.

                                                               Reconstruction   Completion
                            Factor             Setting
                                                                 Perplexity     Perplexity
                               -               Default              1.75           7.40
                          Pretraining    Reconstruction Only        1.75          34.34
                             Task         Completion Only           6.38          6.71
                         Normalization       Frobenius              7.72           7.32
                            Module          Feedforward             1.68           7.26



6    R ELATED W ORKS
Fast Weights: Our proposed method is closely related to the idea of “fast weights” (Hinton &
Plaut, 1987; Ba et al., 2016; Schlag et al., 2021), which makes the model weights being adaptive to
the model input. Context-dependent fast weight programmers (FWPs) introduced by Schmidhuber
(1992; 1993) use a slow network with slow weights to reprogram the fast weights of the correspond-
ing fast network. Schlag et al. (2021) point out that self-attention without softmax and other linear
Transformer variants (Tsai et al., 2019; Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Choromanski et al., 2021; Peng
et al., 2021) can be viewed as FWPs. Clark et al. (2022) propose fast weight layers which are added
on top of the Transformer model after the last attention layer for language modeling. Different from
previous work mainly focusing on specific tasks, our goal is to enhance frozen pretrained LMs with
fast associative memory for general language processing. Instead of using a slow network to pro-
gram a separate fast model, our method can be viewed as a self-programming model, i.e., context
encoded by the base LM is used to update the base LM itself. Our work is also related to hyper-
networks (Ivison et al., 2023; Vladymyrov et al., 2024; von Oswald et al., 2020), which typically
introduce additional layers to improve multi-task learning and in-context learning. However, our
method directly integrates generative fast weights into the Transformer architecture, and our method
can recall user-provided facts for tasks such as question answering beyond in-context learning.
Adapting LMs via Meta-Learning: Recent work explores adapting pre-trained LMs to an online
stream of documents using meta-learning. Hu et al. (2023) propose context-aware meta-learned
loss scaling, which reweights token-level losses during online fine-tuning, addressing the inefficacy
of naive fine-tuning for downstream QA. Tack et al. (2024) introduce a meta-learned amortization
network that predicts parameter-efficient fine-tuning modulations for individual context documents,
which are then aggregated for QA. Unlike these approaches, which typically require a nested training
loop, our adapter generator augments pre-trained LMs and enables end-to-end training with self-
supervised objectives.
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT): Generative Adapter employs a low-rank adapter akin
to LoRA (Hu et al., 2022), which was originally designed for PEFT. Several derivatives of LoRA
exist such as AdaLoRA (Zhang et al., 2023) and DoRA (Liu et al., 2024), along with various other
PEFT strategies such as serial adapters (Houlsby et al., 2019) and prefix tuning (Li & Liang, 2021).
A thorough survey of PEFT methods is presented by Han et al. (2024). Most work focuses on task-
specific fine-tuning scenarios. Instead, Generative Adapter is a general LM and does not require a
downstream dataset for adaptation.

7    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduce Generative Adapter, a method for efficiently adapting pretrained LMs
on-the-fly using test-time context through forward passes only. We design an adapter generator net-
work on frozen pretrained LMs to transform text contexts into updated model parameters. Trained
end-to-end with the frozen LM using two self-supervised tasks on web corpora, Generative Adapter
is evaluated in three scenarios: acquiring new factual knowledge, learning from demonstrations,
and personalizing to individual users. Our experiments show that Generative Adapter reduces infor-
mation loss compared to continual pertaining in retaining factual knowledge from new documents.
Additionally, the model effectively adapts to new task instructions when learning from demonstra-
tions. Finally, Generative Adapter achieves comparable fact recall to efficient prompting methods
while using less inference-time computation, making it well-suited for personalization. Future work
could explore scaling the adapter generator, such as integrating adapters into additional layers, and
investigating more selective update rules (Schlag et al., 2021).


                                                          10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the members of the Deep Learning Group at Microsoft Research and Semantic Machines
for their invaluable discussions and support. We also appreciate the insightful feedback provided by
members of Hannaneh Hajishirzi’s and Luke Zettlemoyer’s labs.


R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.1, knowledge storage and
  extraction, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.14316.

Jimmy Ba, Geoffrey E Hinton, Volodymyr Mnih, Joel Z Leibo, and Catalin Ionescu. Using
  fast weights to attend to the recent past. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2016/file/9f44e956e3a2b7b5598c625fcc802c36-Paper.pdf.

Payal Bajaj, Daniel Campos, Nick Craswell, Li Deng, Jianfeng Gao, Xiaodong Liu, Rangan Ma-
  jumder, Andrew McNamara, Bhaskar Mitra, Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Alina Stoica,
  Saurabh Tiwary, and Tong Wang. Ms marco: A human generated machine reading comprehension
  dataset, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.09268.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.

Alexis Chevalier, Alexander Wettig, Anirudh Ajith, and Danqi Chen. Adapting language models
  to compress contexts. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 3829–3846,
  Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.
  emnlp-main.232. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.232.

Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou Song, Andreea
  Gane, Tamas Sarlos, Peter Hawkins, Jared Quincy Davis, Afroz Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser,
  David Benjamin Belanger, Lucy J Colwell, and Adrian Weller. Rethinking attention with per-
  formers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=Ua6zuk0WRH.

Kevin Clark, Kelvin Guu, Ming-Wei Chang, Panupong Pasupat, Geoffrey Hinton, and Mohammad
  Norouzi. Meta-learning fast weight language models. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva,
  and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
  ral Language Processing, pp. 9751–9757, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.661. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.661.

Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel Stanovsky, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner.
  DROP: A reading comprehension benchmark requiring discrete reasoning over paragraphs. In
  Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 2368–2378, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1246. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/N19-1246.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tao Ge, Hu Jing, Lei Wang, Xun Wang, Si-Qing Chen, and Furu Wei. In-context autoencoder
  for context compression in a large language model. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  uREj4ZuGJE.

Zeyu Han, Chao Gao, Jinyang Liu, Jeff Zhang, and Sai Qian Zhang. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning
  for large models: A comprehensive survey, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.
  14608.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=d7KBjmI3GmQ.

Geoffrey E Hinton and David C Plaut. Using fast weights to deblur old memories. In Proceedings
  of the ninth annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 177–186, 1987.

Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin de Laroussilhe, An-
  drea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp.
  In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=nZeVKeeFYf9.

Nathan Hu, Eric Mitchell, Christopher Manning, and Chelsea Finn. Meta-learning online adapta-
  tion of language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 4418–4432,
  Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.
  emnlp-main.268. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.268.

Hamish Ivison, Akshita Bhagia, Yizhong Wang, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Matthew Peters. HINT:
  Hypernetwork instruction tuning for efficient zero- and few-shot generalisation. In Anna Rogers,
  Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 11272–11288, Toronto,
  Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.
  631. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.631.

Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chap-
  lot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier,
  Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril,
  Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825.

Zhengbao Jiang, Zhiqing Sun, Weijia Shi, Pedro Rodriguez, Chunting Zhou, Graham Neubig,
  Xi Lin, Wen-tau Yih, and Srini Iyer. Instruction-tuned language models are better knowl-
  edge learners. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the
  62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
  pers), pp. 5421–5434, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.296. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  acl-long.296.

Qiao Jin, Bhuwan Dhingra, Zhengping Liu, William Cohen, and Xinghua Lu. PubMedQA: A
  dataset for biomedical research question answering. In Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, and
  Xiaojun Wan (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
  (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2567–2577, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1259. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  D19-1259.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Angelos Katharopoulos, Apoorv Vyas, Nikolaos Pappas, and François Fleuret. Transformers are
  RNNs: Fast autoregressive Transformers with linear attention. In Proceedings of the 37th Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Jang-Hyun Kim, Junyoung Yeom, Sangdoo Yun, and Hyun Oh Song. Compressed context memory
  for online language model interaction. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=64kSvC4iPg.
Tomáš Kočiský, Jonathan Schwarz, Phil Blunsom, Chris Dyer, Karl Moritz Hermann, Gábor Melis,
  and Edward Grefenstette. The NarrativeQA reading comprehension challenge. Transactions of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics, 6:317–328, 2018. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00023.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/Q18-1023.
Wojciech Kryscinski, Nazneen Rajani, Divyansh Agarwal, Caiming Xiong, and Dragomir Radev.
 BOOKSUM: A collection of datasets for long-form narrative summarization. In Yoav Gold-
 berg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp. 6536–6558, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022.
 Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-emnlp.488. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-emnlp.488.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman
  Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel,
  and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 9459–9474. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/6b493230205f780e1bc26945df7481e5-Paper.pdf.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation.
  In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.), Proceedings of the 59th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 4582–4597, Online,
  August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.353.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.353.
Xi Victoria Lin, Xilun Chen, Mingda Chen, Weijia Shi, Maria Lomeli, Richard James, Pedro
  Rodriguez, Jacob Kahn, Gergely Szilvasy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Wen tau Yih.
  RA-DIT: Retrieval-augmented dual instruction tuning. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  22OTbutug9.
Adam Liska, Tomas Kocisky, Elena Gribovskaya, Tayfun Terzi, Eren Sezener, Devang Agrawal,
  Cyprien De Masson D’Autume, Tim Scholtes, Manzil Zaheer, Susannah Young, Ellen Gilsenan-
  Mcmahon, Sophia Austin, Phil Blunsom, and Angeliki Lazaridou. StreamingQA: A bench-
  mark for adaptation to new knowledge over time in question answering models. In Kamalika
  Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Pro-
  ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 13604–13622. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/liska22a.html.
Shih-Yang Liu, Chien-Yi Wang, Hongxu Yin, Pavlo Molchanov, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, Kwang-
  Ting Cheng, and Min-Hung Chen. DoRA: Weight-decomposed low-rank adaptation. In Proceed-
  ings of the 41th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Nick Mecklenburg, Yiyou Lin, Xiaoxiao Li, Daniel Holstein, Leonardo Nunes, Sara Malvar, Bruno
  Silva, Ranveer Chandra, Vijay Aski, Pavan Kumar Reddy Yannam, Tolga Aktas, and Todd
  Hendry. Injecting new knowledge into large language models via supervised fine-tuning, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.00213.
Sewon Min, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. MetaICL: Learning to learn
  in context. In Marine Carpuat, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and Ivan Vladimir Meza Ruiz
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2791–2809, Seattle, United
  States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.
  201. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.201.
Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E.
  Gonzalez. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2310.08560.
Hao Peng, Nikolaos Pappas, Dani Yogatama, Roy Schwartz, Noah Smith, and Lingpeng Kong.
  Random feature attention. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=QtTKTdVrFBB.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions
  for machine comprehension of text. In Jian Su, Kevin Duh, and Xavier Carreras (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  2383–2392, Austin, Texas, November 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/D16-1264. URL https://aclanthology.org/D16-1264.
Siva Reddy, Danqi Chen, and Christopher D. Manning. CoQA: A conversational question answering
  challenge. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:249–266, 2019. doi:
  10.1162/tacl a 00266. URL https://aclanthology.org/Q19-1016.
Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, Matthew Downey, and Anna Rumshisky. Getting closer to AI
  complete question answering: A set of prerequisite real tasks. In The Thirty-Fourth AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2020, The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications
  of Artificial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2020, The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational
  Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New York, NY, USA, February 7-12, 2020,
  pp. 8722–8731. AAAI Press, 2020. URL https://aaai.org/ojs/index.php/AAAI/
  article/view/6398.
Alireza Salemi, Sheshera Mysore, Michael Bendersky, and Hamed Zamani. LaMP: When large
  language models meet personalization. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 7370–7392, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.399. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.399.
Imanol Schlag, Kazuki Irie, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Linear Transformers are secretly fast weight
  programmers. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Learning to control fast-weight memories: An alternative to dynamic recurrent
   networks. Neural Computation, 4(1):131–139, 1992.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Reducing the ratio between learning complexity and number of time varying
   variables in fully recurrent nets. In Proceedings of International Conference on Artificial Neural
   Networks (ICANN), pp. 460–463, 1993.
Daria Soboleva, Faisal Al-Khateeb, Robert Myers, Jacob R Steeves, Joel Hestness, and Nolan Dey.
  SlimPajama: A 627B token cleaned and deduplicated version of RedPajama, 2023. URL https:
  //huggingface.co/datasets/cerebras/SlimPajama-627B.
Jihoon Tack, Jaehyung Kim, Eric Mitchell, Jinwoo Shin, Yee Whye Teh, and Jonathan Richard
   Schwarz. Online adaptation of language models with a memory of amortized contexts, 2024.
   URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.04317.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288.
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Shaojie Bai, Makoto Yamada, Louis-Philippe Morency, and Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov. Transformer dissection: An unified understanding for transformer’s attention
  via the lens of kernel. In Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun Wan (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
  the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp.
  4344–4353, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/D19-1443. URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-1443.
Max Vladymyrov, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Mark Sandler. Continual hypertransformer: A meta-
 learner for continual few-shot learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN
 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=zdtSqZnkx1.
Johannes von Oswald, Christian Henning, Benjamin F. Grewe, and João Sacramento. Continual
  learning with hypernetworks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJgwNerKvB.
Jing Xu, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. Beyond goldfish memory: Long-term open-domain
   conversation. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceed-
   ings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
   Long Papers), pp. 5180–5197, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Lin-
   guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.356. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
   acl-long.356.
Zitong Yang, Neil Band, Shuangping Li, Emmanuel Candès, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Synthetic
  continued pretraining, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.07431.
Peitian Zhang, Zheng Liu, Shitao Xiao, Ninglu Shao, Qiwei Ye, and Zhicheng Dou. Compressing
  lengthy context with ultragist, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.16635.
Qingru Zhang, Minshuo Chen, Alexander Bukharin, Pengcheng He, Yu Cheng, Weizhu Chen, and
  Tuo Zhao. Adaptive budget allocation for parameter-efficient fine-tuning. In The Eleventh In-
  ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=lq62uWRJjiY.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    DATASET D ETAILS
Pretraining. We pretrain our models using a randomly sampled subset of 1B tokens from the
SlimPajama corpus. For validation, we sample an additional 100 segments, each containing 2K
tokens, from the same corpus.

Instruction Tuning. We perform instruction tuning using a combination of question answering,
in-context learning, and instruction following datasets, following prior studies (Lin et al., 2024; Ge
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024).

B    T RAINING S ETUP
Implementation We empirically found that normalization is crucial for Generative Adapter to
function effectively. For SVD normalization, we implemented it using torch.svd lowrank(),
setting the number of iterations to 1.
Generative Adapter is able to generate the adaptors for prefixes of chunks simultaneously by process-
ing the context chunks in parallel. The computation proceeds by processing the hidden states of each
Transformer block for all context chunks layer by layer. Given the hidden states of Σ(1), . . . , Σ(t)
                                                       (l−1)
from the (l − 1)-th Transformer block, denoted by H1:t , we first compute the accumulated outer
          (l)
product S1:t using Equation 2. We then normalize this outer product to obtain the additive matrix
   (l)                                                                                (l)
W∆,1:t using Equation 6, and finally get the output of the l-th Transformer block H1:t by the base
model.

Pretraining. For Mistral-7B-Instruct (hereafter referred to as Mistral), we use a learning rate of
5 × 10−5 , and for Llama2-7B-Chat (Llama2), we use 1 × 10−4 . We apply a weight decay of 0.01
and no dropout. The adapter added to the base model are scaled by 1/16 for Mistral and 1/8 for
Llama2. We employ a WarmupDecayLR learning rate scheduler with a 100-step warmup and use
the Adam optimizer. The global batch size is set to 8. Pretraining the adapter generator on 1B tokens
takes approximately 20 hours using 8 NVIDIA H100 GPUs.

Instruction Tuning. For instruction tuning, we largely follow the same configurations as in pre-
training, with some adjustments. We set the learning rate to 5 × 10−5 for both Mistral and Llama2
models. We train the models for 2 epochs and use a batch size of 32.

C    E XPERIMENT S ETUP
Document-based QA. We set up experiments for document-based question answering (QA) using
both supervised fine-tuning and continuous pretraining. For supervised fine-tuning on question-
answer pairs, we train on the training split of each dataset, evaluate on a validation set, and employ
early stopping when the validation loss increases. We use a learning rate of 1 × 10−5 and a global
batch size of 64. For continuous pretraining, we train for 8 epochs using the log-likelihood of the
document as the training loss, with learning rates of 1 × 10−5 for Mistral and 3 × 10−5 for Llama2.
Each passage is treated as a training sample, and we use a global batch size of 16.
For closed-book prompting and in-context prompting, we apply an instruction template to encourage
the model to generate a short answer. The prompts are shown in Figure 7.

In-Context Learning. We explore in-context learning using both fine-tuning and prompting meth-
ods. For fine-tuning, we conduct task-specific fine-tuning on 16 samples for each dataset. We use
a learning rate of 5 × 10−6 for Mistral and 1 × 10−5 for Llama2. A validation set of 16 samples,
disjoint from the training set, is collected from the same dataset. We train the model for a maximum
of 40 epochs, employing early stopping if the validation loss increases for three consecutive epochs.
For in-context prompting, we observe that omitting additional instructions yields better performance
for Mistral, whereas adding an instruction template improves performance for Llama2. The prompts
are shown Figure 7.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 3: Statistics of data used in the instruction tuning.

                  Type                          Dataset                  #Docs   #Instructions   Context len   Instruction len   Response len
                                     COQA (Reddy et al., 2019)           1798        57.2          1083.5            5.5              2.7
                                       DROP (Dua et al., 2019)           1379        38.4           848.6           11.0              1.4
                                  NarrativeQA (Kočiský et al., 2018)   1047        29.4           574.5            8.5              4.4
          Question Answering
                                    PubMedQA (Jin et al., 2019)          1000        1.0            200.2           12.9             40.7
                                      Quail (Rogers et al., 2020)         560        16.2           332.7            8.7              4.9
                                   MS MARCO (Bajaj et al., 2018)         4832        16.5          1152.1           6.0              14.0
          In-context Learning         MetaICL (Min et al., 2022)         11888       3.5           1776.8           84.3             2.9
                                  BookSum (Kryscinski et al., 2022)       2914        1.0          1158.6            7.0            205.3
          Instruction Following
                                       PwC (Ge et al., 2024)             13102       12.4          348.1            10.3            23.3


D     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
This section presents extra results for document-based question answering and in-context learning
evaluation.

D.1   D OCUMENT- BASED QA

In Section 4.1, we evaluate the knowledge recall capability of Generative Adapter and baseline
models. The complete numerical results are provided in Table 5.
We also assess the performance of Ultragist (Zhang et al., 2024) on document QA. Since Ultragist
requires a predefined compression rate for token reduction, a direct comparison with our method is
not easy. To address this, we report results for compression ratios of 2, 8, and 32, as shown in Table 7
and Figure 8. As expected, Ultragist’s performance degrades significantly as the compression ratio
increases.
Unlike Ultragist, Generative Adapter modifies the model parameters directly, ensuring that its infer-
ence time remains identical to that of the base model after contextualization. In contrast, Ultragist’s
inference and storage costs depend on the number of gist tokens, which is approximately equal to the
original context length divided by the compression ratio. Given its efficient inference, Generative
Adapter is particularly suitable for scenarios where the model undergoes contextualization once and
is then reused multiple times, making it an effective solution for resource-constrained environments
such as edge computing.

D.2   I N - CONTEXT L EARNING

Expanding on Section 4.2, we further evaluate Ultragist on MetaICL, with results summarized in
Table 8. Ultragist performs worse than in-context prompting on classification tasks but shows a slight
improvement on non-classification tasks. In contrast, Generative Adapter consistently outperforms
both Ultragist and in-context prompting across various tasks, demonstrating its effectiveness.

D.3   R ETRIEVAL -AUGMENTED G ENERATION

Generative Adapter can be combined with prompting techniques or other prompt compression meth-
ods to provide complementary benefits. To illustrate this, we integrate Generative Adapter with
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). In this hybrid approach, the contextualization phase re-
mains unchanged, and at inference, we prepend the most relevant 100-token chunk (retrieved using
BM25) to the query. Additionally, for comparison, we report results where the entire context is
prepended to the query (denoted as ”Generative Adapter + Context”). The results are presented in
Table 6.


                                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                   Table 4: Training and test datasets of MetaICL.

              Train                             piqa, hate speech offensive, google wellformed query, social i qa, circa, quoref,
                                             glue-sst2, scitail, emo, cosmos qa, freebase qa, ag news, art, paws, kilt ay2, glue-qnli,
                                               quail, ade corpus v2-classification, sciq, hatexplain, emotion, glue-qqp, kilt fever,
                                               kilt nq, dbpedia 14, kilt zsre, hellaswag, squadwith context, hotpot qa, glue-mnli,
                                                ropes, squad-no context, kilt hotpotqa, discovery, superglue-record, race-middle,
                                                    race-high, lama-trex, swag, gigaword, amazon polarity, biomrc, tab fact,
                                                  tweet eval-emoji, tweet eval-offensive, tweet eval-sentiment, tweet qa, imdb,
                                              lama-conceptnet, liar, anli, wiki qa, kilt trex, wikisql, wino grande, wiqa, search qa,
                                                            xsum, yahoo answers topics, yelp polarity, yelp review full
              Test                               quarel, financial phrasebank, openbookqa, codah, qasc, glue-mrpc, dream, sick,
                                             commonsense qa, medical questions pairs, quartz-with knowledge, poem sentiment,
                                                quartz-no knowledge, glue-wnli, climate fever, ethos-national origin, ethos-race,
                                                  ethos-religion, ai2 arc, hate speech18, glue-rte, supergluecb, superglue-copa,
                                                     tweet eval-hate, tweet eval-stance atheism, tweet eval-stance feminist


                                    Zero-shot Prompting                                                    Fine-tuning                                     In-context Prompting                                            Generative Adapter
                                            quarel                                        financial_phrasebank                                  openbookqa                                            codah                                             qasc
                         0.4
                                                                                 Classification Tasks
                                                                                1.0
                                                                                                   0.05                                                                  Non-classification
                                                                                                                                                                          0.05              Tasks
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.08
                         0.3
                                                                                0.8
                                                                                                0.150                             0.04                                              0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.06
                                                                                0.6                         0.03
              Accuracy


                                                                     Accuracy


                                                                                                                       Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                         Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Accuracy
                                                                                                                                  0.03
                         0.2                              0.6                   0.4             0.125       0.02                  0.02                                                                                               0.04
                         0.1                               0.2                   0.01
                                                                                                0.100       0.01                                                                                                                     0.02
                                               Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                Accuracy



                         0.0
                                1       2     4   80.416
                                                           0.0
                                                               1 2    4   8 16
                                                                                 0.00
                                                                                      1   2    40.075
                                                                                                   8   16
                                                                                                            0.00
                                                                                                                 1    2      4   8    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1     2      4     8     16
                                           K-shot                  K-shot                   K-shot                        K-shot                                                                                                                        K-shot
                                          dream                     sick                commonsense_qa           medical_questions_pairs                                                                                                      quartz-with_knowledge
                    0.150
                                                   0.2     0.8                   0.20           0.050        0.8                                                                                                                     0.25
                    0.125
                    0.100
                                                           0.6                   0.15           0.025        0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.15
         Accuracy


                                                                     Accuracy


                                                                                                                       Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                           Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Accuracy
                    0.075
                    0.050
                                                   0.0     0.4                   0.10
                                                                                                0.000        0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.10

                    0.025                                1 0.2 2        4      8 0.05 16                  1 0.2 2              4        8                                                                                            0.05    16
                    0.000                                  0.0      K-shot       0.00                        0.0         K-shot                                                                                                      0.00
                                1       2       4         8   16                      1       2      4      8   16                         1    2        4      8   16                      1    2       4       8   16                       1     2      4     8     16
                                             K-shot                                               K-shot                                              K-shot                                          K-shot                                            K-shot
                                      poem_sentiment                                      quartz-no_knowledge                                       glue-mrpc                                        glue-wnli                                    inst:climate_fever
                         0.6                                                  0.25                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                     0.6                                              0.8
                         0.5                                                  0.20                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                         0.4                                                                                                         0.4                                              0.6                                              0.3
              Accuracy


                                                                   Accuracy


                                                                                                                          Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                           Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Accuracy


                                                                              0.15
                         0.3                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                              0.10                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                         0.2                                                                                                         0.2
                         0.1                                                  0.05                                                                                                    0.2                                              0.1
                         0.0                                                  0.00                                                   0.0                                              0.0                                              0.0
                                1       2       4         8   16                      1       2      4      8   16                         1    2        4      8   16                      1    2       4       8   16                       1     2      4     8     16
                                             K-shot                                               K-shot                                              K-shot                                          K-shot                                            K-shot
                                    ethos-national_origin                                     ethos-race                                       ethos-religion                                        ai2_arc                                       hate_speech18
                                                                                                                                     0.8
                                                                                0.8                                                                                                 0.05                                               0.8
                         0.8
                                                                                0.6                                                  0.6                                            0.04
                         0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
              Accuracy


                                                                     Accuracy


                                                                                                                          Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                         Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Accuracy


                                                                                                                                     0.4                                            0.03
                         0.4                                                    0.4                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.02
                         0.2                                                    0.2                                                  0.2                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.01
                         0.0                                                    0.0                                                  0.0                                            0.00                                               0.0
                                1       2       4         8   16                      1       2      4      8   16                         1    2        4      8   16                      1    2       4       8   16                       1     2      4     8     16
                                             K-shot                                               K-shot                                              K-shot                                          K-shot                                            K-shot
                                            glue-rte                                         superglue-cb                                      superglue-copa                                   tweet_eval-hate                              tweet_eval-stance_atheism
                                                                                0.8                                             0.012                                                 0.6
                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                0.6                                             0.010                                                 0.5
                         0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                0.008                                                 0.4
              Accuracy


                                                                     Accuracy


                                                                                                                     Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                           Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Accuracy


                                                                                0.4                                             0.006                                                 0.3                                              0.3
                         0.4
                                                                                                                                0.004                                                 0.2                                              0.2
                         0.2                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                                0.002                                                 0.1                                              0.1
                         0.0                                                    0.0                                             0.000                                                 0.0                                              0.0
                                1       2       4         8   16                      1       2      4      8   16                         1    2        4      8   16                      1    2       4       8   16                       1     2      4     8     16
                                             K-shot                                               K-shot                                              K-shot                                          K-shot                                            K-shot
                               tweet_eval-stance_feminist
                         0.5
                         0.4
                         0.3
              Accuracy


                         0.2
                         0.1
                         0.0
                                1       2       4         8   16
                                             K-shot



Figure 5: In-context learning evaluation of Generative Adapter, based on Llama2-7B-Chat, across
26 test datasets from MetaICL.



                                                                                                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Zero-shot Prompting                                                 Fine-tuning                                     In-context Prompting                                               Generative Adapter
                                         quarel                                       financial_phrasebank                                  openbookqa                                            codah                                                qasc
                                                                             Classification Tasks
                                                                            0.8                                                                                      Non-classification
                                                                                                                                                                      0.03              Tasks
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.10
                      0.3
                                                                            0.6
                                                                                               0.03
                                                                                                   0.150                                      0.08
                                                                                                              0.02
           Accuracy


                                                                 Accuracy


                                                                                                                   Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                     Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Accuracy
                                                                                                                              0.02            0.06
                      0.2
                                                        0.6                 0.4                    0.125                                      0.04
                      0.1                                                          0.01                       0.01
                                                        0.2
                                                                                                   0.100                                      0.02
                                             Accuracy


                                                                                                                                            Accuracy
                                               8 0.4
                      0.0                               0.0                        0.00                       0.00                            0.00
                             1       2     4       16       1   2    4     8 16         1   2    4 0.075
                                                                                                      8  16        1    2      4   8    16         1     2     4    8   16
                                        K-shot                    K-shot                      K-shot                        K-shot                          K-shot
                                       dream                       sick                   commonsense_qa           medical_questions_pairs          quartz-with_knowledge
                    0.10                         0.2 0.8                          0.175
                                                                                                   0.050       0.5
                                                                                                                                             0.150
                                                                                                                                             0.125
                    0.08                                0.6                       0.150
                                                                                  0.125
                                                                                                   0.025       0.4
                                                                                                                                             0.100
                    0.06
         Accuracy


                                                                 Accuracy


                                                                                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                       Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Accuracy
                                                                                                               0.3
                    0.04                         0.0    0.4                       0.100
                                                                                  0.075
                                                                                                   0.000       0.2
                                                                                                                                             0.075
                                                                                                                                             0.050
                    0.02                              1 0.2
                                                              2          4      8 0.050 16                  1  0.1   2           4         8 0.025 16
                    0.00                                0.0         K-shot        0.025                        0.0         K-shot            0.000
                             1       2       4      8     16                      1       2      4     8   16                          1    2        4      8   16                      1    2       4       8   16                          1     2      4     8     16
                                          K-shot                                              K-shot                                              K-shot                                          K-shot                                               K-shot
                                   poem_sentiment                                     quartz-no_knowledge                                       glue-mrpc                                        glue-wnli                                       inst:climate_fever
                      0.5                                                 0.20                                                   0.5                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4
                      0.4                                                                                                        0.4                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                          0.15                                                                                                    0.3                                                 0.4
           Accuracy


                                                               Accuracy


                                                                                                                      Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                       Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Accuracy
                      0.3                                                                                                        0.3
                                                                          0.10                                                                                                    0.2                                                 0.3
                      0.2                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                      0.1                                                 0.05                                                   0.1                                              0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.1
                      0.0                                                 0.00                                                   0.0                                              0.0                                                 0.0
                             1       2       4      8     16                      1       2      4     8   16                          1    2        4      8   16                      1    2       4       8   16                          1     2      4     8     16
                                          K-shot                                              K-shot                                              K-shot                                          K-shot                                               K-shot
                                 ethos-national_origin                                    ethos-race                                       ethos-religion                                        ai2_arc                                          hate_speech18
                      0.8                                                   0.8                                                                                                 0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                 0.6
                      0.6                                                   0.6                                                                                                 0.03                                                  0.6
           Accuracy


                                                                 Accuracy


                                                                                                                      Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                     Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Accuracy



                      0.4                                                   0.4                                                  0.4                                            0.02                                                  0.4
                      0.2                                                   0.2                                                  0.2                                            0.01                                                  0.2
                      0.0                                                   0.0                                                  0.0                                            0.00                                                  0.0
                             1       2       4      8     16                      1       2      4     8   16                          1    2        4      8   16                      1    2       4       8   16                          1     2      4     8     16
                                          K-shot                                              K-shot                                              K-shot                                          K-shot                                               K-shot
                                         glue-rte                                        superglue-cb                                      superglue-copa                                   tweet_eval-hate                                 tweet_eval-stance_atheism
                      0.8                                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                              0.04                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                            0.6                                                                                                   0.5
                      0.6                                                                                                     0.02                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4
           Accuracy


                                                                 Accuracy


                                                                                                                Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                       Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Accuracy


                                                                            0.4                                               0.00                                                0.3                                                 0.3
                      0.4
                                                                                                                              0.02                                                0.2                                                 0.2
                      0.2                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.1                                                 0.1
                                                                                                                              0.04
                      0.0                                                   0.0                                                                                                   0.0                                                 0.0
                             1       2       4      8     16                      1       2      4     8   16                          1    2        4      8   16                      1    2       4       8   16                          1     2      4     8     16
                                          K-shot                                              K-shot                                              K-shot                                          K-shot                                               K-shot
                            tweet_eval-stance_feminist
                      0.5
                      0.4
                      0.3
           Accuracy


                      0.2
                      0.1
                      0.0
                             1       2       4      8     16
                                          K-shot



Figure 6: In-context learning evaluation of Generative Adapter, based on Mistral-7B-Instruct, across
26 test datasets from MetaICL.


                                                                                                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                        F1
               Model       Dataset           Methods
                                                                   512    1K     2K     4K     8K     16K    32K
                                       Zero-Shot Prompting                              10.8
                                       Supervised Fine-tuning                           20.7
                                       Continuous Pretraining                           30.0
                           SQuAD
                                       In-context Prompting        45.4   44.9   43.6   42.6   42.5   38.6   35.1
                                         GenerativeAdapter         48.8   43.0   39.9   35.9   33.8   30.3   28.0
                                       Zero-Shot Prompting                              13.6
               Mistral                 Supervised Fine-tuning                           19.5
                                       Continuous Pretraining                           22.2
                         StreamingQA
                                       In-context Prompting        47.2   48.7   48.1   48.7   48.0   46.0   39.3
                                         GenerativeAdapter         51.5   49.3   44.7   40.9   36.7   32.7   32.0
                                       Zero-Shot Prompting                              14.6
                                       Supervised Fine-tuning                           20.7
                                       Continuous Pretraining                           23.9
                           SQuAD
                                       In-context Prompting        64.8   60.6   55.4   44.9   25.2   9.6    6.4
                                         GenerativeAdapter         36.2   32.5   31.0   28.9   28.2   24.9   23.6
                                       Zero-Shot Prompting                              18.0
               LLama2                  Supervised Fine-tuning                           18.9
                                       Continuous Pretraining                           20.5
                         StreamingQA
                                       In-context Prompting        61.2   61.3   58.0   46.8   27.8   17.5   11.6
                                         GenerativeAdapter         42.9   37.8   34.4   32.6   28.7   26.0   25.7


               Table 5: All results of the QA accuracy on SQuAD and StreamingQA.


   Prompting for Document-based Question Answering

   {Context}

   ## Instruction: Answer the question based on the context above. Respond with a short phrase only.
   Keep the answer short and concise, without any explanation or additional words

   Question: {Question}
   Answer:

   Prompting for MetaICL

   Input: {demo input}
   Output: {demo output}
   { . . . k-shot demonstrations . . . }

   ## Instruction: Based on the demonstration above, provide a short and concise answer, with-
   out any explanation or additional words.

   Input: {input}
   Output:


      Figure 7: Prompts used in the document-based QA and in-context learning evaluation.


                                                              20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: The F1 scores (along with the number of gist tokens in parentheses) on the StreamingQA
dataset to show complementary benefits on top of RAG.

       Context Length                                     512               1K                2K                                  4K                 8K               16K                 32K

       GenerativeAdapter                                51.5 (0K)       49.3 (0K)        44.7 (0K)                           40.9 (0K)           36.7 (0K)          32.7 (0K)           32.0 (0K)
       GenerativeAdapter + Context                     67.8 (0.5K)      67.8 (1K)        61.1 (2K)                                /                   /                  /                   /
       GenerativeAdapter + RAG                         61.9 (0.1K)     63.6 (0.1K)      60.8 (0.1K)                         60.9 (0.1K)         60.1 (0.1K)        59.1 (0.1K)         56.5 (0.1K)


Table 7: The F1 scores (along with the number of gist tokens in parentheses) on the StreamingQA
dataset for Ultragist with different compression ratios.

    Context Length                                           512              1K                      2K                             4K                 8K              16K                 32K

    Ultragist (Compression Ratio=2)                      63.5 (0.3K)      63.6 (0.5K)      62.3 (1K)                              61.9 (2K)         61.8 (4K)         62.1 (8K)          51.0 (16K)
    Ultragist (Compression Ratio=8)                      57.6 (0.1K)      55.7 (0.1K)     55.4 (0.3K)                            55.7 (0.5K)        54.0 (1K)         53.0 (2K)          51.1 (4K)
    Ultragist (Compression Ratio=32)                     32.5 (0.1K)      31.1 (0.1K)     30.1 (0.1K)                            32.8 (0.1K)       33.0 (0.3K)       32.0 (0.5K)         31.4 (1K)
    GenerativeAdapter                                     51.5 (0K)        49.3 (0K)       44.7 (0K)                              40.9 (0K)         36.7 (0K)         32.7 (0K)          32.0 (0K)


                      Table 8: Comparison between Generative Adapter and Ultragist on MetaICL.

                                                 Method                                Classification                               Non-classification
                                                 Ultragist (256 tokens)                       41.1                                                7.5
                                                 In-context prompting                         60.5                                                6.7
                                                 Finetune                                     71.8                                               10.5
                                                 GenerativeAdapter                            63.7                                               14.9


                      PromptingPrompting
                                  wo/ KV wo/Cache
                                               KV Cache                      Prompting
                                                                               Promptingw/    KVCache
                                                                                           w/ KV Cache                                               Generative
                                                                                                                                                Generative  AdapterAdapter
                      UltraGist UltraGist
                                (Compression     RatioRatio
                                          (Compression 2) 2)                 UltraGist
                                                                               UltraGist(Compression    Ratio
                                                                                         (Compression Ratio 8) 8)                                    UltraGist
                                                                                                                                                UltraGist       (Compression
                                                                                                                                                          (Compression Ratio 32) Ratio 32)

                                               Inference  Computation
                                                     Inference Computation                                                                      ExtraExtra Storage
                                                                                                                                                      Storage
                                   102                                                                          103  103
                102
                                                                                                         (Million)
                                                                                                     (Million)


                                                                                                                102
                       FLOPs (T)


                                                                                                                     102
    FLOPs (T)


                                   101
                101
                                                                                                  Floats


                                                                                                                101
                                                                                              Floats


                                   100                                                                               101
                                                                                                                100
                100                      512      1K     2K    4K      8K        16K    32K                                512      1K         2K    4K      8K        16K       32K
                                                          Context Length                                             100                        Context Length
                      512                1K       2K       4K        8K      16K        32K                                 512           1K       2K         4K       8K         16K        32K
                       Context Length                               Context Length
Figure 8: Inference computation     and storage requirements for Generative    Adapter and baseline
methods on StreamingQA.


                                                                                           21
