Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S EVERING S PURIOUS C ORRELATIONS WITH
DATA P RUNING
 Varun Mulchandani & Jung-Eun Kim∗
 Department of Computer Science
 North Carolina State University
 {vmmulcha,jung-eun.kim}@ncsu.edu



                                               A BSTRACT

            Deep neural networks have been shown to learn and rely on spurious correlations
            present in the data that they are trained on. Reliance on such correlations can
            cause these networks to malfunction when deployed in the real world, where these
            correlations may no longer hold. To overcome the learning of and reliance on
            such correlations, recent studies propose approaches that yield promising results.
            These works, however, study settings where the strength of the spurious signal
            is significantly greater than that of the core, invariant signal, making it easier to
            detect the presence of spurious features in individual training samples and allow
            for further processing. In this paper, we identify new settings where the strength of
            the spurious signal is relatively weaker, making it difficult to detect any spurious
            information while continuing to have catastrophic consequences. We also discover
            that spurious correlations are learned primarily due to only a handful of all the
            samples containing the spurious feature and develop a novel data pruning technique
            that identifies and prunes small subsets of the training data that contain these
            samples. Our proposed technique does not require inferred domain knowledge,
            information regarding the sample-wise presence or nature of spurious information,
            or human intervention. Finally, we show that such data pruning attains state-of-
            the-art performance on previously studied settings where spurious information is
            identifiable.1


1       I NTRODUCTION

Deep neural networks have shown promising results on a variety of benchmarks and applications.
However, their reliability and by extension, ability to solve increasingly challenging problems remains
questionable as these networks have been shown to exhibit several failure modes in practice. Of
these, the inability to adapt to distributional shifts due to the reliance on spurious correlations is of
strong concern as it makes them unreliable for deployment in the real world. Spurious Correlations
are correlations that a network learns between simple, weakly predictive spurious features present in
a fraction of the training data and the class label. These correlations are problematic as a network
may prefer them over strongly predictive invariant correlations when making a prediction. Thus, in
the event of a distribution shift where spurious features either no longer exist or become correlated
with a different task, which is a common phenomenon in the real world, these networks begin to
malfunction (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Sagawa et al., 2020a;b; Nagarajan et al., 2021; Geirhos et al.,
2020).
To promote the learning of invariant features, several recent works have proposed techniques that yield
promising results. These works heavily rely on sample-wise environment labels, where each class is
spuriously correlated with a spurious feature from one environment. Such labels are also referred
to as group labels. For instance, Sagawa et al. (2020a) aim to prioritize samples from environments
that have high training risk to promote invariant feature learning, with the assumption that such
    ∗
        Corresponding author.
    1
        Code is available at: https://github.com/JEKimLab/ICLR2025_SpuriousDataPruning


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


labels are available. Kirichenko et al. (2023) work with a stronger assumption, where they assume
that overrepresented environments contribute to the learning of spurious correlations and simply
re-train the last layer of a spuriously biased network on a dataset where all environments are equally
represented. Such a solution makes strong assumptions regarding which samples contain spurious
features associated with each class. Moayeri et al. (2023) follow a similar technique of utilizing
human supervision to determine the strength of spurious signals in each training sample and fine-tune
a biased network on samples where spurious signals are weaker. Attaining sample-wise environment
labels and information regarding sample-wise presence of spurious features during training, however,
is unrealistic. To overcome this problem, Liu et al. (2021); Zhang et al. (2022); Pezeshki et al. (2024)
aim to infer the sample-wise presence of spurious features based on a biased network’s outputs and
they follow this with further processing such as up-weighting of samples without spurious features or
aligning representations of samples with and without spurious features, typically at the cost of overall
testing accuracy.
All past works that study spurious correlations and aim to promote invariant feature learning perform
experiments on settings where the strength of the spurious signal is significantly higher than the core,
invariant signal. This makes it easy to identify the presence of spurious features in each sample within
the training set, which is, however, not always the case. In this paper, we aim to tackle novel settings
where the strength of the spurious signal is relatively weaker, making it impossible to identify such
information while rendering existing techniques ineffective. We then show that spurious correlations
are learned primarily due to a few key samples in the training set and present a novel data pruning
technique to identify and prune a small subset of the training data that contains these samples. Finally,
we show that such data pruning attains state-of-the-art performance on previously studied settings
where information regarding the sample-wise presence of spurious features is easily identifiable. We
summarize our contributions below:

Contributions

       • We identify settings where it is impossible/difficult to identify sample-wise presence of
         spurious features. This renders past approaches that mitigate spurious correlations as
         ineffective.
       • We discover that spurious correlations are learned primarily due to a handful of all the
         samples containing spurious features, through extensive empirical investigation. Based on
         this insight, we propose a simple and novel data pruning technique that identifies and prunes
         a small subset of the data that contains these samples.
       • We show that such data pruning attains state-of-the-art results even in previously studied
         settings where information regarding the sample-wise presence of spurious features is
         identifiable.

2    BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
Consistent with past literature, we study the supervised classification setting where S = {(xi , yi )}N
                                                                                                      i=1
denotes the training dataset of size N and network is trained to learn a mapping between xi (input)
and yi (class label) using empirical risk minimization (Vapnik, 1998). Every training sample s ∈ S
contains a core feature (ci ) that represents its class (yi ). A fraction of all samples within a class
contain the spurious feature (ai ) associated with that class. Core (or invariant) features represent
the class label yi and are semantically relevant to the task. They are also fully predictive of the
task, as they are present in all samples. Spurious features do not represent the class labels and are
semantically irrelevant to the task.
Spurious Correlations. The correlations a network learns between spurious features and class
labels. Such correlations are undesirable as they can disappear during testing or become associated
with a different task, causing these networks to malfunction (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Nagarajan et al.,
2021; Shah et al., 2020; Tsipras et al., 2019; Sagawa et al., 2020b;a; Kirichenko et al., 2023; Jain
et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2022). To make a network robust against spurious correlations, Sagawa et al.
(2020a) suggest using information regarding sample-wise environment labels during training. Since
such information is often unavailable, more recent approaches attempt to infer group or spurious
information with the help of an ERM-trained model, followed by subsequent sample up-weighting
or class-wise representational alignment (Sohoni et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022;


                                                   2
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      (1) Female Samples Without                           (2) Female Samples With                                                         (1) Samples With Spurious Feature
                                       Spurious Feature                                     Spurious Feature
                                      (3) Male Samples Without                             (4) Male Samples With
                                       Spurious Feature                                     Spurious Feature                                                               (2) Samples Without Spurious Feature
                                Training with no spurious Training with spurious Training with spurious                                                        Unidentifiable Setting Unidentifiable Setting Identifiable Setting
                                      samples (0%)            samples (10%)          samples (50%)                                                             (WD=0.1, 1st Epoch) (WD=0.1, 2nd Epoch) (WD=0.1, 2nd Epoch)


                                                                                                                               Group-wise Train accuracy (%)
                               100                       100                    100
Group-wise Test accuracy (%)



                                                                                                                                                               60                    80                     50
                                80                           80                               80
                                                                                                                                                               50                                           40
                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                                60                           60                               60                                                               40
                                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                                40                           40                               40                                                               30                    40
                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                               20
                                20                           20                               20                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                               10
                                 0                            0                                0                                                                0                     0                      0
                                     (1)   (2)   (3)   (4)        (1)    (2)   (3)   (4)           (1)   (2)   (3)   (4)                                            (1)     (2)            (1)    (2)             (1)    (2)


  (a) Training with just a few Male samples with spurious fea-                                                                     (b) Training with greater regularization may not
  tures causes heavy reliance on spurious features, indicated                                                                      help identify samples with the spurious feature.
  by low test accuracy on Female samples with Spurious
  Features.

                                                                        Figure 1: Spurious information is often unattainable.



  Ahmed et al., 2021; Creager et al., 2021; Pezeshki et al., 2024). Recent work has also shown that
  a model learns both general and spurious features and just re-training the last layer with balanced
  data where strong spurious correlations do not hold can improve robustness (Kirichenko et al., 2023).
  Moayeri et al. (2023) perform a similar re-training, where they fine-tune the final layers of trained
  (biased) models on those samples with minimal spuriosity, where spuriosity is determined with human
  supervision. Idrissi et al. (2022) train a network on a balanced train set where all environments are
  equally represented, thereby promoting invariant feature learning.
   Simplicity Bias and Spurious Correlations. Recent work has shown that deep neural networks have
   a greater affinity towards simpler features than more complicated ones (Shah et al., 2020; Morwani
   et al., 2023; Tiwari & Shenoy, 2023). Shah et al. (2020) show that in the presence of two fully
   predictive features, a network would choose to fully ignore the more complicated features in favor of
   the simpler set of features. In settings where the simpler feature is not fully predictive (Spurious), the
   network still relies strongly on these features (Kirichenko et al., 2023), leading to the learning of and
   reliance on spurious correlations.
  Feature Difficulty. Consistent with deep learning literature (specifically, those works concerned with
  spurious correlations), difficulty of learning a feature is determined by the following three factors: (1)
  Proportion (or Frequency) of training samples containing the spurious feature (Sagawa et al., 2020b;
  Shah et al., 2020; Kirichenko et al., 2023), (2) Area Occupied and Position (if it is centered or not) in
  the training sample (Moayeri et al., 2022) and (3) The amount of noise in its signal (Sagawa et al.,
  2020b; Ye et al., 2022). A feature which is present in a large portion of all training samples, occupies
  a lot of area, is centered, and has little to no variance, is easy to learn. On the other hand, a feature
  which is present in a small portion of all training samples, occupies little area, is not centered, and
  has a lot of noise/variance, is hard to learn.
   Our work is concerned with two different widely studied areas in deep learning: out-of-distribution
   generalization and data pruning.
  Data Pruning. A large part of deep learning’s recent success has been attributed to large datasets
  that models are trained on. However, with increasing datasets sizes, computational costs have risen
  significantly. This raises an important question: Are all samples in a dataset equally important for
  attaining good testing accuracy? In other words, is it possible to reduce samples in the training data
  without impacting generalizability? Recent work has shown that it is possible to remove a large
  fraction of a dataset without sacrificing test accuracy. Most approaches create sample-wise metrics
  that measure how important it is to maintain a given sample in the training set and remove the least
  important samples by their definition (Paul et al., 2021; Toneva et al., 2019; Feldman & Zhang, 2020;
  Sorscher et al., 2022; He et al., 2023).
  While existing works aim to prune samples to reduce computational costs, our work focuses on
  pruning samples to mitigate the learning of spurious correlations during training. This direction, to
  the best of our knowledge, is novel.


                                                                                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3    S PURIOUS I NFORMATION IS O FTEN U NATTAINABLE
Suppose one wants to build a gender classifier using the CelebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015). A small
fraction of the training samples in the Male class contain eyeglasses (10%), which takes the form
of the spurious feature in our setting. None of the samples in the Female class contain eyeglasses
in the training set. Thus, the Male class is spuriously correlated with eyeglasses. Note that in our
setting, only a small minority of all Male samples contain the spurious feature, making the strength
of the spurious signal relatively weaker. This is different from settings studied in literature, where the
spurious feature is present in a majority of the samples (often 95-97% of all samples of that class) and
the strength of the spurious signal is significantly higher than the strength of the core, invariant signal.
We observe that under normal training conditions without the existence of spurious samples, test
accuracy of Female samples with the spurious feature is high as shown in Fig. 1a (Left). Introduction
of just a few Male samples with the spurious feature is capable of reducing the test accuracy of
Female samples with eyeglasses significantly, as shown in Fig. 1a (Middle and Right).
In settings where the strength of the spurious signal is significantly greater than the strength of
the core, invariant signal, it becomes easy to differentiate between groups of samples containing
spurious features and those that do not (Liu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024). This
is because the network relies very strongly on the spurious features during training, making it easy
to differentiate between such groups based on representational differences or on a network’s ease
of learning these samples. For instance, Liu et al. (2021); Zhang et al. (2022) train a network with
high regularization (greater weight decay) such that a network correctly classifies samples with easy
spurious features early during training and misclassifies those without, as shown in Fig. 1b (Right)
- The identifiable setting shown is the CelebA setting studied in Liu et al. (2021). In our setting,
however, the spurious feature is not present in a majority of the training samples and so the strength
of the spurious signal is relatively weaker. This makes it impossible to identify which samples contain
spurious features using past approaches, even when 50% of all male samples contain eyeglasses -
see Fig. 1b (Left and Middle). Thus, we identify the primary failure mode of existing approaches as
follows:

       • Attaining information regarding the presence of spurious features becomes difficult when
         the strength of the spurious signal is not exceptionally greater than the strength of the core,
         invariant signal in the training set.

Based on this observation, we propose the following problem statement:

       • Problem Statement: How does one overcome spurious correlations in settings where
         attaining spurious information is difficult or impossible?


4    E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN
In this paper, we study both settings: those where information regarding spurious information is
identifiable and those where such information is unidentifiable. To support our claims, we study both
Vision and Language Tasks. We also move beyond simple binary classification tasks that have been
the focus of all recent works that study spurious correlations. Below, we detail the experimental
design for this paper. Please note that we provide additional details in the Appendix.
T ESTBED

       • CIFAR-10S. We create a testbed based on the CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky, 2009) where
         we synthetically introduce spurious features in a fraction of one class’ (c1) training samples.
         We introduce the same spurious feature in all samples of a different class (c2) during testing.
         The degree of spurious feature reliance is estimated by measuring the number of samples of
         (c2) that are misclassified as (c1) during testing. Since spurious features are synthetically
         introduced, this setting allows us to:
           1. Vary the strength of the spurious feature relative to the core, invariant feature.
           2. Accurately compute the difficulty of learning the core, invariant feature of individual
              training samples before the introduction of spurious features.


                                                     4
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    S1 (Hardest Spurious Feature)                           S2                                              S3 (Easiest Spurious Feature)
                                  100
                                          Easiest Core       100
                                                                     Hardest Core                                                                          Easiest Core               Hardest Core
Spurious Misclassifications (%)


                                                         Spurious Misclassifications (%)


                                                                                                          Spurious Misclassifications (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                    Spurious Misclassifications (%)
                                                                                                                                            100                                100

                                  80                                                       80                                               80                                                                        80

                                  60                                                       60                                               60                                                                        60

                                  40                                                       40                                               40                                                                        40

                                  20                                                       20                                               20                                                                        20

                                   0                                                       0                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                  0   25    50   75   100 125 150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0   25   50   75   100 125 150
                                                                                                                                                             Epochs                                                                  Epochs
                                              (a)                                               (b)                                                            (c)                                                                     (d)

     Figure 2: Introducing spurious features in 100 samples with the easiest core features (Easiest
     Core) causes little to no reliance on spurious features, indicated by low Spurious Misclassifications.
     Introducing the same spurious features in 100 samples with the hardest core features (Hardest
     Core) causes heavy reliance on spurious features, indicated by high Spurious Misclassifications.


                                          Note that in this setting, the spurious feature takes the form of a line running through the
                                          center of the images of class c1 and we vary the strength of the spurious signal by increasing
                                          the region the spurious feature covers or by increasing the proportion of samples that contain
                                          the spurious feature. We note that in each experimental setting studied, we only vary one of
                                          the two factors.

      U NIDENTIFIABLE B ENCHMARKS

                                        • CelebA. (Liu et al., 2015) We utilize the same experimental setting studied in Sec. 3,
                                          where we build a gender classifier in which the Male class is spuriously correlated with
                                          Eyeglasses. The degree of spurious feature reliance is measured based on the testing
                                          accuracy of Female samples with Eyeglasses.
                                        • Hard ImageNet. (Moayeri et al., 2022) The Hard ImageNet dataset is a 15 class classifica-
                                          tion task where all classes have a spurious feature associated with them and certain classes
                                          share similar spurious features. For instance, both Ski and Dog Sled classes contain
                                          similar spurious features (Snow, People, Trees, and Hills). In our experiments, we
                                          measure the degree of spurious feature reliance by measuring the numbers of Dog Sled
                                          samples that are misclassified as Ski during testing. Note that in our experimental setting,
                                          no Skis are misclassified as Dog Sled.

      S TANDARD B ENCHMARKS (I DENTIFIABLE )

                                        • Waterbirds. (Sagawa et al., 2020a) The Waterbirds task is a binary image classification
                                          task where the goal is to classify an image of a bird as landbird or waterbird. We use
                                          the same setting studied in previous works (Sagawa et al., 2020a; Kirichenko et al., 2023),
                                          where the class landbird is spuriously correlated with Land backgrounds while the class
                                          waterbird is spuriously correlated with Water backgrounds.
                                        • MultiNLI. (Williams et al., 2018) The MultiNLI task is a classification task with three
                                          classes where the goal is to classify the second sentence in a pair of sentences as entailed
                                          by, neutral with, or contradicts. Consistent with the setting in Sagawa et al. (2020a), a
                                          large fraction of the contradicts class contains negation words while the other two only
                                          contain a few samples with negation words, making the contradicts class spuriously
                                          correlated with negation words and the other two with the lack thereof.

      E VALUATION .
     Current practice in deep learning utilizes Worst-Group Accuracy (WGA) to assess the degree of
     spurious feature reliance in binary classification tasks. WGA computes the accuracy of test samples
     that contain the spurious feature associated with the other class during training. While suitable
     for simple binary classification tasks, WGA becomes insufficient to asses the reliance on spurious


                                                                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


features in settings with multiple classes. This is because WGA cannot differentiate between loss
in test accuracy due to spurious correlations, or due to lack of learnability of invariant correlations
stemming from limited capacity or insufficient training data. In such settings, we measure the degree
of spurious feature reliance through Spurious Misclassifications, i.e., the percentage of samples of
one class (c2) containing the spurious feature of another class (c1) that are misclassified as (c1)
during testing. Lower Worst Group Accuracy indicates heavy reliance on spurious correlations while
high Worst Group Accuracy indicates little to no reliance on spurious correlations. A high number of
Spurious Misclassifications indicates heavy reliance on spurious correlations while a low number
Spurious Misclassifications indicate little to no reliance on spurious correlations.



5    S PURIOUS C ORRELATIONS ARE L EARNED FROM A F EW K EY S AMPLES

In this section, we aim to form a deeper understanding of the relationship between spurious correla-
tions and standard training paradigms. Deep neural network training relies on the Empirical Risk
Minimization (Vapnik, 1998) principle, where during training, the model attempts to minimize risk
or loss on the training data. From recent works, we understand that spurious correlations are learned
because the network uses these weakly predictive but simple spurious features to further minimize
training risk (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Sagawa et al., 2020a; Geirhos et al., 2020; Kirichenko et al.,
2023). In this section, we attempt to understand if this simple statement encapsulates the entire
relationship between deep neural network training and spurious correlations.
We understand that spurious correlations are learned be-
cause standard training paradigms are prone to accepting           Spurious Misclassifications (%)   100
any features that help minimize risk or loss during training.
However, different samples have different contributions to                                           80
overall training loss due to differences in difficulty of learn-
ing the features used to make correct classification. Does                                           60
this imply that samples containing harder core/invariant
features contribute more to the learning of spurious correla-                                        40
tions? Or do all samples contribute equally to the learning
of spurious correlations, as a network might simply prefer                                           20
a simpler feature over a more complex one?
                                                                                                      0
                                                                        0     10    20       30   40 50
To answer this question, we study a variant of the CIFAR-                        Split Difficulty
10S setting described in Sec. 4. In this experiment, we
first train a ResNet20 on standard CIFAR-10. Early in Figure 3: Spurious feature reliance ex-
training, we compute training error for each sample to hibits super-linear growth with increas-
estimate the difficulty of learning these samples, as is ing sample difficulty.
done in Paul et al. (2021). Such sample-wise training
error is computed as ||p(w, x) − y||2 , where p(w, x) is the
probability distribution given by the network for sample x, w denotes the network parameters early in
training, and y is the one hot encoding of the ground truth value. We specify the epoch at which these
values are computed in the Appendix. Trivially, the greater the error, the more difficult that sample
is to learn. Since the standard CIFAR-10 does not contain significant spurious cues that can impact
difficulty of learning, we estimate the difficulty of learning the core/invariant feature per sample as
the difficulty of learning that sample. Next, we train a ResNet20 on two settings: One where we
introduce the spurious feature in samples with the lowest training error (samples with easy invariant
features) and another where we introduce spurious features in samples with the highest training error
(samples with hard invariant features). We term these settings as Easiest Core and Hardest
Core, respectively. In each setting, we vary the strength of the spurious signal by increasing the
amount of area it takes up in each image. Spurious feature S1 takes up the least amount of area and
is the most difficult to learn while spurious feature S3 takes up the most amount of area and is the
easiest spurious feature to learn. In other words, a network will have less reliance on spurious feature
S1 as it is difficult to learn and more reliance on S3 as it is easier to learn. S2 is in between them.
Note that in both experimental settings, we introduce spurious features in only 100 samples (2% of
class c1, 0.2% of the training set), and thus, we maintain the proportion of samples containing the
spurious features in all settings.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        (1) Pruning Easiest           (2) Pruning Hardest                            (3) Unpruned Dataset
                             100
                                               Higher is Better                                      100
                                                                                                                     Higher is Better
  Worst Group Accuracy (%)
                              80                                                                      80


                                                                                 Test Accuracy (%)
                              60                                                                      60
                              40                                                                      40
                              20                                                                      20
                               0                                                                       0
                                   10     25   40    50 75 90     95 97(%)                                 10   25   40    50 75 90     95 97(%)
                                                    Pruned (%)                                                            Pruned (%)

Figure 4: Excluding only a handful of training samples with spurious features and hard core features
mitigates spurious correlations in the CelebA setting. This is indicated by high Worst Group
Accuracies. Excluding up to 97% of all training samples with spurious features and easy core features
shows no improvements in worst group accuracy.


Samples with simple core features do not contribute to spurious correlations. In the setting
where we introduce spurious features in samples with low training loss (Easiest Core), we find
that Spurious Misclassifications tend to zero (Fig. 2(a)). This is true even if the strength of the
spurious signal is increased. More interestingly, the network learns the spurious features present in
these samples in the first couple of epochs of training but overcomes them as training converges. This
is evidenced by high Spurious Misclassifications in the first half of training followed by low Spurious
Misclassifications in the second half of training, as shown in Fig. 2(c). In other words, the network
learns to ignore weakly predictive but simpler spurious features and prefers strongly predictive but
complex core features in those samples that contain relatively easier invariant features.
Samples with hard core features are primary contributors to spurious correlations. In the
setting where we introduce spurious features in samples with high training loss (Hardest Core),
we find that Spurious Misclassifications are significantly higher, as shown in Fig. 2(b). This is also
true for spurious features that are harder to learn (S1). Unlike what we observe in the previous setting,
the network is unable to overcome the spurious features present in these samples, as we observe that
Spurious Misclassification either remains the same or increases in the second half of training, as
shown in Fig. 2(d). It is important to note that although only 100 of all samples of class c1 contain the
spurious feature (2% of class c1, 0.2% of the training set), almost all samples of class c2 (≈ 100% of
class c2) are spuriously misclassified during testing (Fig. 2(b)). This is in sharp contrast to the setting
where we introduce the same spurious features in samples with easy invariant features (Easiest
Core), where almost none of the samples of class c2 are spuriously misclassified (Fig. 2(a)).
Spurious feature reliance exhibits super-linear growth with increasing sample difficulty. We
extend our original experimental setting to introduce the spurious feature in 100 samples ranging from
the easiest to the hardest, instead of only considering the Easiest and Hardest 100 samples. Intuitively,
as we scale up the difficulty of the 100-sample split to which we inject the spurious features, we
observe an increase in spurious misclassifications, as shown in Fig. 3. Interestingly, we observe that
spurious feature reliance exhibits super-linear growth as we scale up the difficulty of the core features
of the 100 samples, implying that those samples with hard core features contribute significantly more
to spurious feature reliance than those with easy core features.
Excluding a few key samples during training severs spurious correlations. From the experiments
above, we learn that samples with harder core features contribute far more to spurious feature reliance
than samples with easy core features. Consider a setting where spurious features are uniformly
distributed across samples containing easy and hard core features. In such a setting, what if we
simply exclude a handful of the hardest training instances that contain spurious features in them?
Does this simple exclusion sever the learned spurious correlations that would be heavily relied on by
the network? In Fig. 4, we show that by simply excluding a few samples containing the spurious
feature with hard invariant features in the CelebA setting studied in Sec. 3 (10% of all samples
with spurious features in that class, 1% of the total train set), we observe significant improvements
in Worst Group Accuracy (WGA: Test accuracy of Female samples with spurious features). On
the other hand, excluding up to 97% of the easiest samples containing the spurious feature shows


                                                                             7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               (1) Spurious Samples                       (2) Non-Spurious Samples                                                                                   (1) Spurious Samples                      (2) Non-Spurious Samples
                                                   CIFAR-10S (Identifiable);Setting 1                                  CIFAR-10S (Unidentifiable);Setting 2                                                  Waterbirds (Identifiable)                                            CelebA (Unidentifiable)
                        100                                                                                       50                                                                      100                                                                          50
Sample Percentage (%)     80                                                                                      40                                                                       80                                                                          40


                                                                                          Sample Percentage (%)


                                                                                                                                                                  Sample Percentage (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sample Percentage (%)
                          60                                                                                      30                                                                       60                                                                          30

                          40                                                                                      20                                                                       40                                                                          20

                          20                                                                                      10                                                                       20                                                                          10

                                0                                                                                  0                                                                          0                                                                         0
                                                 Q1          Q2        Q3       Q4                                       Q1        Q2       Q3       Q4                                                  Q1        Q2       Q3       Q4                                       Q1        Q2      Q3       Q4
                                               (Easiest)                     (Hardest)                                 (Easiest)                  (Hardest)                                            (Easiest)                  (Hardest)                                 (Easiest)                 (Hardest)

(a) Training distribution variance based on the strength (b) Training distribution variance based on strength
of the spurious feature in CIFAR-10S Testbed. Grouped of spurious feature in identifiable and unidentifiable
by Quartiles, sorted by difficulty.                      settings. Grouped by Quartiles, sorted by difficulty.

                                                                        Figure 5: Impact of strength of spurious signal on sample difficulty.

                                                                  (1) Pruning Easiest                                                         (2) Pruning Hardest                                                                    (3) Unpruned Dataset

                                                   80
                                                                                Higher is Better                                                                                                       100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Higher is Better
                                                   70
                        Worst Group Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                        80
                                                   60
                                                   50                                                                                                                              Test Accuracy (%)    60
                                                   40
                                                   30                                                                                                                                                   40
                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                   10
                                                    0                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                             10       25       40        50 75 90                                   95 97(%)                                                                       10      25       40       50 75 90                                   95 97(%)
                                                                                        Pruned (%)                                                                                                                                          Pruned (%)

 Figure 6: Excluding a small fraction of all hardest samples in the dataset mitigates spurious correla-
 tions in the CelebA setting. This is indicated by high Worst Group Accuracies.


 no improvements in WGA. Within the pool of samples containing spurious features, difficulty of
 learning the invariant feature is similar to the difficulty of learning the sample. This is because
 spurious features in our settings exhibit very low variance. For instance, in the MultiNLI setting, the
 spurious feature comprises the same set of negation words across the training data. Additionally, we
 note that on pruning these samples, we do not observe significant drops in overall testing accuracies,
 implying that these samples do not contribute significantly to generalizability either (Fig. 4).

  6                                            S EVERING S PURIOUS C ORRELATIONS WITH DATA P RUNING
 Based on the observations presented above, we develop a novel data pruning method to sever learned
 spurious correlations by identifying and pruning subsets of the training data that contain the few key
 samples that contribute to spurious feature reliance. To do so, we first understand how the presence
 of spurious features impacts the difficulty of learning a sample in the training set and how it impacts
 the training distribution when observed through the lens of sample difficulty.

  6.1                                               T HE IMPACT OF SPURIOUS FEATURES ON TRAINING DISTRIBUTION

Consider the CIFAR-10S setting described in Sec. 4. We create two versions of this setting: Setting
1: the strength of the spurious signal is significantly greater than the strength of the core, invariant
signal; Setting 2: the strength of the spurious signal is only marginally greater than the strength of
its invariant counterpart. In Setting 2, spurious information is unattainable/unidentifiable. In both
settings, we introduce spurious features into samples at random such that both samples with easy
and hard core features contain spurious features in them. We observe in Setting 1, almost all of the
samples that contain the spurious feature lie in the first half of the data distribution when observed
through the lens of sample difficulty. In Setting 2, however, samples containing spurious features are


                                                                                                                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


distributed uniformly (Fig. 5a). Note that in both settings, spurious misclassifications are significant
(58.0% and 13.76% in Setting 1 and Setting 2, respectively).
We extend these findings to the bench-
marks discussed in Sec. 4. In settings
where the strength of the spurious signal
                                                                                               (1) Pruning Easiest                            (2) Pruning Hardest
                                                                                               (3) Unpruned Dataset
is significantly greater than the strength
                                                                                              Lower is Better                                 Higher is Better


                                                   Spurious Misclassifications (%)
of the invariant feature, (Identifiable                                              35                                                 100
settings), samples containing the spu-                                                                                                   80


                                                                                                                    Test Accuracy (%)
rious feature occupy a large majority of the                                         30
first half of the training distribution. On                                                                                              60
                                                                                     25
the other hand, in the unidentifiable bench-                                                                                             40
marks, samples containing spurious fea-                                              20                                                  20
tures are uniformly distributed across the                                           15                                                   0
training distribution when viewed through                                                     4 6.66 10 20(%)                                 4 6.66 10 20(%)
                                                                                                Pruned (%)                                      Pruned (%)
the lens of sample difficulty (Fig. 5b). Note
that since Hard ImageNet has multiple spu-
                                                     Figure 7: Excluding a small fraction of all hardest sam-
rious features, we show that this setting is
                                                     ples in the dataset mitigates spurious correlations in the
unidentifiable by showing images with and
                                                     Hard ImageNet setting. This is indicated by low Spuri-
without these spurious features spread uni-
                                                     ous Misclassifications.
formly across the difficulty spectrum in the
Appendix.

6.2    DATA PRUNING IN UNIDENTIFIABLE SETTINGS

From Sec. 6.1, we observe that in settings where the strength of the spurious signal is not significantly
greater than the strength of the invariant signal, i.e. in settings where attaining information regarding
the sample-wise presence of spurious features is impossible, samples containing spurious features
are uniformly distributed across the training distribution when observed through sample difficulty.
In other words, the presence of spurious features does not have a significant impact on the training
distribution. We also know that samples containing hard core features that also contain the spurious
feature are primary contributors to the learning of spurious correlations. Thus, to mitigate spurious
correlations without knowing which samples have spurious features in them, one would only have to
prune the hardest samples in the training set, as this subset of the data would contain samples with
spurious features that have hard core features.
In Figs. 6 and 7, we show that by simply pruning a small subset of the hardest samples in the training
set, one can overcome spurious correlations. Note that instead of pruning the hardest samples globally,
we prune an equal proportion of the hardest samples per class to account for differences in difficulty
per class. Most importantly, we do not perform any hyperparameter-tuning. Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz
(2021) demonstrate that state-of-the-art techniques fail without hyperparameter-tuning with the help
of a validation split that mimics test-time distribution. Our data pruning technique shows promising
results without any hyperparameter tuning.


Table 1: We present Worst Group and Mean accuracies. Consistent with literature, Mean accuracy
is reported by weighting groups based on their prevalence in the unpruned training dataset. Simple
data pruning attains state-of-the-art performance on standard benchmarks (Identifiable Settings). The
group labels column represents the availability of group labels in training and validation sets.

                                          Waterbirds (%)                                                   MultiNLI (%)                              Group Labels
              Method                    Worst%                                            Mean%          Worst %                          Mean%      Train       Val
              ERM                    74.81 (0.7)                             98.10 (0.1)               65.9 (0.3)                       82.8 (0.1)       ✗        ✗
      CnC (Zhang et al., 2022)        88.5 (0.3)                              90.9 (0.1)                        -                                -       ✗        ✓
       JTT (Liu et al., 2021)              86.7                                    93.3                     72.6                             78.6        ✗        ✓
   gDRO (Sagawa et al., 2020a)              86.0                       93.2                                  77.7                   81.4                 ✓        ✓
  DFRTr (Kirichenko et al., 2023)     90.2 (0.8)                 97.0 (0.3)                            71.5 (0.6)             82.5 (0.2)                 ✓        ✓
     PDE (Deng et al., 2023)          90.3 (0.3)                 92.4 (0.8)                                     -                      -                 ✓        ✓
              Ours                  90.93 (0.58)               92.48 (0.72)                          75.88 (1.62)           81.07 (0.25)                 ✓        ✓



                                                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6.3   DATA PRUNING IN IDENTIFIABLE SETTINGS

Unlike in unidentifiable settings, in
settings where the strength of the spu-                 Waterbirds                       MultiNLI
rious signal is significantly greater         100                           100
                                                           SOTA


                                         Worst Group Accuracy (%)


                                                                         Worst Group Accuracy (%)
than the strength of the invariant sig-        90                            90
nal, samples with spurious features
are not uniformly distributed when             80          ERM
                                                                             80            SOTA
sorted by sample difficulty. This is be-       70                            70            ERM
cause the presence of strong spurious
information enables the network to             60                            60
have lower training errors for samples         50                            50
with hard core features and spurious
                                               40                            40
features. In such settings, it is not fea-           25     50 75(%)               20      25 33.33(%)
sible to simply prune the hardest sam-                  Prune (%)                      Prune (%)
ples of the training data as this will
primarily prune samples that do not Figure 8: Our data pruning approach is effective across a
contain the spurious features (Figs. 5a wide range of sparsities. Sparsities reported before class bal-
& 5b). Liu et al. (2021); Zhang et al. ancing, if applicable. We report SOTA results for Waterbirds
(2022); Yang et al. (2024) show that and MultiNLI from Kirichenko et al. (2023) and Sagawa et al.
in settings where the strength of the (2020a), respectively. Note that Kirichenko et al. (2023) ob-
spurious signal is significantly greater tain state-of-the-art results on Waterbirds with the help of
                                                                                     Val
than the strength of the invariant sig- a held-out group balanced dataset (DFR ) and thus, we
nal, it is possible to identify which exclude it from our comparison in Table 1.
samples and groups contain spurious
features in them and which ones do not. For such identifiable settings, our approach works with group
labels as is done in Kirichenko et al. (2023); Deng et al. (2023) and simply prunes those samples
containing the hardest core features within groups containing the spurious feature associated with
each class. As shown in Table 1, we attain state-of-the-art performances. Note that in settings with
heavy class imbalances, such as Waterbirds, we prune such that the total number of samples in both
classes is the same. We also compare our method with two popular techniques that make use of
inferred sample-wise spurious information during training, JTT (Liu et al., 2021) and CnC (Zhang
et al., 2022). It is interesting to note that such data pruning attains state-of-the-art performances
across a wide range of pruning sparsities, as observed in Fig. 8. This suggests, in addition to all
previously observed results, that if one wants to ensure that the model they obtain after training is
robust to spurious correlations, they only need to remove a few training instances that are hard for
the network to understand. This is in contrast to existing methods that mitigate spurious correlations
which are more complex and at times, computationally expensive (Sagawa et al., 2020b; Ahmed
et al., 2021; Ye et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Kirichenko et al., 2023; Moayeri et al., 2023; Deng
et al., 2023).

7     C ONCLUSION
Summary. We have shown that, in practice, extracting domain knowledge and information regarding
the presence and nature of spurious features is often difficult. This renders all existing techniques
that show promise in overcoming spurious correlations as ineffective. We also discover that spurious
correlations are formed due to only a small fraction of all samples containing the spurious feature
and develop a novel data pruning technique that overcomes spurious correlations by pruning a small
subset of the training data that contains these samples. Finally, we show that such data pruning attains
state-of-the-art performance on standard benchmarks where information regarding spurious features
is easily available.
Outlook. With current practice of training models on increasing large datasets, it has become critical
to develop techniques that identify samples that can cause these models to malfunction without
requiring human intervention. In the future, we will further develop this work to take into account
other failure modes that are commonly exhibited by these deep neural networks.


                                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Faruk Ahmed, Yoshua Bengio, Harm van Seijen, and Aaron C. Courville. Systematic generalisation
  with group invariant predictions. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021.
Martı́n Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 CoRR, abs/1907.02893, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.02893.
Elliot Creager, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, and Richard S. Zemel. Environment inference for invariant
  learning. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 2189–2200. PMLR, 2021.
Yihe Deng, Yu Yang, Baharan Mirzasoleiman, and Quanquan Gu. Robust learning with
  progressive data expansion against spurious correlation. In Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann,
  Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16,
  2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  0506ad3d1bcc8398a920db9340f27fe4-Abstract-Conference.html.
Vitaly Feldman and Chiyuan Zhang. What neural networks memorize and why: Discovering the
  long tail via influence estimation. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell,
  Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020,
  December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel, Matthias
  Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature Machine
  Intelligence, 2(11):665–673, 2020.
Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
   id=lQdXeXDoWtI.
Muyang He, Shuo Yang, Tiejun Huang, and Bo Zhao. Large-scale dataset pruning with dynamic
 uncertainty. CoRR, abs/2306.05175, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2306.05175. URL https:
 //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.05175.
Badr Youbi Idrissi, Martin Arjovsky, Mohammad Pezeshki, and David Lopez-Paz. Simple data
  balancing achieves competitive worst-group-accuracy. In Bernhard Schölkopf, Caroline Uhler,
  and Kun Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the First Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning,
  volume 177 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 336–351. PMLR, 11–13 Apr 2022.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v177/idrissi22a.html.
Saachi Jain, Hannah Lawrence, Ankur Moitra, and Aleksander Madry. Distilling model failures as
  directions in latent space. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=99RpBVpLiX.
Polina Kirichenko, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Last layer re-training is sufficient
  for robustness to spurious correlations. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=Zb6c8A-Fghk.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Evan Zheran Liu, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie S. Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori
  Sagawa, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Just train twice: Improving group robustness without
  training group information. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event,
  volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6781–6792. PMLR, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhuang Liu, Mingjie Sun, Tinghui Zhou, Gao Huang, and Trevor Darrell. Rethinking the value
  of network pruning. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019,
  New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=rJlnB3C5Ym.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2015, Santiago, Chile, December
  7-13, 2015, pp. 3730–3738. IEEE Computer Society, 2015. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2015.425. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2015.425.
Mazda Moayeri, Sahil Singla, and Soheil Feizi. Hard imagenet: Segmentations for objects with
 strong spurious cues. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Mazda Moayeri, Wenxiao Wang, Sahil Singla, and Soheil Feizi. Spuriosity rankings: Sorting data
 to measure and mitigate biases. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=jSuhnO9QJv.
Depen Morwani, jatin batra, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. Simplicity bias in 1-hidden layer
  neural networks. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PTvxck0QDE.
Vaishnavh Nagarajan, Anders Andreassen, and Behnam Neyshabur. Understanding the failure modes
  of out-of-distribution generalization. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan,
 Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas
  Köpf, Edward Z. Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy,
  Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer,
  Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019,
 NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 8024–8035, 2019.
Mansheej Paul, Surya Ganguli, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Deep learning on a data diet: Finding
 important examples early in training. In Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N.
 Dauphin, Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021,
 NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual, pp. 20596–20607, 2021.
Mohammad Pezeshki, Diane Bouchacourt, Mark Ibrahim, Nicolas Ballas, Pascal Vincent, and David
 Lopez-Paz. Discovering environments with XRM. In Forty-first International Conference on
 Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=gPStP3FSY9.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis
  Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020a.
Shiori Sagawa, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang. An investigation of why
  overparameterization exacerbates spurious correlations. In Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8346–8356. PMLR, 2020b.
Harshay Shah, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. The pitfalls
  of simplicity bias in neural networks. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell,
  Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020,
  December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.
Nimit Sharad Sohoni, Jared Dunnmon, Geoffrey Angus, Albert Gu, and Christopher Ré. No
  subclass left behind: Fine-grained robustness in coarse-grained classification problems. In Hugo
  Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ben Sorscher, Robert Geirhos, Shashank Shekhar, Surya Ganguli, and Ari Morcos. Beyond neural
  scaling laws: beating power law scaling via data pruning. In Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed,
  A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022,
  NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022, 2022.
Rishabh Tiwari and Pradeep Shenoy. Overcoming simplicity bias in deep networks using a feature
  sieve. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato,
  and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29
  July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  34330–34343. PMLR, 2023.
Mariya Toneva, Alessandro Sordoni, Remi Tachet des Combes, Adam Trischler, Yoshua Bengio,
 and Geoffrey J. Gordon. An empirical study of example forgetting during deep neural network
 learning. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans,
 LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
Dimitris Tsipras, Shibani Santurkar, Logan Engstrom, Alexander Turner, and Aleksander Madry.
  Robustness may be at odds with accuracy. In 7th International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
Vladimir Vapnik. Statistical learning theory. Wiley, 1998. ISBN 978-0-471-03003-4.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for
  sentence understanding through inference. In Marilyn Walker, Heng Ji, and Amanda Stent
 (eds.), Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp.
 1112–1122, New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/N18-1101. URL https://aclanthology.org/N18-1101.
Yu Yang, Eric Gan, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, and Baharan Mirzasoleiman. Identifying spurious
  biases early in training through the lens of simplicity bias. In Sanjoy Dasgupta, Stephan Mandt,
  and Yingzhen Li (eds.), International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2-4 May
  2024, Palau de Congressos, Valencia, Spain, volume 238 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
  search, pp. 2953–2961. PMLR, 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v238/
  yang24c.html.
Haotian Ye, James Zou, and Linjun Zhang. Freeze then train: Towards provable representation
  learning under spurious correlations and feature noise. CoRR, abs/2210.11075, 2022. doi:
 10.48550/arXiv.2210.11075.
Michael Zhang, Nimit Sharad Sohoni, Hongyang R. Zhang, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher Ré.
 Correct-n-contrast: a contrastive approach for improving robustness to spurious correlations. In
 Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato
 (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore,
 Maryland, USA, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 26484–26516.
 PMLR, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   T RAINING D ETAILS

CIFAR-10S. We use the ResNet20 implementation from Liu et al. (2019) that we train for 160
epochs. The network is optimized using SGD with an initial learning rate 1e-1 and weight decay 1e-4.
The learning rate drops to 1e-2 and 1e-3 at epochs 80 and 120 respectively. We maintain a batch size
of 64. Sample difficulty is computed after the 10th epoch.
CelebA. We use an ImageNet pre-trained ResNet-50 from PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) that we
train for 25 epochs. The network is optimized using SGD with a static learning rate 1e-3 and weight
decay 1e-4. We maintain a batch size of 64. Sample difficulty is computed after the 10th epoch.
Hard Image-Net. We use an ImageNet pre-trained ResNet-50 from PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019)
that we train for 50 epochs. The network is optimized using SGD with a static learning rate 1e-3
and weight decay 1e-4. We maintain a batch size of 128. Sample difficulty is computed after the 1st
epoch.
Waterbirds. We use an ImageNet pre-trained ResNet-50 from PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) that we
train for 100 epochs. The network is optimized using SGD with a static learning rate 1e-3 and weight
decay 1e-3. We maintain a batch size of 128. Sample difficulty is computed after the 1st epoch.
MultiNLI. We use a pre-trained BERT model that we train for 20 epochs. The network is optimized
using AdamW using a linearly decaying starting learning rate 2e-5. We maintain a batch size of 32.
Sample difficulty is computed after the 5th epoch.

A.2   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

CIFAR-10S. We follow a similar approach to Nagarajan et al. (2021) for adding a spurious line
where pixel values for a vertical row of pixels in the middle of the first channel are set to the
maximum possible value (255) before normalization and before any augmentations. We use the same
augmentations generally used for training on the original CIFAR-10 Krizhevsky (2009).
CelebA. In this setting, we maintain 5000 Female Samples without Eyeglasses and 2500 Male sam-
ples with Eyeglasses and 2500 Male samples without Eyeglasses. Consistent with implementations
in Sagawa et al. (2020a); Liu et al. (2021), we do not use any augmentations.
Hard ImageNet. In this setting, we maintain 59 Dog Sled samples with minimal spurious features
and 100 Ski samples randomly drawn from the dataset. All remaining classes are maintained the
same. We use the same augmentations used for training on ImageNet.
Waterbirds. We use the original Waterbirds setting commonly used in practice (Sagawa et al.,
2020a; Liu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Kirichenko et al., 2023). We use the augmentations used
in Kirichenko et al. (2023) when training, which are similar to the augmentations used for training on
ImageNet.
MultiNLI. We use the original MultiNLI setting commonly used in practice (Sagawa et al., 2020a;
Liu et al., 2021; Kirichenko et al., 2023). Consistent with implementations in Sagawa et al. (2020a);
Liu et al. (2021); Kirichenko et al. (2023), we do not use any augmentations.

A.3   H ARD I MAGE N ET: V ERIFYING U NIDENTIFABILITY

We show that our Hard ImageNet setting is an unidentifiable setting by presenting information similar
to Fig. 5a and Fig. 5b. But since there exist multiple spurious features, namely Snow, People,
Trees, and Hills, we simply show that samples that contain these features and those that do not
are scattered uniformly across the difficulty spectrum (Fig. 9).


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Training distribution variance based on strength of spurious feature in identifiable and
unidentifiable settings.



A.4   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS WITH M ULTI NLI

In this section, we reinforce our claims and observations by re-conducting specific vision experiments
in the language domain.
Spurious Correlations are formed from a few key samples. To show this, we perform the same
experiment in Section 4, but instead of CIFAR-10S, we use the MultiNLI dataset. First, we remove all
samples with negation words from the training data and then we compute the sample-wise difficulty
scores as we do for CIFAR-10S in Section 4. We then create two settings: one where we introduce
the spurious negation word “never” at the end of the 100 hardest input samples belonging to class 1
(contradicts) and another where we introduce the spurious negation word “never” at the end of
the 100 easiest input samples belonging to class 1 (contradicts). We do the same to a set of test
samples belonging to class 2 (neutral with) and class 3 (entailed by).
Consistent with the standard MultiNLI setting, we measure the degree of spurious feature reliance
through Worst Group Accuracy (accuracy of the set of test samples of class 2 or class 3 with the
spurious feature).
We observe that WGA is significantly worse when the word “never” occurs in the hardest samples vs.
the easiest samples during training.
Introducing the spurious feature in easiest 100 samples: WGA = 55.22%
Introducing the spurious feature in hardest 100 samples: WGA = 1.04%
Additionally, we note that there are 191,504 training samples in this setting. There are 57,498 samples
belonging to the contradicts class. We introduce the spurious feature in only 100 samples of the
contradicts class (0.17% of samples within the class, 0.0522% of all samples in the training set.)
We also observe that in a setting with no spurious features during training, Worst Group Accuracy is
67.42%.
This experiment reinforces the claim that samples with hard core features are primary contributors
to spurious correlations and that samples with simple core features do not contribute to spurious
correlations.
Excluding a few key samples during training severs spurious correlations. In the MultiNLI
setting, we observe that pruning the samples with hard core features and spurious features attains high
worst group accuracy. On the other hand, excluding samples with easy core features and spurious
features does not improve worst group accuracy. Note that we do not perform any hyperparameter
tuning.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 (1) Pruning Easiest                                                       (2) Pruning Hardest                              (3) Unpruned Dataset
                                              80
                                                   Higher is Better                                                 100
                                                                                                                              Higher is Better


                   Worst Group Accuracy (%)
                                              75                                                                     80


                                                                                                Test Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                     60
                                              70
                                                                                                                     40
                                              65                                                                     20
                                              60                                                                      0
                                                   20         25 33.33(%)                                                    20       25 33.33(%)
                                                          Pruned (%)                                                              Pruned (%)

Figure 10: Excluding a fraction of all samples with hard core features and spurious features mitigates
spurious correlations in the MultiNLI setting. This is indicated by high Worst Group Accuracies.
                                                        (1) Spurious Samples                                              (2) Non-Spurious Samples
                                                                                               MutliNLI
                                                                                50

                                                                                40
                                                        Sample Percentage (%)


                                                                                30

                                                                                20

                                                                                10

                                                                                 0
                                                                                       Q1      Q2                    Q3      Q4
                                                                                     (Easiest)                            (Hardest)

Figure 11: Training distribution variance based on strength of spurious feature in identifiable and
unidentifiable settings. Grouped by Quartiles, sorted by difficulty.

Distribution of the MultiNLI dataset. We show the distribution of the MultiNLI dataset, an
extension of Fig. 5b. Q1 in this setting contains almost half of all samples with spurious features
while Q4 only contains 15%. This shows that samples with spurious features are not uniformly
distributed when viewed through the lens of sample difficulty. This is in contrast to the CelebA setting
(Unidentifiable), in which samples with spurious features are uniformly distributed (Fig. 5b (right)).


                                                                                                           16
