Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


RuAG: L EARNED - RULE - AUGMENTED G ENERATION
FOR L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

                  ∗                                   †                                              †
Yudi Zhang1 , Pei Xiao2* , Lu Wang3 , Chaoyun Zhang3 , Meng Fang4 , Yali Du5 ,
Yevgeniy Puzyrev3 , Randolph Yao3 , Si Qin3 , Qingwei Lin3 , Mykola Pechenizkiy1 ,
Dongmei Zhang3 , Saravan Rajmohan3 , Qi Zhang3
1
    Eindhoven University of Technology 2 Peking University                                3
                                                                                              Microsoft
4
    University of Liverpool 5 King’s College London



                                                              A BSTRACT

             In-context learning (ICL) and Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) have
             gained attention for their ability to enhance LLMs’ reasoning by incorporating
             external knowledge but suffer from limited contextual window size, leading to in-
             sufficient information injection. To this end, we propose a novel framework RuAG
             to automatically distill large volumes of offline data into interpretable first-order
             logic rules, which are injected into LLMs to boost their reasoning capabilities.
             Our method begins by formulating the search process relying on LLMs’ com-
             monsense, where LLMs automatically define head and body predicates. Then,
             RuAG applies Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to address the combinational
             searching space and efficiently discover logic rules from data. The resulting logic
             rules are translated into natural language, allowing targeted knowledge injection
             and seamless integration into LLM prompts for LLM’s downstream task reason-
             ing. We evaluate our framework on public and private industrial tasks, including
             natural language processing, time-series, decision-making, and industrial tasks,
             demonstrating its effectiveness in enhancing LLM’s capability over diverse tasks.
             Project link: https://github.com/microsoft/RuAG.


1        I NTRODUCTION

            How to learn from                                  (a) Supervised Fine-Tuning: Parameter Tuning
             external data?
                                                                                                                     Computational Cost
                                 Inserted knowledge


                                                        Rule         Temperature ≥ 30 AND … ⇒ Sunny
                                                      Learning        Wind_speed ≥ 20 OR …. ⇒ Rainy
                      External
                        Data                                 (b) Ours: Learnable-rule-augmented generation


                                                                     Handcraft/Retrieved Demos

                                                          (c) In-Context Learning / Retrieval-augmented generation


Figure 1: Comparison of supervised fine-tuning, in-context learning/retrieval-augmented generation,
and our proposed learned-rule-augmented generation (RuAG), which injects logic knowledge to
boost generation while reducing computational cost.

Leveraging external datasets to enhance the performance of pretrained Large Language Models
(LLMs) on downstream tasks has become a significant focus in recent research (Brown et al., 2020a;
Hu et al.; Fan et al., 2024; Dong et al., 2022). Methods such as supervised fine-tuning (SFT) (Hu
et al., 2021; Li & Liang, 2021), in-context learning (ICL) (Dong et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2020;
Ravi & Larochelle, 2016; Chan et al., 2022; Fang et al., 2024), retrieval-augmented generation
     ∗
         Equal contribution. Work done during the internship of Yudi and Pei in Microsoft.
     †
         Correspondence to: Lu Wang <wlu@microsoft.com>, Meng Fang <Meng.Fang@liverpool.ac.uk>.


                                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(RAG) (Izacard et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2024), and the utilization of knowledge graphs (KGs) (Pan
et al., 2024; Shu et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024) have been explored to incorporate external knowl-
edge into LLMs (Ding et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024), enhancing their reasoning and decision-
making capabilities.
Despite these advancements, these methods face notable challenges. Fine-tuning large LLMs on
extensive datasets is computationally intensive and time-consuming, often leading to overfitting and
catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989). ICL relies on handcrafted demonstrations and
templates that may not effectively summarize large volumes of data, leading to inefficiencies and
the “needle in a haystack” problem when processing long contexts (Li et al., 2024), and the ex-
tremely long context window significantly increases computational costs (Peng et al., 2024; Naveed
et al., 2023). RAG depends heavily on the quality and relevance of retrieved documents and faces
computational hurdles when integrating large-scale retrieval into prompts (Fan et al., 2024). Thus,
RAG is not able to use the whole of vast knowledge base. KG-based methods incorporate structured
representations of knowledge to improve LLMs’ understanding and reasoning (Pan et al., 2024; Shu
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024). While KGs can enhance decision-making by providing explicit
relational data, constructing and maintaining them requires significant manual effort and domain
expertise, making scalability challenging.
These challenges underscore the urgent need                          Body Predicates               Targe Predicates
for efficient knowledge transformation to en-
                                                      Temperature ≥ 30 AND         Humidity < 50 ⇒      Sunny
hance LLMs’ understanding. Logic rules,
with their high information density, act as a         Wind_speed ≥ 20 AND Cloud_coverage ≥ 80 ⇒ Rain Expected

promising bridge between vast, diverse data                       Logical connective
types (including numerical, textual, and vi- Figure 2: Illustration of logic rules, which are uti-
sual data) and LLMs’ understanding. Previ- lized to guide LLMs’ generation in this paper.
ous work has demonstrated their learnability from external data and their efficiency in providing
explanations to enable transparent AI processes (Qu & Tang, 2019; Qu et al.). A logic rule, as
shown in Figure 2, typically expressed as α → h, indicates that if a set of events α (referred to
as body predicates) occurs, then the event h (called the target predicate) will also occur. As an
example, the logic rule “Temperature(1)≥
                                       Retrieval-Augmented
                                          30 AND Humidity ≤ 50 → Sunny Day” represents knowl-
                                          Generation
edge in symbolic structures, suitable for learning from data. Additionally, this rule can be easily
translated into natural language: “If the temperature is 30 degrees or higher and the humidity is
50 percent or lower, it will be a sunny day.” Logic rules are understandable to both humans and
LLMs as they encapsulate complex relationships in a concise, structured form. Unlike lengthy text
passages or extensive datasets in ICL and RAG, logic rules distill essential information into clear,
interpretable statements. Compared to the complex node-and-edge structure of KGs, logic rules re-
duce cognitive load and align better with LLMs’ natural language training. Their direct translation
into natural language further improves alignment with LLMs, facilitating more efficient processing
and understanding.
Inspired by this, we propose a novel framework, learned-rule-augmented generation (RuAG), to
automatically compress large external data into logic rules through LLM-aided Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) (Świechowski et al., 2023) and then inform LLMs domain expertise by applying
translated logic rules into prompts. Our framework consists of the following three phases. LLM-
based Logic Rule Search Formulation: Learning logic rules is expensive due to the involved hu-
man effort in formulating the domain-specific search process. Therefore, we automate this process
by relying on LLMs’ commonsense to define the target and body predicates in logic rules. First, the
target predicate is defined to be task-relevant, like a class label in a classification task or a game state
labeled as “win”, while the body predicates are initialized as all the data attributions in the dataset.
Then, given the task and dataset descriptions, LLM generates new target predicates and eliminates
most irrelevant data attributions from the body predicates. For example, in navigation, LLMs may
infer some special place as the key steps to the destination and suggest to search the rules for agents
reaching the places individually. Also, LLMs may regard some data attributes as irrelevant to the
target predicate, thus excluding them from the candidates. Consequently, the logic rule search space
can be significantly reduced, and a domain-specific search process can be automatically established.
Logic Rule Search with MCTS: Searching rules requires to discover the relationship among the
predicates, suffering from the compositional search space (Qu & Tang, 2019; Zhang et al., 2020;
Evans & Grefenstette, 2018). To this end, RuAG exploits MCTS, which works well in large search
spaces, to generate structured and understandable first-order logic rules, which are applied in the


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


rule-based generation phase. Learned-Rule-Augmented Generation: RuAG translates the abstract
logic rules into natural language and injects them into LLMs’ prompts. By addressing the limitations
of SFT, ICL, RAG, and KG-based methods, RuAG offers a scalable and computationally efficient
solution for integrating extensive domain knowledge into LLMs, improving LLM’s reasoning, com-
prehension, and task performance with minimal manual intervention.
Our contributions are fourfold. First, we introduce a novel learned-rule-augmented generation
framework as a potential alternative to SFT, ICL, RAG, and KG-based methods. This framework
systematically and nearly automatically compresses external knowledge into compact, interpretable
logic rules that prioritize enhancing LLM generation. Second, we propose an automated formulation
for MCTS, eliminating the need for manual, domain-specific rule search and enabling a generaliz-
able approach applicable across a wide range of tasks. Third, we apply MCTS to efficiently handle
the large compositional search space of logic rule discovery. Fourth, we evaluate our framework
across diverse scenarios, including public tasks in NLP (relation extraction on DWIE), time-series
(log anomaly detection on HDFS), decision-making (the cooperative game Alice and Bob), and an
industrial task in abuse detection, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach in both academic
and real-world settings.


2   R ELATED W ORK

In this section, we review the most relevant topics related to our work, including the techniques to
exploit external data in LLMs and logic rule learning.
External data usage in LLMs. There are several ways to inject external knowledge into large lan-
guage models. The most common way is distilling knowledge from external data, but it suffers from
high computational costs (Xu et al., 2024; Gu et al.; Zhang et al., 2025). In-context learning (Brown
et al., 2020a) prompts LLMs with a few handcrafted demonstrations which are understandable for
the LLMs. More fancy, Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)(Chen et al., 2024a) complements
LLMs by retrieved relevant knowledge from external databases (Li et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2024c) or constructing demonstrations for in-context learning (ICL) (Poesia et al., 2022;
Agrawal et al., 2023), showing promise in tasks like OpenQA (Borgeaud et al., 2022; Guu et al.,
2020) and games (Zhu et al., 2023a; Hu et al., 2024). Knowledge graphs are welcome in external
knowledge formats as well, especially in structured tasks like relation extraction and entity recogni-
tion (Shu et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024), improving task-specific decisions. Recent research also
investigates how LLMs can summarize logic rules from large datasets to serve as a knowledge stor-
age (Zhu et al., 2023b; Luo et al., 2023), but shows high computational costs due to frequent calls
to commercial LLMs (Brown et al., 2020b; OpenAI, 2023).
Logic rule learning. Logic rules are increasingly employed to enhance the interpretability and ac-
curacy of decision-making in AI systems (Chiu et al., 2023; An et al., 2024). Manually defined logic
rules have been used to describe how certain events or outcomes are triggered by predefined condi-
tions. However, this process is labor-intensive and highly domain-dependent (Evans & Grefenstette,
2018; Li et al., 2020). Researchers have explored automatic methods for extracting logic rules, such
as statistical approaches and likelihood estimation (Cheng et al., 2022; Qu et al.; Ru et al., 2021).
Despite these advances, the process still involves extensive domain knowledge and commonsense
reasoning, requiring expert intervention to identify the candidate target and body predicates.


3   E NHANCE LLM S ’ REASONING THROUGH APPLYING LOGIC RULES
In this section, we introduce RuAG, our novel approach to augment Large Language Models (LLMs)
with logic rules learned from pre-collected training data. Instead of directly fine-tuning the LLM—
which can be costly and prone to overfitting—or using retrieval-augmented generation limited by
input length, we transform the data into concise logic rules. These rules encapsulate essential pat-
terns and guide the LLM during generation, enhancing performance and interpretability.
As shown in Figure 3, RuAG comprises three key steps: 1) LLM-Based Logic Rule Search For-
mulation: leverage the LLM to automatically formulate the logic rule learning problem, defining
predicates, actions, states, and rewards. (Section 3.1) 2) Logic Rule Search with Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS): employ MCTS to efficiently search for effective logic rules based on the


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   LLM-based Logic Rule Search Formulation                    Learned-Rule
                                Target predicate                                                          Augumented Generation
                                                                   Body predicate                      Input:
                                 Task-related: Obtain 📦
                                                                    Remove impossible ones:            You are 𝓐, your task is to collaborate
                                 LLM suggests more:
                                                                     Predicate 1: Visit(𝓑, ◼) ✔        with 𝓑 to ﬁnd 📦 in the game.
                                    Stand(𝓐, ◼), Stand(𝓐 , ◼)
                                    Stand(𝓑, ◼), Stand(𝓑,◼)          Predicate 2: Visit(𝓐,◼) ✔         Here are some logic rules you may ﬁnd
                                   Stand(𝓑,◼), Reward = -10.0        Predicate 3: IsBoy(𝓑) ✘           helpful:
  Pre-collected data



                          A rule 𝑳: A set of Body Predicates → Target Predicate                        - Rule 1: If 𝓐 visited ◼ and her
                                                                                                       horizonal distance to 📦 is -6, then 𝓐
                                                                  Logic Rule Search with MCTS          stands on ◼.
                        Given target predicate: Stand(𝓐,◼）                                             - Rule 2: If 𝓑 visited ◼ and his vertical
                         State: a rule 𝑳 = some body predicates: [Visit(𝓐,◼) , DisX(𝓐, 📦)=-6,…]        distance to 📦 is -2, then 𝓑 stands on
                         Action: add a new predicate into 𝑳: [Visit, DisX, …]← DisY(𝓑, 📦)=-2           ◼.
                         Reward: F1-score of applying the rule 𝑳 in the pre-collected data             - Rule 3: If ….

                                                                          Searched Logic Rule Set       [Current Observation]
                                    Visit(𝓐, ◼) 1. Visit(𝓐, ◼) & DisX(𝓐, 📦)=-6 & … →Stand(𝓐,◼)          Please response with ….
                                                2. Visit(𝓑, ◼) & DisY(𝓑, 📦)=-2 & … →Stand(𝓑, ◼)
                                                3. …                                                    Response: turn left, as …
                           DisX(𝓐, 📦)=-6

     𝓐 : Alice               𝓑: Bob 📦 : Treasure        ◼◼◼ Blocks with diYerent colors    Stand(𝓐, ◼)/Visit(𝓐, ◼): if 𝓐 stands on/visited ◼
                            DisX(𝓐, 📦)=-6: if 𝓐’s horizonal distance to 📦 is -6   DisY(𝓑, 📦)=-2: if 𝓑’s vertical distance to 📦 is -2.

Figure 3: The framework of our novel learned-rule-augmented generation (RuAG). RuAG automati-
cally compresses large external knowledge into compact logic rules using LLM-aided Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS), through three phases: LLM-based Logic Rule Search Formulation, Logic
Rule Search with MCTS, and Learned-Rule-Augmented Generation. First, the LLM formulates
the MCTS search by defining the target and body predicates. Then we apply MCTS to generate
structured first-order logic rules, which are applied to guide generation. Our framework provides an
efficient alternative to RAG.

Table 1: Task-relevant target predicates, body candidates and their examples in relation extraction,
log-based anomaly detection and cooperative game.
                                              Target
Task                         Training data               Body predicate candidates
                                              predicate
Relation    relations between entities, e.g., A specific All relations except the target predicate, e.g., for target pred-
Extraction in0(A,C) (A is in country C)       relation.  icate in0(A,C), all other relations excepting in0(A,C).
Anomaly     Pairs of log sequences and
                                              Anomaly Log events, e.g., E5 (receiving a block).
Detection   anomaly labels (Anomaly )
                                                         Observations and actions, e.g., IsYellow(Alice,
Cooperative Triplets of observations, actions
                                              GameWin Right): Alice’s right block is yellow, Move(Bob,
Game        and game win label (GameWin)
                                                         Right): Bob moves right.


LLM-formulated problem. (Section 3.2) 3) Learned-Rule-Augmented Generation: integrate the
learned logic rules into the LLM’s generation process, improving its generation. (Section 3.3)

3.1                    F ROM DATA TO RULE S EARCH : LLM- BASED L OGIC RULE S EARCH F ORMULATION

Search for logical rules traditionally requires significant human effort, particularly in defining
domain-specific head predicates and selecting relevant features that characterize data samples. This
process demands domain knowledge and impacts both the quality of the derived logic rules and the
computational cost of search. To address this challenge, our method begin with LLM-based Logic
Rule Search Formulation, where we leverage the capabilities of LLMs to automatically formulate
the logic rule learning problem through defining the predicates.
Initial Predicates. Given a dataset D = {(x, y)}, where each data sample x = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xN ] ∈
X is N -dimensional and y ∈ {0, 1} is the label, we initial the label as the target predicate and the
features as the body predicates, as shown in Table 1. We can directly translate discrete variables
into Boolean values through one-hot vectors. For continuous variables, we can translate them into
Boolean-valued attributes through Gini-index (Strobl et al., 2007). Furthermore, we suggest prompt-
ing LLMs to remove impossible body predicates to reduce logic rules search space or suggest new
target predicates to search more logic rules for a better understanding of the task.
Removing Impossible Body Predicates. Given the definition of logic rules and the candidate pred-
icates with their descriptions, LLM aids in filtering out impossible or irrelevant body predicates,
reducing the computational burden. By utilizing commonsense reasoning, the LLM can identify


                                                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


predicates that are unlikely to contribute to effective logic rules. For instance, in a system log anal-
ysis, the LLM might determine that certain attributes like user IDs are less relevant for anomaly
detection compared to error codes or access patterns. We provide the prompt in Figure A3.
Suggesting New Target Predicates. In addition to the primary target predicate (e.g., achieving a
specific classification label), the LLM can suggest additional head predicates to explore, given log-
ical rule definition, task description, and data schema. This is particularly useful in tasks requiring
long-horizon planning, where intermediate goals can guide the search for effective logic rules. By
generating these new head predicates, the LLM enables a more comprehensive exploration of the
logic rule space. We provide the prompt in Figure A4.
Our LLM-based logic rule search formulation enjoys the following advantages:
   • Automation and Scalability: The LLM automates the setup of the logic rule learning problem,
     i.e., defining the target and body predicates, avoiding human experts, and making it scalable to
     large and complex datasets.
   • Enriched rule generation: By generating relevant target predicates, our method can extract
     more meaningful rules.
   • Reduced Computational Burden: By eliminating irrelevant predicates, the LLM narrows
     down the search space, improving efficiency.

3.2   L OGIC RULE S EARCH WITH MCTS
Following the definition of predicates in logic rule searching, we apply Monte Carlo Tree Searching
(MCTS) to perform logic rule learning, inspired by its effectiveness in searching optimal policy in
large state spaces.
States, Actions, and Rewards in MCTS. With the predicates defined, the state, action, and reward
in MCTS for logic rule searching can be defined as:
 • States (S): Each state represents a partial logic rule, consisting of a set of predicates. The initial
   state is the empty set, S0 = ∅. Subsequent states are defined as: Sn = Sn−1 ∪ {αi }, where αi
   is the predicate added by an action.
 • Actions (A): Actions involve adding a new predicate to the current state. The action space is
   defined as: A = {Add αi | αi is a candidate predicate generated by the LLM}.
 • Rewards (R): The reward function evaluates the quality of a logic rule. For example, the reward
   for state Sn can be defined as the precision of the rule evaluating on the dataset D.
Typically, MCTS involves building a search tree and simulating outcomes to estimate the value
of actions. It consists of four key phases: selection, expansion, simulation, and backpropagation.
Selection and expansion. The process begins at the root node, where the algorithm selects the
most promising child nodes based on the Upper Confidence Bound applied to Trees (UCT). This
continues until a leaf node is reached. If the leaf node is not terminal, new child nodes are created
to explore potential moves. As an example, we expand a new node at the state of [(age ≥ 30), ] ⇒
(income ≥ $50, 000), if we select a new candidate predicate (income ≥ $50, 000) according to its
UCT value, then we add it into the rule: [(age ≥ 30), ] ← (income ≥ $50, 000) and enter the new
state of [(age ≥ 30), (education = bachelor’s)] ⇒ income ≥ $50, 000. Simulation: For the newly
expanded nodes, random simulations (also known as rollouts) are performed to calculate the reward
of the state. Backpropagation: The calculated reward is then propagated back up the tree, updating
the nodes’ statistical information. The UCT algorithm plays a crucial role in MCTS,  q       balancing
                                                                                       2 ln NC
exploration and exploitation by selecting actions that maximize: U CTj = X̄j + C          Nj , where
X̄j is the average reward of action j, NC is the total number of visits to the parent node, is the
number of visits to node j, C is a constant that adjusts the exploration-exploitation trade-off.
Finally, we collect all the rules constructed at the terminal nodes when 1) the constructed rule reaches
a predefined maximum length (i.e., the number of body predicates exceeds a threshold).2) If the
reward of the final node (i.e., the precision of the rule) exceeds a predefined threshold, indicating
that the rule is sufficiently accurate.

3.3   LEARNED - RULE - AUGMENTED GENERATION
After the logic rule search, we gather a set of logic rules and follow the following steps to perform
learned-rule-augmented generation. 1) Clean Searched Rules: The collected rules may contain


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


duplicates, exhibit low quality, or cover only a limited subset of the data. We first eliminate those
with low rewards or minimal data coverage. Then, we compare each pair of rules and retain the one
with the higher reward if its body predicates are a subset of the other’s. 2) Translate Rules into
Natural Language: To enhance the LLMs’ comprehension, we translate these symbolic rules into
natural language, resulting in a group of sentences. These sentences can then be injected into the
LLM prompts to guide generation more effectively. 3) Retrieve Relevant Rules: It is optional to
retrieve only the most relevant rules or inject all the rules, depending on the contextual window size
and the long-text understanding capability of the LLM. 4) Generation: The generator component
can be modeled using any LLM. We use GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) if no specific model is clarified. To
combine the input with the rules during generation, we simply apply the rules in a prompt template.

4     E XPERIMENTS

Most decision-making and prediction tasks can be abstracted into state chains to achieve their ulti-
mate goals, which allows our method to adapt to a wide variety of tasks. In this section, we evaluate
our method over diverse domains, including NLP (relationship extraction in Section 4.1), time-
series predication (log-based anomaly detection in Section 4.2), decision-making task (cooperative
game (Chen et al., 2024b) in Section 4.3) and a private industrial task (unauthorized party abuse
detection in Appendix A). We compare our method with the domain-specific baselines for each task
and LLM-based methods, including vanilla, ICL, RAG, and HtT (Zhu et al., 2023b). HtT shares
a similar goal of using constructed rule libraries with us to enhance LLM generation., but relies
on LLMs to generate and verify rules, leading to high computational cost of LLMs. The specific
implementation details of the experimental setup can be found in Appendix C.

4.1   R ELATION EXTRACTION

Document-level relation extraction is a critical task in natural language processing (NLP), where
the goal is to identify and classify relationships between entities across entire documents rather than
isolated sentences. This task becomes more complex at the document level due to the larger con-
text and the need to resolve long-range dependencies and co-references between entities scattered
throughout the document. However, using only LLMs for this task is often limited by their inabil-
ity to consistently capture complex document-wide relationships, especially when reasoning across
multiple entities and contexts.
Setup. We conduct experiments on the DWIE dataset (Zaporojets et al., 2021), which contains
802 documents and 23,130 entities. After excluding irrelevant articles, 700 documents are used for
training and 97 for testing. we utilized the LLM to identify and eliminate 15% of the relationships
(i.e. appears in,vs and player of) that were unlikely to function as valid body predicates, based on
their descriptions and the given rule descriptions. We evaluate the performance of our method us-
ing standard relation extraction metrics, including Precision, Recall, and F1-score. For comparison,
we evaluate our method against several state-of-the-art models for document-level relation extrac-
tion, including CNN, BiLSTM (Yao et al., 2019), Context-Aware (Sorokin & Gurevych, 2017), and
BERT-based models(Shi & Lin, 2019), which are widely used in document-level relation extraction
tasks. Additionally, we compare with the LLM-based methods: Vanilla, ICL, RAG and HtT(Zhu
et al., 2023b) which employs predefined logical rules to extract relations.
Main Results.          As shown in Fig-               Table 2: Results on Relation Extraction.
ure 2, our method outperforms both deep
learning-based and LLM-based baselines in                       Model         F1     Precision Recall
document-level relation extraction. Deep                        CNN       43.78%     47.13%    45.03%
learning methods, while achieving decent                      BiLSTM      48.17%     44.32%    41.53%
                                                 DL-based
performance in document-level relation ex-                       Bert     49.84%     49.35%    54.13%
traction, struggle to capture long-range se-                Context-Aware 45.37%     49.87%    38.76%
mantic dependencies. LLMs, such as GPT-                         Vanilla     46.94%   69.61%    35.41%
4, demonstrate superior performance due                          ICL        50.26%   74.09%    38.02%
to their strong natural language understand-    LLM-based        RAG        52.30%   78.64%    39.17%
ing. For example, ICL achieves an F1 score                       HtT        52.59%   68.20%    42.80%
of 50.26%, outperforming DL-based meth-                          Ours       60.42%   69.44%    53.48%
ods. RAG further improves results (F1:


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


52.30%) by retrieving similar cases from a training-based knowledge base, while HtT extracts rules
document by document (F1: 52.59%), which limits its global perspective. Our method addresses
these limitations by using MCTS to search for rules globally, mining potential rules efficiently from
the entire training data. This ensures reliability during the search process and combines the learned
rules with LLM reasoning capabilities, achieving an F1 score of 60.42%. These results highlight the
effectiveness of our approach in delivering more accurate and comprehensive relation identification
compared to both traditional DL-based and other LLM-based methods.

4.2   L OG - BASED ANOMALY DETECTION

Log-based anomaly detection is fundamentally a time-series prediction task, where the goal is to
predict whether a sequence of log events indicates abnormal system behavior. This task is crucial
for maintaining system reliability and security by identifying patterns that signal potential failures
or attacks. Given the temporal nature of log data, both sequential patterns and the semantic content
of the logs must be analyzed to accurately detect anomalies. Effective anomaly detection in time-
series log data is essential for preventing system downtime and ensuring the smooth functioning of
distributed infrastructures.
Setup. We evaluate our method on the HDFS dataset (Xu et al., 2009) for the log-based anomaly
detection task. This dataset consists of over 11 million log entries generated from Hadoop-based
map-reduce jobs on more than 200 Amazon EC2 nodes. In practice, we sampled 20,000 blocks of
log sequences from the HDFS dataset, consisting of approximately 486,060 log entries. The dataset
is split chronologically into training, validation, and test sets with a ratio of 8:1:1. We evaluate our
method using F1 score, Precision, and Recall to compare it against several baselines, including tradi-
tional methods like LogCluster (Lin et al., 2016), DeepLog (Du et al., 2017), and LogRobust (Zhang
et al., 2019), as well as LLM-based models like Vanilla, HtT, LogGPT (Qi et al., 2023), ICL and
RAG, providing a comprehensive assessment of performance across various approaches.
Main Results.        Table 3 compares our Table 3: Comparison under different methods on
method with traditional baselines and LLM- Log-based anomaly detection.
based models on the log-based anomaly de-
tection task. Traditional deep learning meth-                 Mehtod       F1     Precision Recall
ods like LogCluster and DeepLog rely heav-                   LogCluster 70.97% 96.70% 56.05%
ily on training data, making it hard for them     DL-based    DeepLog 79.64% 84.81% 75.08%
to detect new anomalies. While LogRo-                        LogRobust 87.31% 89.12% 85.54%
bust improves performance (F1: 87.31%),                        Vanilla 60.10% 47.05% 83.16%
its ability to generalize remains limited.                      ICL     69.77% 78.95% 62.50%
LLMs like GPT-4 perform well using simple                       RAG     84.32% 98.97% 73.46%
                                                 LLM-Based
prompts. For example, LogGPT achieves an                      LogGPT 72.56% 56.82% 100%
F1 score of 72.56%, showing strong seman-                       HtT     58.73% 45.46% 82.31%
tic reasoning. However, its low precision                       Ours     92.59     100% 86.21%
(56.82%) leads to misclassifications of mi-
nor issues as anomalies. HtT learns patterns from training data but struggles with efficiency and
global pattern recognition, resulting in an F1 score of 58.73%. RAG improves LLM performance
by retrieving similar cases, but the limited information in a single case restricts its effectiveness.
Our method addresses these issues by using MCTS to extract reliable rules from the entire dataset,
providing clear guidance to the LLM. This approach eliminates misclassifications, achieving an F1
score of 92.59%, outperforming all baselines and effectively balancing accuracy and generalization.

4.3   M ULTI - AGENT GAME : A LICE &B OB

In the real world, plenty of scenarios involve decision-making, planning, and collaborating, espe-
cially in partially observable environments. Moreover, often the optimal strategy often contradicts
human intuition. You can not walk towards the treasure directly as there may be walls blocking the
path. In such tasks, it is crucial to inject domain knowledge to make informed decisions, as only
by integrating specific domain expertise can the model accurately identify the optimal strategy and
make sound judgments.
Setup. We choose the cooperative multi-agent game Alice&Bob, which requires both planning and
collaboration. In the game, Alice and Bob work together to find the treasure (Chen et al., 2024b),


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and the optimal paths for both agents often go against intuition. They are required to sequentially
experience key blocks, with one agent needing to remain on a block to enable the other to obtain the
treasure. Episodes last up to 50 steps. Metric We evaluate the method by reporting the average win
rate (WR), the accumulative rewards (AR), and the average episode length (AL across 30 episodes.
Baselines. We compare our method with RL baselines (behavior cloning; offline tabular Q), rule
generated method (PLLB (Srivastava et al., 2024) and HtT (Zhu et al., 2023b)), ICL-Good (ICL with
3 good demonstrations) and ICL-Contrastive (ICL with 2 good and 2 bad demonstrations) and RAG,
RAG retrieves timesteps with similar observations and informs LLMs both observations and actions.
We provide the results of random policy and LLM-based grounded policy (with handcraft rules) as
well. Data Collection We collect 1000 episodes of trajectories by applying a handcraft policy where
the agent has the probability of p to follow the optimal policy and 1 − p to follow a random policy.
We set p = 0.7 in the default setting. Generated target predicates by LLMs. We search the logic
rules from different aspects following the LLMs’ suggestion: 1) team reward = -10; 2) Alice or Bob
stand on yellow, purple, skyblue blocks; 3) Game Win. During the evaluation, we make different
LLM serves as Alice and Bob, providing them with the observations, historical information, and the
action space and prompting them to respond with the chosen action.
Main Results. In Table 4, we com- Table 4: Experimental results over the decision-making task,
pare the performance of various RL- Alice&Bob. The standard error is provided in the bracket.
based and LLM-based methods on
the Alice & Bob task. Overall,                            Method              AR      AL WR (%)
our method achieves the sota perfor-                 Behavior Cloning 54.67(±51.82) 32.46 0.56
                                         RL-based
mance. RL-based methods perform                      Offline Tabular Q 59.51(±52.71) 32.60 0.63
relatively well and surpass most                          Vanilla        -0.08(±0.11) 50.0    0.0
LLM-based methods, as they can                           ICL-Good        -0.71(±0.55) 50.0    0.0
accumulate knowledge during train-                    ICL-Contrastive -0.83(±0.66) 50.0       0.0
ing. In contrast, LLM-based meth- LLM-based                RAG           -0.14(±0.22) 50.0    0.0
ods face significant challenges in                          HtT         -0.26 (±0.22) 50.0    0.0
this task. Methods like Vanilla, ICL-                  PLLB (Offline) -0.15(±0.26) 50.0       0.0
Good, and ICL-Contrastive show                             Ours         69.45(±46.1) 33.23    0.7
negative accumulative rewards (-                          Random          -2.2(±0.52) 50.0    0.0
0.08, -0.71, and -0.83, respectively)                    Grounded       89.87(±30.06) 32.1    0.9
with a win rate of 0, indicating a
clear lack of strategy reasoning and task optimization. Vanilla performs badly due to the absence of
domain knowledge. However, once domain knowledge is correctly incorporated, performance im-
proves significantly, as seen with methods like Ours (win rate of 0.7) and Grounded Policy (win rate
of 0.9). Among those in-context-based LLM methods, ICL and RAG insert relevant demonstrations.
However, they perform bad as LLMs may suffer from long-text understanding. HtT, and PLLB rely
on LLM to summarize rules, which not only need to understand long text but also require more
domain knowledge than our method to summarizing rules, therefore the summarized rules may not
provide enough domain knowledge for LLMs.

4.4   A BLATION S TUDY
In this section, we present an ablation study to evaluate the robustness and effectiveness of our
method across several dimensions. First, we analyze the performance of our method when using
different LLM backbones, examining whether the choice of LLM impacts overall task performance.
Second, we explore the contribution of different components in our method, including the use of
chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning and rule-based guidance, to assess how each component improves
the task. Lastly, we investigate the effectiveness of the MCTS rule extraction process by varying the
number of search episodes.
Ablation on Different LLM backbones. Table 5 presents the results of our ablation study on
different LLM backbones across relation extraction, log anomaly detection and cooperative games.
It compares baseline models (Vanilla), chain-of-thought (CoT), and our RuAG for GPT-3.5 and
GPT-4. While CoT improves performance by promoting step-by-step reasoning, it falls short in
tasks requiring domain knowledge. In contrast, RuAG learned rules from external data, provides the
required context, and consistently enhances performance across different backbones.
Ablation on searching episodes in MCTS. Table 6 shows the impact of MCTS search episodes
for three tasks. In relation extraction and cooperative games, we report the number and accuracy of


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Table 5: Ablation on LLM backbones across different tasks.
                         Relation Extraction        Log Anomaly Detection          Cooperative Game
Backbone Method
                        F1    Precision Recall       F1    Precision Recall          AR        AL    WR
            Vanilla 18.94% 31.06% 13.62% 48.42% 62.71% 39.43% -0.58(±0.47) 50.0 0.0
 GPT3.5     +CoT 19.85% 28.19% 15.32% 73.19% 75.42% 71.08% -0.38(±0.26) 50.0 0.0
             +rule 26.63% 39.82% 20.00% 91.39% 100.00% 84.16% 45.2(±49.81) 42.73 0.45
            Vanilla 46.94% 69.61% 35.41% 60.10% 47.05% 83.16% -0.08(±0.11) 50.0 0.0
  GPT4      +CoT 48.10% 66.13% 37.39% 76.11% 63.62% 94.69% -0.83(±0.66) 50.0 0.0
             +rule 60.42% 69.44% 53.48% 92.59% 100.00% 86.21% 69.45(±46.1) 33.23 0.7

 Table 6: Ablation on searching episodes in MCTS. Num. denotes the number of searched rules.
                       Relation Extraction       Anomaly Detection     Cooperative Game
               Times
                       Num.    Precision       F1    Precision Recall Num.     Precision
                50       13      100%        65.75% 100.00% 48.89%      14      100%
               200       20      100%        86.86% 98.7% 77.55%        16      100%
               500       21      100%        91.30% 100%     84%        21      100%
               1000      23     95.65%       91.30% 100%     84%        23     91.30%


extracted rules are evaluated, while log anomaly detection is assessed based on the final task per-
formance. According to the results, fewer search episodes still yield high-quality rules. Increasing
episodes expands the search space, leading to more rules, but with diminishing returns as excessive
episodes introduce ineffective searches and, in some cases, incorrect rules (e.g., relation extraction).
Ablation on hyperparameter p for data collection in decision-making task. We adjust the prob-
ability p of performing optimal policy and report the searched rule numbers and their precision in
Table 7 to investigate the impact of data collection policies on the searched rules.

4.5   C ASE S TUDY

In this section, we present a case study to demonstrate how the extracted     Table 7: Ablation on hy-
rules help LLMs perform tasks more effectively across different do-           perparameter p.
mains. The extracted rules serve as a guiding mechanism, assisting the
                                                                               p      Num      Precision
LLM in making more accurate predictions and improving task perfor-
mance by providing structured logic and patterns that the LLM can fol-         0.2        25     80%
low. Figure 4 illustrates the most representative cases where extracted        0.5        35     88%
rules helped LLMs improve performance across three tasks: relation             0.7        21    100%
extraction, log-based anomaly detection, and multi-agent gaming.
In the relation extraction task, without the aid of extracted rules, LLMs typically rely solely on the
literal content of the document, extracting only obvious relational triples while missing more implicit
ones. As shown in Figure 4(a), the LLM can infer the relationship (“Ariel Sharon”, “head of gov”,
“Israel”) based on the document’s semantics. However, it misses the implicit relationship (“Ariel
Sharon”, “citizen of”, “Israel”). By providing the LLM with the rule “head of gov → citizen of”,
our method helps the LLM extract this additional, less obvious relation. This demonstrates how our
rule-based approach enables LLMs to more comprehensively complete the relation extraction task
by accounting for logical patterns that might otherwise be overlooked.
In the log-based anomaly detection task, LLMs can struggle due to insufficient domain knowledge,
leading to hallucination issues. In Figure 4(b), the log sequence lacks clear semantic indicators of
an anomaly, making it difficult for the LLM to detect. Our method uses MCTS to extract rules
from historical logs that indicate abnormal patterns. When processing a sample, the log sequence is
matched with the rule base, and the corresponding rule, along with its confidence score, is provided
to the LLM. This enables the LLM to combine semantic information with historical patterns and
rule reliability to make accurate anomaly detections. In this case, Rule 1 triggered by “E11, E28”
indicates a high probability of anomaly, allowing the LLM to correctly assess the system state.
In the decision-making task (Figure 4 (c)), the vanilla LLM only takes as input Bob’s observation,
therefore has a straightforward policy to walk towards the treasure directly. However, RuAG awares


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                              Table 8: Searched rule examples across different tasks.

       Task                                         Rule                                       Description
                                                                                               If a person holds the position of head of government, they are
 Relation                             head of gov → citizen of
                                                                                               also a citizen of that country.
Extraction
                                                                                               If a person holds the position of head of government in a nomi-
                                    head of gov-x → citizen of-x                               nal variation of a country, they are also a citizen of that nominal
                                                                                               variation of the country.
                                  [E11 & E28] → abnormal,                                      If events E11 and E28 occur sequentially, it indicates a high
Anomaly
                                      precision = 0.96                                         probability of anomaly with a precision of 0.96.
Detection
                               [E11 & E26 & E20] → abnormal,                                   If events E11, E26, and E20 occur sequentially, it indicates a
                                      precision = 0.99                                         very high probability of anomaly with a precision of 0.99.
            [IsGreen(Alice, Left) & Move(Alice, right)                                         When Alice’s center left block is green, if Alice moves right,
            & dx (Alice, treasure)=0 & dx (Alice, trea-                                        then the team will receive a Reward = 100.0. In all these cases,
Cooperative sure) & Stand(Bob, skyblue) & Visited(Bob,                                         Alice locates at 0 blocks down, 1 block to the left of the trea-
  Game      skyblue) & Visited(Bob, purple) & Vis-                                             sure, Bob stands on skyblue block, Bob visited skyblue block,
            ited(Alice, yellow) ] → Reward = 100.0                                             Alice visited yellow block, Bob visited purple block.

                Inputs                                                                                            Inputs
#Entities:                                                          Vanilla                        #Log Seq : ['E5', 'E22', 'E5', 'E5', 'E11', '                                  Vanilla
Ariel Sharon;Israel; Mahmoud Abbas …                                                               E9', 'E26', 'E11', 'E9', 'E11', 'E9', 'E26', 'E26                ….Although there are some eve
                                                           ('Ariel Sharon', 'head_of_gov',
#Document: In a historic meeting in the                                                            ', 'E4', 'E4', 'E3', 'E2', 'E23', 'E23', 'E23', 'E2              nts related to file operations an
                                                             'Israel’), ('George W. Bush’,
Jordanian coastal town of Aqaba on We-                                                             1', 'E21', 'E28', 'E26', ‘E21’]                                  d block transfers, none indicate
                                                             'agent_of', 'United States’),
dnesday, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sha-                                                         #Event content :                                                 abnormal behavior.
                                                           ('Mahmoud Abbas', 'head_of
ron and his Palestinian counterpart Mah-                                                           E5:[*]Receiving block[*]src:[*]dest:[*]…                         System State:[Normal].          ❌
                                                               _gov-x', 'Palestinians')…❌
moud Abbas ….


                                     inputs                          Ours                                                                         inputs                           Ours
                 Retreival                            (‘Ariel Sharon’, ‘head_of_gov’, ‘Isra                               Retreival                                 … the sequence "E11, E28" trigger
                                                      el’),(‘George W. Bush’, ‘agent_of’, ‘                                                                         s Rule 1, indicating a high probabili
                                                      United States’), ('Mahmoud Abbas                                                                              ty of an anomaly. Based on the log
      head_of_gov→ citizen_of        Rules                                                            R1: 𝐸11, 𝐸28 → 1,conf=0.96                     R1             sequence information, E28 indeed
                                                      ', 'head_of_gov-x', 'Palestinians')('
                  …                                                                                                  …                                              indicates a high probability of an a
                                                      Ariel Sharon’,'head_of_gov', 'Isra
      head_of_gov-x→ citizen_of-x                                                                     𝑅2: 𝐸11, 𝐸26, 𝐸20 → 1,conf=0.9                                nomaly, as …
                                                      el’), ('Mahmoud Abbas', 'head_of
                                                            _gov-x’, 'Palestinians')…                                                                               System State:[Abnormal]
           Rue Base                                                                   ✅                            Rue Base                                                                           ✅

                                (a) Relation Extraction                                                                               (b) Log-based Anomaly Detection
                                                    Inputs
    You are Bob, currently collaborating with Alice in a grid world to obtain the treasure (green block).
                                                                                                                                                                                Vanilla
    You are currently located at 0 blocks down and 5 blocks to the left of treasure. Your teammate, Alice, is c
    urrently located at 5 blocks down and 0 blocks to the left of treasure. The blocks surrounding you and th                                                         Move Right as the treasure
    eir colors are: lower left block: white (reachable)…                                                                                                              is located at my right side.
                                                                                                                                                                                               ❌
    Please choose action from up, down, left, right, stand.

                         !                      !     Team receives a Reward = 100.0 (Game Win):
                                                      When Alice's center right block is green, if Alice moves right, then … I                             inputs
                                                      n all these cases, Alice locates at 0 blocks down and 1 blocks to the l
                                                      eft of the treasure, Bob stands on skyblue block, Alice visited yello                                                      Ours
                                                      w block, Bob visited purple, skyblue blocks.                                             Rules                  Move Left as I need to stan
                                                      Bob stands on purple block:                                                                                     d on the skyblue block to w
                                                      When Bob locates at 2 blocks down and 9 blocks to the left of the tre                                           ait Alice reach the treasure.

                                                "
                                                      asure, if Bob moves right, then Bob will stand on purple block.                                                                          ✅
                                                      When Bob locates at 1 blocks down and 8 blocks to the left of the tre
                                                      asure, if Bob moves down, then Bob will stand on purple block.


                                                                                  (c) Cooperative Game


Figure 4: Case studies on relation extraction, log-based anomaly detection, and cooperative game.

Bob the domain-specific knowledge: to stand on the skyblue block is a significant step for your
team’s success. Therefore, in RuAG, Bob chooses to walk to the skyblue block first. This cooper-
ative game highlights the significance of domain-specific knowledge in decision-making tasks, and
demonstrates the effectiveness of our RuAG to integrate domain-specific knowledge by logic rules.

5        C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce a novel framework RuAG that automatically distills large volumes of of-
fline data into understandable first-order logic rules, which are then injected into LLMs to enhance
their generation capabilities. By leveraging LLMs’ commonsense, we first automatically formulate
the searching process through defining the target predicate and body predicates. Then, we apply
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to efficiently address the combinatorial search space. As a con-
sequence, our method discovers logic rules that can be seamlessly integrated into LLM prompts for
downstream task reasoning. Empirical evaluations across a variety of tasks, including NLP, time-
series, decision-making, and industrial applications, demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
in improving LLM performance over diverse domains.


                                                                                              10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS S TATEMENT
In this paper, we strictly obey the principles outlined in the ICLR Code of Ethics, including careful
consideration of potential ethical concerns, including the impact on human subjects, data privacy,
and fairness in algorithmic decisions. Specifically, the three public datasets do not have potential
risk. As for the private industrial dataset, we promise that any data used in this study was released
in compliance with legal and ethical standards, and proper security measures were implemented to
safeguard personal information.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide all the details of our method in the paper and appendix, including evaluation prompts,
detailed experimental setup, implementation, and hyperparameters for both LLM reasoning and
MCTS. The code will be available upon the paper’s publication. The above ensures that others can
reproduce our method.

R EFERENCES
Sweta Agrawal, Chunting Zhou, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Marjan Ghazvininejad. In-
  context examples selection for machine translation. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber,
  and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL
  2023, pp. 8857–8873, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.564. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  findings-acl.564.
Ziyan An, Hendrik Baier, Abhishek Dubey, Ayan Mukhopadhyay, and Meiyi Ma. Enabling mcts
  explainability for sequential planning through computation tree logic. In Proceedings of the 27th
  European Conference on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI), 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2407.10820.
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Mil-
  lican, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark,
  Diego De Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang,
  Loren Maggiore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, Andy Brock, Michela Paganini, Geoffrey Irv-
  ing, Oriol Vinyals, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Jack Rae, Erich Elsen, and Laurent
  Sifre. Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In Kamalika Chaud-
  huri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2206–2240. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v162/borgeaud22a.html.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, T. J. Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeff Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learn-
  ers. ArXiv, abs/2005.14165, 2020b. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:218971783.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Stephanie Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew Lampinen, Jane Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre
  Richemond, James McClelland, and Felix Hill.      Data distributional properties drive
  emergent in-context learning in transformers. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agar-
  wal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, volume 35, pp. 18878–18891. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.      URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
  77c6ccacfd9962e2307fc64680fc5ace-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Jiawei Chen, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. Benchmarking large language models in
   retrieval-augmented generation. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38
   (16):17754–17762, Mar. 2024a. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v38i16.29728. URL https://ojs.aaai.
   org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/29728.
Sirui Chen, Zhaowei Zhang, Yaodong Yang, and Yali Du. Stas: Spatial-temporal return decompo-
  sition for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In The 38th Annual AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2024b.
Zhongwu Chen, Chengjin Xu, Dingmin Wang, Zhen Huang, Yong Dou, and Jian Guo. Rulerag:
  Rule-guided retrieval-augmented generation with language models for question answering. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2410.22353, 2024c.
Kewei Cheng, Jiahao Liu, Wei Wang, and Yizhou Sun. Rlogic: Recursive logical rule learning
  from knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’22, pp. 179–189, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for
  Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450393850. doi: 10.1145/3534678.3539421. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1145/3534678.3539421.
Tzu-Yi Chiu, Jerome Le Ny, and Jean-Pierre David. Temporal logic explanations for dynamic
  decision systems using anchors and monte carlo tree search. Artificial Intelligence, 318:103897,
  2023. ISSN 0004-3702. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2023.103897. URL https://
  www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0004370223000437.
Ruomeng Ding, Chaoyun Zhang, Lu Wang, Yong Xu, Minghua Ma, Wei Zhang, Si Qin, Saravan Ra-
  jmohan, Qingwei Lin, and Dongmei Zhang. Everything of thoughts: Defying the law of penrose
  triangle for thought generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04254, 2023.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu,
  and Zhifang Sui. A survey on in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00234, 2022.
Min Du, Feifei Li, Guineng Zheng, and Vivek Srikumar. Deeplog: Anomaly detection and diagnosis
 from system logs through deep learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC conference on
 computer and communications security, pp. 1285–1298, 2017.
Richard Evans and Edward Grefenstette. Learning explanatory rules from noisy data. Journal of
  Artificial Intelligence Research, 61:1–64, 2018.
Wenqi Fan, Yujuan Ding, Liangbo Ning, Shijie Wang, Hengyun Li, Dawei Yin, Tat-Seng Chua,
 and Qing Li. A survey on rag meeting llms: Towards retrieval-augmented large language
 models. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
 Data Mining, KDD ’24, pp. 6491–6501, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Com-
 puting Machinery. ISBN 9798400704901. doi: 10.1145/3637528.3671470. URL https:
 //doi.org/10.1145/3637528.3671470.
Meng Fang, Shilong Deng, Yudi Zhang, Zijing Shi, Ling Chen, Mykola Pechenizkiy, and Jun Wang.
 Large language models are neurosymbolic reasoners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 17985–17993, 2024.
Yuxian Gu, Li Dong, Furu Wei, and Minlie Huang. Minillm: Knowledge distillation of large lan-
  guage models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Mingwei Chang. Retrieval augmented
  language model pre-training. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Research, pp. 3929–3938. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v119/guu20a.html.
Edward J Hu, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen,
  et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Sihao Hu, Tiansheng Huang, and Ling Liu. Pok\’ellmon: A human-parity agent for pok\’emon
  battles with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01118, 2024.
Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane
  Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard Grave. Atlas: Few-shot learning
  with retrieval augmented language models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(251):
  1–43, 2023.
Mo Li, Songyang Zhang, Yunxin Liu, and Kai Chen. Needlebench: Can llms do retrieval and
 reasoning in 1 million context window? arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.11963, 2024.
Shuang Li, Lu Wang, Ruizhi Zhang, Xiaofu Chang, Xuqin Liu, Yao Xie, Yuan Qi, and Le Song.
  Temporal logic point processes. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the
  37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 5990–6000. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v119/li20p.html.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2101.00190, 2021.
Xianzhi Li, Xiaodan Zhu, Zhiqiang Ma, Xiaomo Liu, and Sameena Shah. Are chatgpt and gpt-
  4 general-purpose solvers for financial text analytics? an examination on several typical tasks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05862, 2023.
Qingwei Lin, Hongyu Zhang, Jian-Guang Lou, Yu Zhang, and Xuewei Chen. Log clustering based
  problem identification for online service systems. In Proceedings of the 38th International Con-
  ference on Software Engineering Companion, pp. 102–111, 2016.
Linhao Luo, Jiaxin Ju, Bo Xiong, Yuan-Fang Li, Gholamreza Haffari, and Shirui Pan. Chatrule:
  Mining logical rules with large language models for knowledge graph reasoning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.01538, 2023.
Michael McCloskey and Neal J. Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
 sequential learning problem. volume 24 of Psychology of Learning and Motivation, pp. 109–165.
 Academic Press, 1989. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-7421(08)60536-8. URL https:
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0079742108605368.
Humza Naveed, Asad Ullah Khan, Shi Qiu, Muhammad Saqib, Saeed Anwar, Muhammad Usman,
  Naveed Akhtar, Nick Barnes, and Ajmal Mian. A comprehensive overview of large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06435, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4: Openai’s generative pre-trained transformer 4 model, 2023.
Shirui Pan, Linhao Luo, Yufei Wang, Chen Chen, Jiapu Wang, and Xindong Wu. Unifying large
  language models and knowledge graphs: A roadmap. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
  Engineering, 36(7):3580–3599, July 2024. ISSN 2326-3865. doi: 10.1109/tkde.2024.3352100.
  URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2024.3352100.
Bowen Peng, Jeffrey Quesnelle, Honglu Fan, and Enrico Shippole. YaRN: Efficient context win-
  dow extension of large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=wHBfxhZu1u.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gabriel Poesia, Alex Polozov, Vu Le, Ashish Tiwari, Gustavo Soares, Christopher Meek, and Sumit
  Gulwani. Synchromesh: Reliable code generation from pre-trained language models. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=KmtVD97J43e.
Jiaxing Qi, Shaohan Huang, Zhongzhi Luan, Shu Yang, Carol Fung, Hailong Yang, Depei Qian, Jing
   Shang, Zhiwen Xiao, and Zhihui Wu. Loggpt: Exploring chatgpt for log-based anomaly detection.
   In 2023 IEEE International Conference on High Performance Computing & Communications,
   Data Science & Systems, Smart City & Dependability in Sensor, Cloud & Big Data Systems &
   Application (HPCC/DSS/SmartCity/DependSys), pp. 273–280. IEEE, 2023.
Meng Qu and Jian Tang. Probabilistic logic neural networks for reasoning. In H. Wal-
 lach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.,
 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/
 file/13e5ebb0fa112fe1b31a1067962d74a7-Paper.pdf.
Meng Qu, Junkun Chen, Louis-Pascal Xhonneux, Yoshua Bengio, and Jian Tang. Rnnlogic: Learn-
 ing logic rules for reasoning on knowledge graphs. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations.
Sachin Ravi and Hugo Larochelle. Optimization as a model for few-shot learning. In International
  conference on learning representations, 2016.
Dongyu Ru, Changzhi Sun, Jiangtao Feng, Lin Qiu, Hao Zhou, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, and Lei Li.
  Learning logic rules for document-level relation extraction. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing
  Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1239–1250, Online and Punta Cana,
  Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2021.emnlp-main.95. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.95.
Xinyue Shen, Zeyuan Chen, Michael Backes, and Yang Zhang. In chatgpt we trust? measuring and
  characterizing the reliability of chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08979, 2023.
Peng Shi and Jimmy Lin. Simple bert models for relation extraction and semantic role labeling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05255, 2019.
Dong Shu, Tianle Chen, Mingyu Jin, Chong Zhang, Mengnan Du, and Yongfeng Zhang. Knowledge
  graph large language model (kg-llm) for link prediction, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2403.07311.
Daniil Sorokin and Iryna Gurevych. Context-aware representations for knowledge base relation
  extraction. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 1784–1789, 2017.
Megha Srivastava, Cedric Colas, Dorsa Sadigh, and Jacob Andreas. Policy learning with a language
 bottleneck. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04118, 2024.
Carolin Strobl, Anne-Laure Boulesteix, and Thomas Augustin. Unbiased split selection for classi-
  fication trees based on the gini index. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, 52(1):483–501,
  2007.
Maciej Świechowski, Konrad Godlewski, Bartosz Sawicki, and Jacek Mańdziuk. Monte carlo tree
 search: A review of recent modifications and applications. Artificial Intelligence Review, 56(3):
 2497–2562, 2023.
Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T Kwok, and Lionel M Ni. Generalizing from a few examples:
  A survey on few-shot learning. ACM computing surveys (csur), 53(3):1–34, 2020.
Yuqi Wang, Boran Jiang, Yi Luo, Dawei He, Peng Cheng, and Liangcai Gao. Reasoning on efficient
  knowledge paths:knowledge graph guides large language model for domain question answering,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.10384.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wei Xu, Ling Huang, Armando Fox, David Patterson, and Michael I Jordan. Detecting large-scale
 system problems by mining console logs. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 22nd symposium
 on Operating systems principles, pp. 117–132, 2009.
Xiaohan Xu, Ming Li, Chongyang Tao, Tao Shen, Reynold Cheng, Jinyang Li, Can Xu, Dacheng
  Tao, and Tianyi Zhou. A survey on knowledge distillation of large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2402.13116, 2024.
Yuan Yao, Deming Ye, Peng Li, Xu Han, Yankai Lin, Zhenghao Liu, Zhiyuan Liu, Lixin Huang, Jie
  Zhou, and Maosong Sun. Docred: A large-scale document-level relation extraction dataset. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1906.06127, 2019.
Klim Zaporojets, Johannes Deleu, Chris Develder, and Thomas Demeester. Dwie: An entity-centric
  dataset for multi-task document-level information extraction. Information Processing & Manage-
  ment, 58(4):102563, 2021.
Chaoyun Zhang, Liqun Li, Shilin He, Xu Zhang, Bo Qiao, Si Qin, Minghua Ma, Yu Kang, Qingwei
  Lin, Saravan Rajmohan, Dongmei Zhang, and Qi Zhang. UFO: A UI-Focused Agent for Windows
  OS Interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07939, 2024.
Xu Zhang, Yong Xu, Qingwei Lin, Bo Qiao, Hongyu Zhang, Yingnong Dang, Chunyu Xie, Xin-
  sheng Yang, Qian Cheng, Ze Li, et al. Robust log-based anomaly detection on unstable log data.
  In Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM joint meeting on European software engineering conference
  and symposium on the foundations of software engineering, pp. 807–817, 2019.
Yudi Zhang, Lu Wang, Meng Fang, Yali Du, Chenghua Huang, Jun Wang, Qingwei Lin, Mykola
  Pechenizkiy, Dongmei Zhang, Saravan Rajmohan, and Qi Zhang. Distill not only data but also
  rewards: Can smaller language models surpass larger ones?, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2502.19557.
Yuyu Zhang, Xinshi Chen, Yuan Yang, Arun Ramamurthy, Bo Li, Yuan Qi, and Le Song. Efficient
  probabilistic logic reasoning with graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJg76kStwH.
Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li,
  Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, Yu Qiao, Zhaoxiang Zhang, and Jifeng Dai. Ghost in the minecraft:
  Generally capable agents for open-world environments via large language models with text-based
  knowledge and memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17144, 2023a.
Zhaocheng Zhu, Yuan Xue, Xinyun Chen, Denny Zhou, Jian Tang, Dale Schuurmans, and Hanjun
  Dai. Large language models can learn rules. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07064, 2023b.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON PRIVATE INDUSTRAIL DATASET:
     U NAUTHORIZED PARTY A BUSE DETECTION

The Unauthorized Party Abuse (UPA) detection task is a binary classification problem, where the
goal is to predict whether an incident is a case of UPA (IsUPA) based on a series of features. These
features include both time-dependent data, such as resource acquisition velocities and user activity
history, as well as static features, like resource descriptions and types of compromised subscriptions.
The task is to accurately classify each event as either UPA or not, while maintaining high precision
and recall to avoid misclassifying legitimate customer activities.


Setup The dataset used for this task comes from a private industrial source, consisting of histor-
ical incidents of Unauthorized Party Abuse (UPA). It includes both time-dependent features, such
as resource acquisition velocities and user activity history, as well as static features, like resource
descriptions and types of compromised subscriptions. The dataset is imbalanced, with significantly
fewer UPA cases compared to legitimate ones, and the overall data volume is large. To address this,
we sampled a balanced dataset and tested the algorithm on smaller batches. For evaluation, we used
common fraud detection metrics, including F1-score, Recall, Precision, and Accuracy. We compared
our method against several baselines, including XGBoost, Decision Tree, and Rule Grounding. In
Rule Grounding, the extracted rules were directly used for prediction to evaluate the effectiveness
of rule extraction.


Implement Details In our task, most features in the dataset are continuous. To adapt to the re-
quirement of Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) for discrete state mining, we used the Gini index to
discretize these continuous features. Specifically, for each continuous feature, we divided it into 10
discrete states. The discretization process involved calculating the Gini index to determine the opti-
mal split points, ensuring that each resulting interval maintains a high degree of data purity. Thus,
each data sample was converted into a sequence of discrete states.
We used Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to extract rules from the training set. MCTS was initial-
ized with a root node representing the initial state. Child nodes were created and expanded using the
Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) formula. Simulations were performed to explore different paths,
and optimal rules were generated for both IsUPA=1 and IsUPA=0 targets. The rollout was set to
500, and the reward was based on the precision derived from the rule. The maximum rule length
was set to 5. Additionally, if a node’s precision exceeded 0.85, we considered it a terminal node,
as further expansion was deemed unnecessary. This allowed us to collect all reasonable rules with
lengths ranging from 1 to 5.


Main result Table A1 shows the results of different methods on the small batch dataset for abuse
detection. We observe that the rules extracted using MCTS achieve high precision, similar to tradi-
tional machine learning methods, but also exhibit a higher recall. This is because MCTS explores
a broader search space, allowing it to capture a more comprehensive set of abuse patterns. On the
other hand, directly using the LLM for this task yields poor performance, with an F1 score of only
22.64%. The lack of domain-specific knowledge and the difficulty in processing purely numerical
features hinder the LLM’s effectiveness in this scenario.
However, our method, which provides the MCTS-extracted rules as historical guidance to the LLM,
enables the LLM to make better decisions by combining the extracted rules with feature information
from specific scenarios. The results indicate that our approach significantly improves the LLM’s
performance on this type of numerical task. With the help of rules, the LLM’s F1 score increases
to 96%, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method in guiding the LLM to handle such tasks
better. The table shows several representative rules extracted using MCTS, along with their pre-
cision, recall, and F1-score if used directly for detection. As can be seen, just using the first rule
alone yields an F1 score of 0.6623. Additionally, precision is crucial for rules in this task, as high
precision means that the rule for predicting IsUPA=1 is highly reliable and unlikely to make false
positive errors.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Table A1: Comparison under different methods on Fraud detection

                                                  F1     Precision Recall
                               Decision tree 83.72%        100%      72%
                                XGBoost      88.89%        100%      80%
                              Rule grounding 93.62%        100%      88%
                                  Vanilla      22.64% 21.43%         24%
                                   Ours         96%    96%           96%

 Table A2: Representative rule, precision, and description of unauthorized party abuse detection.

    Conditions                                             Target      Precision      Recall       F1
    Feature1 ≤ 0.030 and Feature2 is 1 and                    1         0.8632        0.5372     0.6623
    0.003 < Feature3 ≤ 0.547
    0.348 < Feature4 ≤ 0.712                                  1         0.8229        0.4202     0.5563
    Feature1 ≤ 0.030 and Feature2 is 1 and                    1         0.9630        0.1383     0.2419
    0.258 < Feature4 ≤ 0.348


B     M ORE E XAMPLES OF S EARCHED RULES
We provide the searched rules in Table A3 (Relation Extraction), Table A4(Log-based anomaly
detection), Listing 1(Cooperative game) and Table A2 (Abuse detection).

           Table A3: Representative rule, precision, and description of relation extraction

    Rule                    Precision   Description
    player of→member of        1.0      If someone is a player of a certain team, then they are also a
                                        member of that team. For example, “John is a player of TeamA”
                                        can be deduced as “John is a member of TeamA”.
    minister of→agent of     0.9928     If someone is a minister of a certain organization or country,
                                        then they are also an agent of that organization or country. For
                                        example, “Alice is a minister of Country X” can be deduced as
                                        “Alice is an agent of Country X”.
    head of state-x, gpe0    0.7472     If someone is the head of state of a nominal variation of a coun-
    → head of state                     try, and that nominal variation corresponds to an official coun-
                                        try name, then they are also the head of state of that country.
                                        For example, “PersonA is the head of state-x of German” and
                                        “German is gpe0 of Germany” can be deduced as “PersonA is
                                        the head of state of Germany”.
    head of gov, in0-x →     0.8235     If someone is the head of government of a country, and a geo-
    citizen of-x                        graphic location in that country has a nominal variation, then the
                                        head of government can be considered a citizen of the nominal
                                        variation. For example, “PersonB is the head of gov of Israel”
                                        and “Tel Aviv is in0-x of Israeli” can be deduced as “PersonB
                                        is citizen of-x of Israeli”.
    head of, agency of →     0.6364     If someone is the head of an organization, and that organization
    citizen of                          is an agency of a country, then the head of the organization can
                                        be considered a citizen of that country. For example, “PersonC
                                        is head of Organization Y” and “Organization Y is agency of
                                        Country Z” can be deduced as “PersonC is citizen of Coun-
                                        try Z”.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1) Summarized experiences related to **Bob stands on yellow block**
    - Conditions: Alice visited yellow block, Bob visited purple block, and Bob visited skyblue block.
    - When Bob locates at 5 blocks down and 0 block to the left of the treasure, if Bob moves down, then Bob
      will stand on yellow block.
2) Summarized experiences related to **Bob stands on purple block**
    - When Bob locates at 2 blocks down and 9 blocks to the left of the treasure, if Bob moves right, then Bob
       will stand on purple block.
    - When Bob locates at 1 block down and 8 blocks to the left of the treasure, if Bob moves down, then Bob
      will stand on purple block.
    - When Bob locates at 2 blocks down and 8 blocks to the left of the treasure, if Bob keep standing on
      current block, then Bob will stand on purple block. In all these cases, Bob visited purple block.
    - When Bob locates at 2 blocks down and 8 blocks to the left of the treasure, if Bob moves right, then Bob
       will stand on purple block. In all these cases, Bob visited purple block.
    - When Bob locates at 2 blocks down and 8 blocks to the left of the treasure, if Bob moves down, then Bob
      will stand on purple block. In all these cases, Bob visited purple block.
3) Summarized experiences related to **Alice stands on skyblue block**
    - Conditions: Alice visited yellow block, and Bob visited purple block.
    - When Alice locates at 0 block down and 5 blocks to the left of the treasure, if Alice moves left, Bob
      did not visit skyblue block, then Alice will stand on skyblue block.
4) Summarized experiences related to **Alice stands on green block**
    - Conditions: Bob stand on skyblue block, and Bob visited skyblue block, Alice visited yellow block, Bob
      visited purple block
    - When Alice locates at 1 block down and 0 block to the left of the treasure, if Alice moves up, then
      Alice will stand on green block.
    - When Alice locates at 0 block down and 1 block to the left of the treasure, if Alice moves right, then
      Alice will stand on green block.
5) Summarized experiences related to **Alice stands on yellow block**
    - Conditions: Bob visited purple block
    - When Alice locates at 6 blocks down and 0 block to the left of the treasure, if Alice’s action is not up
      , Alice’s action is not left, then Alice will stand on yellow block. In all these cases, Alice visited
      yellow block.
    - When Alice locates at 6 blocks down and 1 block to the left of the treasure, if Alice moves right, then
      Alice will stand on yellow block.
    - When Alice locates at 5 blocks down and 0 block to the left of the treasure, if Alice moves down, then
      Alice will stand on yellow block.
    - When Alice locates at 6 blocks down and 0 block to the left of the treasure, if Alice keep standing on
      current block, then Alice will stand on yellow block. In all these cases, Alice visited yellow block.
    - When Alice locates at 6 blocks down and 0 block to the left of the treasure, if Alice moves down, then
      Alice will stand on yellow block. In all these cases, Alice visited yellow block.
    - When Alice locates at 6 blocks down and 0 block to the left of the treasure, if Alice moves right, then
      Alice will stand on yellow block. In all these cases, Alice visited yellow block.
6) Summarized experiences related to **Bob stands on skyblue block**
    - Conditions: Alice visited yellow block, and Bob visited purple block.
    - When Bob locates at 0 block down and 5 blocks to the left of the treasure, if Bob moves left, Alice does
       not stand on skyblue block, then Bob will stand on skyblue block.
    - When Bob locates at 0 block down and 5 blocks to the left of the treasure, if Alice’s action is not left
      , Bob moves left, then Bob will stand on skyblue block.
7) Summarized experiences related to **the team receive a Penalty of -10.0 reward**
    - Conditions: Bob stands on skyblue block, Bob visited skyblue block, Alice visited yellow block, Bob
      visited purple block, Bob’s action is not stand.
    - When Alice’s upper right block is green, Alice’s action is not down, if Bob moves right, then the team
      will receive a Penalty of -10.0 reward. In all these cases, Alice locates at 1 block down and 1 block to
       the left of the treasure.
    - When Alice locates at 1 block down and 1 block to the left of the treasure, if Alice’s action is not
      down, Bob moves right, then the team will receive a Penalty of -10.0 reward.
8) Summarized experiences related to **the team receive a Reward = 100.0 (Game Win) **
    - Conditions: Bob stands on skyblue block, Bob visited skyblue block, Alice visited yellow block, Bob
      visited purple block
    - When Alice’s center right block is green, if Alice moves right, then the team will receive a Reward =
      100.0. In all these cases, Alice locates at 0 block down and 1 block to the left of the treasure.
    - When Alice locates at 0 block down and 1 block to the left of the treasure, if Alice moves right, then
      the team will receive a Reward = 100.0.

                           Listing 1: Searched rules in Alice&Bob Scenario


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Table A4: Representative rule of Log-based anomaly detection

                 Rule            Precision Description
         E7,E15 → abnormal           1.0    If events E11 and E28 occur sequentially, it indicates a
                                            high probability of anomaly with a confidence of 100%.
         E11,E28 → abnormal        0.9553   If events E11 and E28 occur sequentially, it indicates
                                            a high probability of anomaly with a confidence of
                                            95.53%
      E11,E26,E20 → abnormal        0.99    If events E11 and E28 occur sequentially, it indicates a
                                            high probability of anomaly with a confidence of 99%



C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
We provide detailed implementation for the three public tasks and the hyperparamter in Table A5.

C.1   R ELATION E XTRACTION

We employed Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) for relation extraction across all relation triplets
in the training set. The rules corresponding to terminal nodes were saved, and only those with a
precision greater than 0.5 were retained, resulting in a final set of 20 rules. During decision-making,
the LLMs select the most relevant rule based on similarity for each input. We experimented with both
GPT-3.5 (gpt-35-turbo-16k-20230613) and GPT-4 (gpt-4-20230613). For more hyper-parameters,
please refer to Table A5.

C.2   L OG - BASED ANOMALY DETECTION

For our experiments, we sampled 20,000 blocks of log sequences from the large HDFS dataset,
which contained nearly 486,060 log entries. We split the dataset in a time-ordered fashion into
training, validation, and test sets with a ratio of 8:1:1. Both the sequential and semantic information
of log events were used for anomaly detection. In this task, we defined rules such that if a subset of
events (e.g., Em , En , El → abnormal) appears in order in a sequence, it indicates an abnormal log
sequence. For example, the rule Em , En , El → abnormal indicates that if Em , En , El appear in
order within a sequence, the sequence is identified as having abnormal characteristics. We employed
MCTS to search for rules in the log event sequences of the training set, with the rule’s accuracy
serving as the reward. During anomaly detection, both event sequence and semantic information are
input into the LLM, and matching rules are retrieved from the rule library. If no matching rule is
found, the LLM is notified that the log sequence does not reflect any known abnormal patterns from
historical data.

C.3   A LICE &B OB S CENARIO

We choose the cooperative puzzle-solving game Alice&Bob (shown in Figure A6), as it is both
challenging in requiring planning and collaboration, where two agents, Alice and Bob, navigate a
13x9 grid to find a treasure (Chen et al., 2024b) and the optimal path for them are both against to the
intuition. Each agent starts at different positions and can move up, down, left, right, or keep stand,
constrained by walls and map boundaries. Keys open corresponding doors, and a lever removes
walls, unlocking new areas. The agents only receive rewards upon reaching the treasure (+100),
with penalties for hitting walls (-0.1 for general walls, -10 for removable ones). Each agent has
limited visibility (a 3x3 area), and they must cooperate, using their abilities to overcome obstacles.
Episodes last up to 50 steps.
The observation of the agents includes their surrounding 8 blocks, their relative distance to the
treasure, their teammate’s relative distance to the treasure, as well as the special blocks they visited.
The candidate body predicates, including the agents’ observations and their actions. We search the
logic rules from different aspects following the LLMs’ suggestion: 1) team reward = -10; 2) Alice
or Bob stand on yellow, purple, skyblue blocks; 3) Game Win.



                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  You are a relation extraction assistant, and your task is to extract specific relationships between given
  entities from a document. The format for a relationship triple should be (entity1, relation, entity2), for
  example, (’University of Cologne’, ’based in’, ’Germany’). I will supply you with a document, 20
  relationships with their descriptions, and the entities whose relationships need to be uncovered. Your
  mission is to sift through the document and extract all potential relationships between the given entities,
  based on the content of the document.

  #### Task ####
  You need to extract the relationships mentioned below. Here are the descriptions and explanations of
  these relationships:
  {{relationships}}

  To improve Recall and precision in relationship extraction, we apply a set of logic rules to deduce
  additional relationships based on the ones already identified. You can follow these logic rules to find
  more relationships between entities:
  {{rules}}

  Remember, the goal is to use these rules to fill in missing information and enhance the accuracy of
  relationship extraction. Apply these rules systematically to every piece of information you process.
  Please use the logical rules to derive more comprehensive relation triples as far as possible. At the
  same time, the relation triples inferred using Logic rule should be identified and distinguished from the
  original triples.

  1. I have given you the following relationship triples. Based on these and the provided logical rules,
  derive additional relationship triples.
  2. Explain your derivation process and the logical rules you applied.

  ####Input####
  ## Entities: {{Entities}}
  ## Document: {{Document}}

  Now, based on the relationships, Document, and specified Entities I provided, extract the triples from the
  Document that include these Entities and relationships, and briefly state the reason for each extraction.
  Let’s think step by step.

  #### Output ####
  ## result:
  //Please return the relationship triples in the following JSON format, and after each relation you can
  attach a reason:
  { (’entity1’, ’relation1’, ’entity2’)//Reason: After each relation triple you can attach a reason.
  ...
  (’entity1’, ’relation2’, ’entity3’)//Reason:
  }
  To summarize, your task is to extract relation triples from the given document and follow logical rules
  to get a more comprehensive relation triple, focusing only on the entities and relationships mentioned.
  Please ensure that you do not extract any duplicate triples, and you should only extract triples that involve
  the entities and relationships provided by me. Output the triples in the strict format (entity1, relation,
  entity2), such as (University of Cologne, based in0, Germany).


         Figure A1: Instruction prompt template for generating relation extraction triples.


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  I’m fetching logical rules between relationships. I need you to help me complete the relationship pre-
  processing of rule generation.
  The logical rule is of the form:
  - relation1 → relation3, which means that if relation1 exists for entity A and entity B , then relation3
  exists for entity A and entity B.
  - relation1, relation2 → relation3, which means that if relation1 exists for entity A and entity B and
  relation2 exists for entity B and entity C, then relation3 exists for entity A and entity C.
  Given the following 20 relations and their interpretation, I need you to tell me which relations are can-
  didates for which it is completely impossible to derive relation 3 when each is a target relation. relation-
  ships
  In fact, I need you to eliminate some options to help me reduce the amount of calculation when I extract
  rules. It’s important to make the decision as carefully as possible so that you don’t miss a rule that will
  lead to the target relationship.
  You need to find as much as possible and not miss any potential relationships. Return a json format with
  a reason after each item, like this:
  {
  relation3: [relation2, relation1], //reason: Explain why relation1, relation2 does not derive relation3
  ...
  }


Figure A2: Instruction prompt template 1 for removing impossible body predicates in relation ex-
traction.


  I need your assistance in completing the preprocessing for generating logical rules between relation-
  ships.
  The logical rules follow this format (where the predicates before the arrow are considered Body
  predicates and the ones after the arrow are Head predicates):

  - relation1 → relation3: This means if relation1 exists between entity A and entity B, then relation3 also
  exists between entity A and entity B. - relation1, relation2 → relation3: This means if relation1 exists
  between entity A and entity B, and relation2 exists between entity B and entity C, then relation3 exists
  between entity A and entity C.


  Given the following twenty relations and their descriptions, I need you to identify which relations are
  suitable for being Body predicates. Please remove the ones that are not appropriate for Body predicates.
  {relationships}

  Please return the results as a dictionary where the key represents the relations suitable as Body predicates,
  and the value explains why.


Figure A3: Instruction prompt template2 for removing impossible body predicates in relation ex-
traction.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  You are a helpful assistant. Your task is to build body predicate and the head predicate for searching
  logic rules of a game through the Monte Carlo Tree Search.

  Game Description:
  Two player, Alice and Bob are collaborating to obtain a treasure in the grid world. At each timestep,
  the agent can observe their own paritial observation of the grid world, consisting of the following
  information:
  1) the color of the blocks surrounding the agent
  2) the color of the block where the agent is located
  3) the relative position of the agent’s teammate to the treasure
  4) the relative position of the agent to the treasure

  Each agent can choose to move up, move down, move right, move left and no action. If move towards
  an unmovable block, the agent gets a penalty of reward = -0.1. The two agents share a team reward
  whose values fails in [-0.2, -0.1, 0, -10, -10.1, 99.9, 100].
  There are blocks with five colors: movable white blocks, unmovable blocks, movable yellow blocks,
  movable purple blocks, movable skyblue blocks and the green blocks representing the treasure. Yellow,
  purple, skyblue blocks are with different functions but we do not know what will happen if any of the
  agent stand on any blocks. At any timestep, the agents can not stand on a same block.

  Definitions of Logic Rule:
  The logic rules are defined as:
  [body predicates: (feature 1 satisfies condition 1) & (feature 2 satisfies condition 2) ...]           →
  [head predicate: a special game state].
  As an example, (relative x-position of agent equals value 1) & (relative y-position of agent equals value
  2) → Alice obtains green block.

  Your Task: Define Head Predicates:
  To help the agents know the environment better, please suggest all events that may significant for the
  game win. Below are some examples,
  - if alice obtain treasure
  - if bob obtain the green block
  - the agent get a reward of -10.

  Please think step by step to finish your task.


Figure A4: Instruction prompt template for suggesting new target predicates in cooperative game.



                                     Relationship          Anomaly           Abuse
   Phase          Parameter                                                                    Alice&Bob
                                      Extraction           Detection        Detection
                Total rollouts            500                500              500                 500
   Rule         Reward metric          Precision           F1-score         F1-score           Precision +
 Generation                                                                                      Recall
                  Maximum
                                           2                  5                  5                 10
                body predicates
                   Terminal
                                    Precision > 0.9   Precision > 0.9      Precision >        Precision = 1
                   condition
                                                                              0.85
                  Maximum
                                         1000                1000              1000               1000
                    tokens
   LLM           Temperature               0                  0                  0                  0
 Reasoning           Top-p                 1                  1                  1                  1
                  Frequency
                                           0                  0                  0                  0
                    penalty
                   Presence
                                           0                  0                  0                  0
                    penalty

         Table A5: Summary of MCTS Parameters and LLM Configuration Across Tasks



                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  You will see a complete log event sequence from a Block in the HDFS file system. I will also provide
  you with the content of each log event in this sequence. Based on the current log sequence, you need to
  predict whether the system is in a [Normal] or [Abnormal] state, along with a written description of your
  reasoning.
  ## Input
   The log sequence window requiring anomaly detection is:
  {logs}
   The content of each log event in this sequence is as follows:
  {event content}
  ## The Guidelines for anomaly detection is :
  {{guidelines}}
  The provided guidelines are very reliable. You need to trust the guidelines I provide to you first, unless
  there is more obvious and direct evidence to the contrary. If there are obvious unusual messages in your
  logs like “error,” “failure,” “exception,” and so on, you can judge for yourself
  The provided guidelines are very reliable. You need to trust the guidelines I provide to you first, unless
  there is more obvious and direct evidence to the contrary. If there are obvious unusual messages in your
  logs like “error,” “failure,” “exception,” and so on, you can judge for yourself.

  ## And you should answer:
  ‘System State:[Normal]’ or ‘System State:[Abnormal]’

  You should first provide a brief explanation of your evaluation, and then always end your response with
  either ‘System State:[Normal]’ or ‘System State:[Abnormal]’ verbatim.


             Figure A5: Instruction prompt template for Log-based anomaly detection


                                                   Door can be opened after 𝓐 stand on yellow block.
  𝓑                                 📦
                                                   Door can be opened after 𝓑 stand on purple block.

                                                       Walls that can be removed if one of the agent keep
                                                       standing on the skyblue blocks


  𝓐


                                Figure A6: Illustration of Alice& Bob.


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  You are {agent’s name}, currently collaborating with your teammate, {teammate’s name}, in a grid
  world to obtain the treasure (green block). The final goal of your team is to secure the treasure through
  cooperation. Your team’s performance will be evaluated based on the total rewards you collect during
  the game and the number of steps taken to find the treasure. Due to the impossible communication with
  your teammate, please monitor the state of your teammate and adjust your plan in time.
  ## Game Win: You or {teammate’s name} reaches the treasure. Please actively collaborate with your
  teammate to achieve the goal.
  ## Candidate actions: ’up’: move to stand on your **upper center** block if not black; ’down’: move to
  stand on your **lower center** block if not blackk; ’left’: move to stand on your **center left** block
  if not blackk; ’right’: move to stand on your **center right** block if not blackk; ’stand’: keep standing
  on the current block. Be careful to stand on the same block for a long time.
  ## Explanation about your surrounding blocks: - Center left, center right, upper center, lower center
  blocks: you can only move to any of them as long as they are non-black blocks; otherwise, you will
  receive a penalty and stay on original block. - Upper left, Upper right, Lower left, lower right: You need
  move twice to reach those blocks. So if you want to move to those blocks, please be careful to plan the
  path and make sure all the blocks in the path are movable. As an example: if you want to move up then
  right, please make sure both center right and upper center blocks are reachable.
  ## Some examples to avoid obstacles: - If you want to move to the lower right block and your center right
  block is black, you can move down first then right if your lower center blobk is white. - If moving right
  would bring you closer to your destination but the ’center right block’ is unmovable and ’lower center
  block’ is movable, try moving down first, then moving left twice and finally up if applicable. Mention
  this in your plan if you want to do so.
  {Searched Logic Rules}
  Please response with your thoughts, plan, and chosen action in the following format: // Describe your
  initial thoughts, like analysising the key steps towards game win, identifying your subgoals, comparing
  your candidate actions, analysising the progress of your teammate, assessing your previous plan and
  making future plan. ”Thoughts”: ”Let’s think step by step! [your analysis here]”,
  // Make your future plan after you take action at this timestep. The plan will be the reference of your
  future decision making. // Do not include the current chosen action in the plan. ”Plan”: ”[fill your future
  plan here]”,
  // Your action, make sure to choose from ’up’, ’down’, ’left’, ’right’, ’stand’. ”Chosen Action”: ”[fill
  your final action choice here]”
  ## Your last action: {previous action}
  ## Your plan at last timestep: {previous plan}
  Please reaccess your situation and make decisions based on your current observations and the previous
  plan. If necessary, you can choose to act without considering your plan.
  ## Your current observation: {current observation}


       Figure A7: Instruction prompt template for generating Alice’s action in Alice&Bob.


                                                      24
