Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O N THE T RANSFER OF O BJECT-C ENTRIC R EPRESENTA -
TION L EARNING

 Aniket Didolkar1,∗ Andrii Zadaianchuk2 Anirudh Goyal1                   Mike C. Mozer3
 Yoshua Bengio1 Georg Martius4 Maximilian Seitzer4,∗
 1                                     2
   MILA & University of Montreal         University of Amsterdam
 3                      4
   Google Deepmind        MPI for Intelligent Systems & University of Tübingen



                                            A BSTRACT

         The goal of object-centric representation learning is to decompose visual scenes
         into a structured representation that isolates the entities into individual vectors.
         Recent successes have shown that object-centric representation learning can be
         scaled to real-world scenes by utilizing features from pre-trained foundation models
         like DINO. However, so far, these object-centric methods have mostly been applied
         in-distribution, with models trained and evaluated on the same dataset. This is in
         contrast to the underlying foundation models, which have been shown to be appli-
         cable to a wide range of data and tasks. Thus, in this work, we answer the question
         of whether current real-world capable object-centric methods exhibit similar levels
         of transferability by introducing a benchmark comprising seven different synthetic
         and real-world datasets. We analyze the factors influencing performance under
         transfer and find that training on complex natural images improves generalization to
         unseen scenarios. Furthermore, inspired by the success of task-specific fine-tuning
         in foundation models, we introduce a novel fine-tuning strategy to adapt pre-trained
         vision encoders for the task of object discovery. We find that the proposed approach
         results in state-of-the-art performance for unsupervised object discovery, exhibiting
         strong zero-shot transfer to unseen datasets.



1    I NTRODUCTION

In the past decade, deep learning-based approaches have become ever more general, culminating in
models that exhibit broad and flexible vision (Dehghani et al., 2023; Oquab et al., 2023) and language
understanding (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI Team, 2024). These so-called foundation models can
be applied to a variety of data and tasks in a zero-shot manner. An open challenge is how to equip
these models with the ability to robustly reason about visual inputs, that is, in a manner that supports
compositional generalization and causal reasoning (Schölkopf et al., 2021; Goyal & Bengio, 2022).
Evidence suggests that human cognition deals with these problems by dynamically binding raw
perceptual features into symbol-like entities that can be flexibly composed together and reasoned
over (Pinker, 1984; Spelke, 1990; 2000). Inspired by these findings, the field of object-centric
representation learning aims to replicate these abilities in deep learning models (Greff et al., 2020).
By mirroring the compositional generative process of the world (Brady et al., 2023), these methods
learn to decompose visual scenes into structured representations capturing the objects in the scene in
a fully unsupervised way. Not only can object-centric representations provably exhibit compositional
generalization (Wiedemer et al., 2024), they also support a diverse set of downstream tasks such as
world modeling (Ke et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023a), robotic control (Zadaianchuk et al., 2020; Driess
et al., 2023; Didolkar et al., 2024; Haramati et al., 2024), visual question answering (Xu et al., 2024;
Mamaghan et al., 2024), and compositional generation in 2D (Singh et al., 2022a; Wu et al., 2023b;
Jiang et al., 2023) and 3D (Sajjadi et al., 2022; Jabri et al., 2023).

  ∗
    equal    contribution.    Correspondence:                 maximilian.seitzer@tue.mpg.de,
adidolkar123@gmail.com.
Website: rw-ocrl.github.io/ftdinosaur-paper


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


While long confined to simplistic synthetic datasets (Eslami et al., 2016; Greff et al., 2019; Engelcke
et al., 2020; Locatello et al., 2020), recent progress has scaled object-centric representations to
complex real-world image (Seitzer et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023b; Jiang et al., 2023; Kakogeorgiou
et al., 2024; Löwe et al., 2024) and video datasets (Zadaianchuk et al., 2023b; Aydemir et al., 2023).
This success is enabled by the use of pre-trained features from self-supervised vision encoders such
as DINO (Caron et al., 2021). While it has been shown that the representations produced by such
self-supervised models are fairly robust to changes to the training distribution, it is unclear whether the
same holds for an object-centric model trained on top of such representations. Thus, in this work, we
study the question of how well object-centric representations using pre-trained features transfer to new
data. This comprises (1) the ability of models to discover objects in unseen scenarios and (2) the robust-
ness of the object representation itself. In particular, we focus on the “zero-shot” setting, where models
are presented with object categories never seen during training. This setting is relevant as a model
with strong zero-shot abilities could serve as a “foundation model” for object-centric representations.
To this end, we introduce a benchmark consisting of 7 datasets comprising a diverse range of
synthetic and real-world scenes. Using this benchmark, we (1) seek to understand the zero-shot
transfer capabilities of existing models, and (2) study the properties of training datasets that influence
generalization. The general conclusion we draw from this benchmark is that object-centric models
which are trained on naturalistic datasets consisting a variety of objects — such as C OCO (Lin et al.,
2014) — usually exhibit decent zero-shot generalization.
Equipped with this knowledge, we aim to build a strong general-purpose object-centric model. To
achieve this, we first make the observation that current approaches for real-world object-centric
learning (Seitzer et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023b; Jiang et al., 2023; Zadaianchuk et al., 2023b; Aydemir
et al., 2023) use fixed pre-trained encoders (e.g. with the D INO method (Caron et al., 2021)) to
encode the input. This may be limiting as, while the pre-trained encoders offer good general-purpose
features, they may not be optimal for the task of object discovery. Instead, we propose to finetune
the encoder parameters for the target task; to this end, we introduce a suitable training recipe as well
as a novel decoder that reduces the increased computational costs from finetuning. Building on the
D INOSAUR model (Seitzer et al., 2023), our proposed finetuning approach sets a new state-of-the-art
for real-world object-centric learning on the C OCO dataset, as well as in the zero-shot setting. Our
method shows zero-shot transfer across a multitude of diverse datasets, often achieving and even
surpassing the in-distribution performance on these datasets.
Our contributions are as follows:
       • We introduce a benchmark to evaluate the transfer of real-world capable object-centric
         learning methods (Sec. 3.1).
       • Using the benchmark, we analyze the zero-shot capabilities of object-centric models
         (Sec. 3.2) and investigate dataset properties for training generalizable models (Sec. 3.3).
       • We propose a finetuning approach applied to D INOSAUR, which allows the stable adaptation
         of the parameters of the pre-trained encoder for the task of object discovery (Sec. 4).
       • The resulting method, FT-D INOSAUR, achieves state-of-the-art results across various in-
         distribution and out-of-distribution scenarios (Sec. 5).


2    R ELATED W ORK

Object-Centric Learning on Real-World Datasets Originally, object-centric methods were mostly
applied to synthetic data with limited complexity (Johnson et al., 2017; Karazija et al., 2021; Greff
et al., 2022) and trained from scratch (Eslami et al., 2016; Burgess et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2020;
Locatello et al., 2020; Traub et al., 2023). Recently, there has been considerable interest (Elsayed
et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2022b; Seitzer et al., 2023; Zadaianchuk et al., 2023b; Wu et al., 2023b;
Didolkar et al., 2024; Löwe et al., 2024; Kakogeorgiou et al., 2024) in scaling those methods to
complex and unconstrained real-world image and video datasets like C OCO (Lin et al., 2014) or
YouTube-VIS (Yang et al., 2019). Current state-of-the-art techniques (Seitzer et al., 2023; Wu et al.,
2023b; Jiang et al., 2023; Kakogeorgiou et al., 2024; Aydemir et al., 2023; Zadaianchuk et al., 2023b)
rely on applying slot attention (Locatello et al., 2020) to frozen vision transformers (ViT) (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021) pre-trained with contemporary self-supervised representation learning methods (Caron
et al., 2021; Oquab et al., 2023). Approaches differ by their learning objective; one line of models


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Average                                            Average


                                      En


                                                                                         En
              -C


                                                              -C
                               0.8                                                0.8


                                         tity


                                                                                            tity
           i


                                                           i
        OV


                                                        OV
                                                                                                         Model


                                          Se


                                                                                             Se
       M


                                                       M
                           0.4                                                0.4


                                            g


                                                                                               g
                                                                                                         DINOSAUR
                                                                                                         SlotDiffusion
                         0.0                                                0.0


                                                Tex


                                                                                                   Tex
      MOVi-


                                                      MOVi-
                                                                                                         SPOT


                                            Clevr


                                                                                               Clevr
                                                                                                         SAM (comp.)
       E


                                                        E
                                                                                                         SAM (best)

               Sc                                                 Sc
                 anN                 B                              anN                 B
                    et           YC                                    et           YC

     (a) Object discovery (FG-ARI).                   (b) Linear position probing (R2 ).

Figure 1: Evaluating zero-shot transfer of current object-centric models trained on the C OCO
dataset. (a): object discovery performance in terms of FG-ARI. (b): linear probing of object position
from slots in terms of R2 score. We report results for mBO and category probing in Fig. A.1.



is based on D INOSAUR (Seitzer et al., 2023) and utilizes a feature reconstruction objective (Seitzer
et al., 2023; Zadaianchuk et al., 2023b; Kakogeorgiou et al., 2024; Aydemir et al., 2023), whereas
others apply diffusion objectives (Jiang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023b). Although these techniques
confirm that object-centric representation learning is possible for complex real-world inputs, they
are also limited by the quality of self-supervised encoders, as those encoders remain frozen during
object-centric training. In contrast, our method, while starting from self-supervised features, adapts
them through object-centric finetuning, making them more suitable for the task of object-centric
scene decomposition.


Zero-shot Transfer A paradigm first introduced by Larochelle et al. (2008), zero-shot transfer is
the application of models to tasks or datasets not seen during training. Recently, zero-shot transfer
has become more prevalent in deep learning due to the availability of large foundation models (Oquab
et al., 2023; Kirillov et al., 2023; OpenAI Team, 2024); these models utilize large-scale pre-training
to develop robust general-purpose abilities that can be applied zero-shot to various tasks and datasets.
In the context of object-centric learning, model transfer has been studied by testing models under
various types of distribution shifts, changing factors like object color, texture, or the number of
objects (Karazija et al., 2021; Dittadi et al., 2022; Wiedemer et al., 2024). Generally, these works only
change a single factor of variation between training and test data. However, in real-world settings,
distribution changes are much more uncontrolled than this: for instance, transferring to a novel
category of object might include (1) multiple simultaneous factor changes, and (2) completely new
factors of variation. Thus, in this work, we study this more challenging setting by evaluating the
zero-shot transfer to arbitrary object categories.

Task-Specific Finetuning While pre-training models on large and diverse datasets often offers
good baseline performance for zero-shot transfer (Radford et al., 2019; Kirillov et al., 2023; Oquab
et al., 2023), further improvement can be achieved by finetuning the model for the target task. For
example, self-supervised vision representations (Caron et al., 2021) can be adapted by finetuning for
the tasks of unsupervised semantic segmentation (Hamilton et al., 2022; Zadaianchuk et al., 2023a) or
multi-object tracking in videos (Salehi et al., 2023; Tumanyan et al., 2024). In this work, we similarly
propose to adapt pre-trained vision representations by finetuning them for the task of object discovery.


3    W HAT M ATTERS FOR T RANSFER OF O BJECT-C ENTRIC R EPRESENTATIONS ?

In this section, our goal is to (1) measure the degree to which real-world capable object-centric
models support zero-shot transfer, and (2) understand the factors influencing the models’ transfer
ability. For (1), we introduce a benchmark for measuring zero-shot performance in Sec. 3.1 and
compare models in Sec. 3.2. For (2), we study the impact of training data on transfer in Sec. 3.3.


                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1   B ENCHMARK FOR Z ERO -S HOT T RANSFER

Our goal is to test the zero-shot transfer of real-world capable object-centric models utilizing pre-
trained features. As this class of model is typically trained on the C OCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014), we
also use C OCO as the training dataset for our benchmark. For our benchmark, we interpret zero-shot
transfer to mean that a model can successfully discover objects of novel categories not occurring
in the training data. Objects of different categories (e.g. humans; cars) have at least one factor of
variation that is not shared between them (e.g. eye color; number of wheels); thus, we use “category”
as a criterion to make sure there is sufficient difference between train and test sets.1

Evaluation Datasets To obtain a test bed that robustly measures zero-shot performance, we gather
the evaluation splits of several datasets previously proposed by the object-centric community, with
diverse properties and increasing complexity: C LEVRT EX (Karazija et al., 2021), S CAN N ET and
Y CB as used in Yang & Yang (2022), and M OVi-C and M OVi-E (Greff et al., 2022). Additionally,
we add the challenging E NTITY S EG dataset (Lu et al., 2023), consisting of in-the-wild real-world
images with high-quality mask annotations. While E NTITY S EG includes images with categories
also occurring in the C OCO dataset, it is an open world dataset without pre-defined classes; thus, we
consider it adequate for the purpose of this benchmark. In total, we gathered 6 datasets with a total of
18 874 images. For analysis, we also use the PASCAL VOC (Everingham et al., 2012) dataset, but
do not include it in the zero-shot benchmark as its set of categories is fully included in the COCO
dataset used for training. For further details on the datasets, we refer to App. E.

Metrics Similar to prior work (e.g. Dittadi et al., 2022), we evaluate the object representation in
terms of object discovery (do the masks associated with each object align with the true object masks?)
and downstream property prediction (are the representations informative about the objects?). To
aggregate results over different datasets, we compute the per-sample average, normalizing by the
dataset size (see Table E.9). We now provide a brief overview of the metrics; see App. F for details.
For object discovery, we compute the commonly used foreground ARI (FG-ARI) (Rand, 1971; Hubert
& Arabie, 1985), measuring how well the discovered objects follow the separation prescribed by
the reference mask annotations. In addition, we compute the mean best overlap (mBO) (Pont-Tuset
et al., 2017), measuring how well the discovered masks fit to objects. To measure (in-distribution)
performance on the C OCO dataset, we additionally evaluate panoptic scene decomposition into
“things” (objects) and “stuff” (background). This is sensible because on real-world images, there is
no clear distinction between objects and background from the model’s point-of-view. To this end, we
compute panoptic ARI (P-ARI) and class-agnostic panoptic quality (PQ), where the latter measures
both mask quality and precision/recall (Kirillov et al., 2019). For downstream property prediction, we
closely stick to the protocol of Dittadi et al. (2022). In particular, we train linear predictors (probes)
on top of the object representation to predict position and category (where available) of the objects.
For position, we use the R2 score as a metric; for classification, we use accuracy.

3.2   E VALUATING M ODELS

Models We evaluate three recent methods capable of real-world object-centric learning, all using
pre-trained D INO features as inputs:D INOSAUR (Seitzer et al., 2023), which also uses D INO features
as targets; S POT (Kakogeorgiou et al., 2024), which builds upon D INOSAUR by improving the
decoder; and SlotDiffusion (Wu et al., 2023b), which uses a diffusion decoder. We limit ourselves
to pre-trained feature-based methods as other approaches have not shown scalability to real-world
data. To showcase the gap between state-of-the-art supervised and unsupervised methods for object
discovery, we evaluate the Segment Anything model (S AM) (Kirillov et al., 2023), a supervised
segmentation foundation model known for its zero-shot capabilities. We use two configurations: for
S AM (best), we use the largest available model (ViT-Huge), and pick the mask confidence threshold
resulting in the best performance per-dataset; in contrast to current object-centric methods, this results
in a variable number of masks per-image. For better comparability, we also evaluate a baseline S AM
(comp.), using a ViT-Base encoder and a fixed number of masks. Please refer to App. D for details
about the models.
    1
      Note that for our purposes, we are not going to take into account the data the utilized self-supervised
pre-trained models (e.g. D INO) were trained on (e.g. ImageNet). This is because our primary interest is in the
transfer of the object-centric components, which are trained on a distinct set of images (e.g. C OCO).


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        FG-ARI normalized by ID
                      ClevrTex                                                             0.8                                         Evaluation Dataset



  Training Dataset
                       MOVi-C                         1.5                                                                                    COCO (ID)
                       MOVi-E                                                                                                                Mean OOD


                                                                                  FG-ARI
                      ScanNet                                                              0.6                                               EntitySeg
                                                      1.0                                                                                    ScanNet
                          YCB                                                                                                                YCB
                      PASCAL                                                               0.4                                               MOVi-C
                     EntitySeg                        0.5                                                                                    MOVi-E
                                                                                                                                             ClevrTex
                        COCO
                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                 29     211    213     215       217



                        En SC B
                             O x
                             O C
                             an -E
                         PA YC t
                           tit AL

                                  O
                           C eg
                                 e
                          M rTe
                          M Vi-


                                C
                                N
                         Sc Vi


                              yS
                              O
                                                                                                      Size of Training Dataset
                              v
                          le
                       C


                                 Evaluation Dataset                                              .
                        (a) Varying train datasets.                                                     (b) Varying train dataset size.

Figure 2: Effect of training data on transfer of the D INOSAUR model. Performance in FG-ARI,
see Fig. A.2 for corresponding plots with mBO. (a): comparing transfer to in-distribution performance
for different training datasets. (b): scaling behavior for training on differently sized subsets of C OCO.


Results We present the results in Fig. 1 and Fig. A.1, with example predictions in App. G. For
object discovery, D INOSAUR and SlotDiffusion are on par in terms of FG-ARI, while SlotDiffusion
achieves the best mBO. Unsurprisingly, S AM (best) outperforms the unsupervised methods; this is
especially pronounced in terms of mBO — the difference can be explained by S AM’s ability to output
a variable number of masks, which allows S AM to discover smaller objects not captured by methods
with a fixed number of slots. If we remove that privilege, the SAM (comp.) baseline is inferior to the
unsupervised models on many datasets, with the exception of C LEVRT EX. For downstream property
prediction, we find D INOSAUR to perform best on average, allowing for a decent property readout on
most datasets. We also evaluate property prediction for D INOSAUR models trained in-distribution
on each dataset. Comparing the average performance of the zero-shot model to the in-distribution
models, we see similar results for predicting categories (+1% rel. change), and only slight drops
for predicting positions (-11% rel. change). We conclude that object-centric models already exhibit
decent zero-shot generalization to unseen datasets.


3.3                  E VALUATING T RAINING DATA

So far, we used the same training data for comparing the models — a natural question is how the
training data affects transfer behavior. To answer it, we train D INOSAUR on different training datasets
and evaluate the zero-shot performance in terms of object discovery. We organize our experiments
into two groups: (1) varying the data distribution, and (2) varying the amount of samples from a
particular data distribution. The former allows us to identify properties of the data that influence
zero-shot behavior, whereas the latter investigates how models scale with data.

Properties of the Data Distribution To obtain training datasets with different properties, we
utilize the training splits belonging to the benchmark datasets listed in Sec. 3.1. We characterize
the training datasets along three dimensions: realism — in terms of the three categories synthetic
(C LEVRT EX), hybrid (M OVi, S CAN N ET, Y CB) and natural (PASCAL VOC, C OCO, E NTITY S EG);
diversity — on a spectrum from narrow to broad (roughly C LEVRT EX ≪ S CAN N ET, Y CB, PASCAL
VOC ≪ M OVi ≪ C OCO ≪ E NTITY S EG); and the amount of objects — ranging from few (PASCAL
VOC) to moderate (up to 6; C LEVRT EX, S CAN N ET, Y CB) to many (M OVi, C OCO, E NTITY S EG).
The results are shown in Fig. 2a.
First, we find that training and evaluating in-distribution, i.e. on matching datasets, unsurprisingly
performs best in general. Training on synthetic and hybrid datasets transfers well to datasets in
those categories, but not to natural data; conversely, natural data transfers well to synthetic and
hybrid data. Next, we find that the zero-shot performance is fairly similar when trained on C OCO
and E NTITY S EG (high diversity, many objects), or PASCAL VOC (less diversity, few objects). This
shows that having complex natural data is more important for zero-shot performance compared to
data diversity. Moreover, even when trained on natural data with few objects (e.g. PASCAL VOC),
the model transfers well to datasets with more objects such as M OVi, C OCO, and E NTITY S EG.


                                                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    ➀ Object-Centric Finetuning                                ➁ High-Res. Adaptation                     ➂ Transfer
                                                                                              COCO (ID)                EntitySeg


(224 x 224)                                             (518 x 518)
                                                                                              Pascal VOC               ClevrTex
                                                                      Initialize



                                            FT-DINOSAUR                                        MOVi-C                  MOVi-E

                                                                      Top-K MLP
                 DINOv2                    Slot Attention
                                                                       Decoder

                          Patch Features                    Slots
                                                                                               ScanNet                  YCB

                                                                                       Rec.
                 DINOv2                                                                Loss


Figure 3: Overview of our method “FT-D INOSAUR”. ➀ Object-Centric Finetuning: starting from
D INOv2, the encoder is finetuned for the task of object discovery on the C OCO dataset. ➁ High-Res
Adaptation: the model is further adapted to high-resolution images. ➂ Transfer: at test time, we
transfer the trained model to different datasets from our proposed benchmark (Sec. 3.1).


Overall, we can conclude that training on natural data leads to strong zero-shot performance of
current object-centric models.


Effect of Data Scale We now investigate the effect of the number of training data points. To
do so, we train D INOSAUR on differently sized subsets of the C OCO dataset (up to 240k samples
when including the “unlabeled” split). From the results in Fig. 2b, we find that in-distribution
performance plateaus around 8 192 (213 ) samples, and zero-shot performance around 16 182 (214 )
samples. Intriguingly, this shows that current object-centric models can be very sample efficient in
obtaining decent in-distribution and competitive zero-shot generalization. However, we do not find
evidence of favorable data scaling laws.


3.4           S UMMARY

Our initial question was whether object-centric models based on pre-trained models inherit some of
their generality. Our results show that this is indeed the case, as the models we tested (D INOSAUR,
S POT, SlotDiffusion) exhibit decent zero-shot transfer to unseen object categories. Furthermore, our
experiments show that training on complex natural data is an important component for zero-shot
transfer, which can be attributed to the inherent complexities associated with such data. In addition,
real-world datasets offer a significantly larger catalog of objects and instances to train on compared
to synthetic or hybrid datasets.
Equipped with this knowledge, we shift our focus to enhancing the performance of unsupervised
object-centric models. Specifically, the question we ask is: Can we improve object-centric represen-
tations by finetuning pre-trained encoders for the task of object discovery?


4       O BJECT-C ENTRIC F INETUNING

Current methods for real-world object-centric learning (Seitzer et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Wu
et al., 2023b; Kakogeorgiou et al., 2024; Zadaianchuk et al., 2023b; Aydemir et al., 2023; Löwe et al.,
2024) are all based on pre-trained self-supervised features (Caron et al., 2021; Oquab et al., 2023).
While those features offer good performance for many downstream tasks out of the box, they are not
explicitly designed for the task of object discovery. We conjecture that this gap between training
and downstream objective leads to sub-optimal transfer performance. Thus, we propose to adapt the
pre-trained features by task-specific finetuning — Fig. 3 shows our approach.


                                                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Image                                 PCA (1-3)   Masks       Image                            PCA (1-3)   Masks


                      OC Finetuning DINOSAUR


                                                                               OC Finetuning DINOSAUR
Figure 4: Visualization of encoder features in D INOSAUR (frozen D INOv2 features) and for fea-
tures adapted with object-centric finetuning. We show the 1st to 3rd PCA components visualized
by different RGB channels (second column). The last column shows scene decomposition masks by
each method. More examples and additional PCA components are shown in Fig. A.4.



4.1   F INETUNED D INOSAUR

Finetuning We first describe how we adapt the D INOSAUR architecture (Seitzer et al., 2023) for
finetuning. D INOSAUR uses a pre-trained ViT as the encoder that is kept fixed during training. The
original work reported that unfreezing the encoder leads to a collapse; this is because the encoder
features are simultaneously used as the model’s prediction targets. To sidestep this problem, we add
a target encoder that is initialized to be a copy of the original encoder, but kept fixed throughout
training. This allows us train the full model end-to-end without collapse.
We found that the encoder would initially drift away from its pre-trained initialization, likely induced
by the noisy gradients from the randomly initialized slot attention module. To reduce the effect of
this, we introduce blockwise exponentially decaying learning rates (Howard & Ruder, 2018) for
the encoder. Furthermore, we found a better set of hyperparameters, namely a lower learning rate,
switching to a cosine learning rate schedule (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017), lower gradient clipping,
weight decay on the encoder and a higher batch size. We detail the exact settings in App. C.4. The
efficacy of this improved setup is shown by the fact that we can now also train the model starting
from a randomly initialized ViT encoder (42.3 FG-ARI, 27.3 mBO), a scenario which was previously
reported as leading to collapse by Seitzer et al. (2023). We further expand on this setup in Section
A. We also experimented with an EMA student-teacher setup to continuously adapt the targets
throughout training, but found that this leads to worse results (see App. A.2).


High Resolution Adaptation A further way to make more effective usage of data is to increase
the image resolution. Standard ViTs use a relatively low resolution of 224 × 224 pixels, leading to a
patch resolution of 16 × 16 when trained with patch size 14. This hides details, inhibits capturing
smaller objects, and leads to coarser objects masks. Thus, after training at 224 × 224 resolution, we
add a short second stage of training, in which the model is adapted to image resolution to 518 × 518
(i.e. 37 × 37 patches) over 10 000 steps. This is similar D INOv2’s training strategy (Oquab et al.,
2023), and adds significant improvements (Sec. 4.3) without a high computational burden.


Efficient Top-K Decoding Finetuning the encoder and high resolution adaptation both significantly
increase the costs in terms of computation and memory. To mitigate this, we introduce a novel
efficient decoding approach based on the MLP decoder introduced by Seitzer et al. (2023), which
we call top-k decoding. For each of N patches, the MLP decoder produces an output by combining
the predictions over C slots using a slot-wise weighted average, resulting in a computational cost
of O(N · C). Our insight is that most of this computation is wasted, as slots are localized and
mostly sparsely distributed across the image — instead, it suffices to decode the k most likely slots
occupying a patch, reducing the costs to O(N ) for constant k. While we do not have access to the
true occupation probabilities apriori, empirically we found that the masks from slot attention can
serve as a good proxy. We refer to App. C.3 for more details.


                                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Ablation study on C OCO. Starting from D INOSAUR (Seitzer et al., 2023) (first row), we
ablate the impact of switching to D INOv2, finetuning the encoder (FT), improving general (G-HP)
and encoder hyperparameters (E-HP), adding top-k decoding and high-resolution adaptation. Results
averaged over 3 random seeds besides last two rows, which use 5 seeds.

                                                                  D INO   +D INOv2   +FT   +Hi-Res
Model               FT G-HP E-HP FG-ARI mBO P-ARI PQ
D INO ViT-B/16      ✗   ✗     ✗      40.3   27.2   37.1 14.4
D INOv2 ViT-S/14 ✗      ✗     ✗      42.5   28.8   39.5   16.3
                 ✗      ✓     ✗      42.9   29.1   39.8   16.8
                 ✓      ✗     ✗      46.5   29.8   42.2   17.9
                 ✓      ✓     ✗      48.0   30.6   42.8   18.8
                 ✓      ✓     ✓      48.5   30.7   42.6   19.0
+Top-k           ✓      ✓     ✓      46.4   32.0   43.5   19.5
+Top-k, +Hi-Res ✓       ✓     ✓      46.6   35.6   49.6   23.6



4.2     A NALYSIS

Object-centric finetuning adapts the pre-trained encoder such that the original D INOv2 features can
be predicted better, with the slot representations acting as a bottleneck. To better understand the effect
of this procedure, we study how the encoder representations change after finetuning. In Fig. 4 and
Fig. A.4, we show the first PCA components obtained from D INOv2 features (used by D INOSAUR)
and from features after object-centric finetuning. D INOv2 features mainly exhibit semantic similarity,
i.e. one component often corresponds to several different objects or parts of the same category (such
as human heads). In contrast, after object-centric finetuning, PCA components are noticeably object-
centric, splitting instances of the same category and grouping together different object parts into
one component. To confirm this observation quantitatively, we apply per-image k-means clustering
to the two types of features. On C OCO, we find that the clustering of features from object-centric
finetuning corresponds better to object instances, reaching 34.0 FG-ARI and 28.7 mBO in contrast to
27.4 FG-ARI and 24.7 mBO for the original D INOv2 features.

4.3     A BLATIONS

In Table 1, we analyze the contribution of different components of our model on the C OCO dataset,
starting from the original D INOSAUR model and ending with our final model. First, we find that
switching from D INO to D INOv2 leads to moderate improvements (+2.2 FG-ARI and +1.6 mBO).
Adding finetuning results in a strong improvement of FG-ARI (+4.0), demonstrating the importance
of task-specific adaptation. To evaluate our hyperparameter changes, we split them into two groups:
general hyperparameters (cosine schedule, lower learning rate, lower gradient clipping), and encoder
hyperparameters (blockwise learning rates, lower encoder learning rate, encoder weight decay).
The changes to the general hyperparameters result in moderate improvements (+1.5 FG-ARI, +0.8
mBO, +0.9 PQ), with the changed encoder hyperparameters contributing further small improvements.
Introducing top-k decoding reduces FG-ARI (-2.1), but increases the other metrics (e.g. +1.3 mBO).
Finally, high-resolution adaptation results in further strong boosts (+3.6 mBO, +6.1 P-ARI, +4.1 PQ).


5     E VALUATION

To evaluate our approach, we use our benchmark to answer the following three questions:
    • How does our proposed finetuning methodology work on diverse datasets (Sec. 5.1)?
    • How does our method compare to prior methods for real-world object-centric learning (Sec. 5.2)?
    • How does our method perform on the introduced zero-shot benchmark (Sec. 5.3)?

5.1     E VALUATION OF O BJECT-C ENTRIC F INETUNING

We first validate our proposed finetuning approach as a general methodology by training on diverse
datasets. In particular, we train a D INOSAUR model using a D INOv2 backbone with and without


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               1.2                               1.2



FG-ARI norm.
                                                                       Model            FG-ARI mBO P-ARI PQ


                                     mBO norm.
                                                                       D INOSAUR         40.5    27.7   37.1   14.4
               1.0                               1.0
                                                                       SlotDiffusion†    37.3    31.4   47.6   21.0
                                                                       S POT †           37.0    34.8   52.4   21.3
               0.8                               0.8                   FT-D INOSAUR      48.8    36.3   49.4   23.9
                         MOVi-C     YCB                EntitySeg
                                                                       S AM (comp.)†     12.1    19.0   10.8   9.4
                         MOVi-E     ClevrTex           COCO
                         ScanNet    PASCAL             DINOSAUR        S AM (best.)†     44.9    56.9   54.4   10.9

Figure 5: Normalized performance when                                  Table 2: Comparison to prior work on C OCO.
adding finetuning to D INOSAUR for in-                                 We use a ViT-B/14 encoder with top-k de-
distribution training, using a ViT-S/14 D INOv2                        coding and hi-res. adaptation. Results for
encoder. Finetuning shows strong gains on all                          (FT-)D INOSAUR averaged over 3 seeds. Results
datasets. Numerical results in Table A.4.                              marked † evaluate official checkpoints, super-
                                                                       vised models in gray. We compare to more base-
                                                                       lines in Table A.5.


finetuning on the training splits of the datasets we used for analysis in Sec. 3.3, and evaluate
in-distribution. The results are listed in Fig. 5. We find that adding finetuning results in strong
improvements on both FG-ARI (up to 11 points) and mBO (up to 5 points) across all 8 datasets. First,
this demonstrates that finetuning, when using our training recipe, is a general strategy to improve
performance of slot attention-based object-centric models with pre-trained backbones. This is in
contrast to Seitzer et al. (2023)’s findings, who reported collapsing slots when finetuning the pre-
trained ViT encoder. Second, this shows that while pre-trained features obtained from self-supervised
methods like D INOv2 are powerful, it is possible to improve upon them with task-specific finetuning.
Interestingly, even though the model’s objective is to predict D INOv2 features, the optimal input to
slot attention are not those exact features. Following our analysis in Sec. 4.2, we conjecture that
finetuning adapts the features to simplify grouping under the inductive biases of the model.

5.2                  C OMPARISON TO P RIOR W ORK ON R EAL -W ORLD O BJECT-C ENTRIC L EARNING

Second, in Table 2, we compare our full approach with prior work on the C OCO dataset. We find
that our method sets a new state-of-the-art on C OCO, achieving better results than all previous
unsupervised object-centric methods, except being slightly worse than S POT on the panoptic ARI
metric. Moreover, our method also outperforms the S AM (comp.) baseline (ViT-Base encoder, same
number of masks) on all metrics. In particular, our method has strongly improved FG-ARI (+9),
indicating much better object discovery capabilities — it even achieves higher FG-ARI than the S AM
(best.) baseline (ViT-Huge encoder, variable number of masks). However, there is still a large gap
to S AM’s mBO, which we attribute to 1) S AM’s generally higher mask quality, and 2) its ability to
capture a variable number of objects, which in particular leads to finding more small objects. We
refer to Fig. G.6 for example predictions.

5.3                  Z ERO -S HOT E VALUATION

Finally, we evaluate our method in terms of its zero-shot performance. First, in Fig. 6, we compare the
zero-shot performance of our model finetuned on C OCO (without top-k decoding or high-res. adap-
tation) to the performance of our model finetuned in-distribution. We find that transferring from
C OCO yields comparable results to training in-distribution on most datasets (S CAN N ET, E NTITY-
S EG), and even surpasses in-distribution training on some datasets (M OVi-C, Y CB) — surprisingly,
object-centric finetuning does not hurt generalization (e.g. by overfitting), indicating that it adapts the
model to the task rather than the data. Overall, this shows that task-specific finetuning on diverse
real-world data is a viable path to obtain zero-shot object-centric models.
Second, in Fig. 7, we compare the zero-shot performance of our full model (including top-k decoding
and high-resolution adaptation) to prior work. Averaged over all datasets, our approach achieves
both the highest FG-ARI and mBO, while previous work generally trades off high FG-ARI with low
mBO (D INOSAUR), or high mBO with low FG-ARI (SlotDiffusion, S POT). On top of finetuning, we


                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         COCO                                                COCO


                                       En


                                                                                           En
             -C


                                                                 -C
                                 0.8                                                 0.4


                                       tity


                                                                                           tity
              i


                                                                  i
           OV


                                                               OV


                                                                                                                FG-ARI
                                                                                                                                              0.6


                                           Se


                                                                                             Se
                                                                                                                         0.6


                                                                                                                                        mBO
                            0.4                                                 0.2


         M


                                                             M
FG-ARI


                                             g


                                                                                                 g
                                                       mBO
                           0.0                                                 0.0


                                                  ex


                                                                                                      ex
         MOVi-


                                                             MOVi-
                                                                                                                         0.4                  0.4


                                            ClevrT


                                                                                                ClevrT
          E


                                                              E
                 Sc                                                  Sc                                                  0.2                  0.2
                   anN                 B                               anN               B
                      et          YC                                      et          YC
                                                                                                                          FT-DINOSAUR   SlotDiffusion   SAM (comp.)
                      In-distribution                   Zero-shot from COCO                                               DINOSAUR      SPOT            SAM (best)


Figure 6: Comparing in-distribution training                                                                    Figure 7: Zero-shot performance averaged
vs. zero-shot transfer from C OCO for our fine-                                                                 over datasets. FT-D INOSAUR performs best
tuning approach. Overall, performance is simi-                                                                  both in FG-ARI and mBO. Results per datasets
lar. Numerical results in Table A.4.                                                                            available in Table A.6.


ascribe this to our usage of the MLP decoder (higher FG-ARI) in combination with high-resolution
training (higher mBO).
Last, we compare our model to S AM. S AM (comp.) generally performs worse than our model, show-
ing the difficulty of unsupervised scene decomposition in the absence of task-specific information.
For S AM (best.), there is still a large difference to our approach in terms of mBO (30.7 points),
while the difference in terms of FG-ARI is much smaller (8.3 points). Taken together, these results
show that unsupervised object-centric models are closing the gap to supervised methods in terms of
zero-shot object discovery. This is astonishing, given that S AM was trained on 10 million images
with over 1 billion mask annotations. Furthermore, a principal advantage of object-centric models
over S AM is that they come equipped with explicit object representations. While mask quality as
measured by mBO is lacking behind S AM, we are hopeful that this gap is addressable by training on
even higher resolution images and introducing innovations for variable number of slots. Finally, in
the appendix, we present a comparison of the masks obtained from the proposed approach and all
baselines (App. G), and comprehensively study failure cases of our model (App. B).

6            C ONCLUSION
In this work, we have introduced a benchmark of diverse real-world and synthetic datasets to study
the zero-shot capabilities of object-centric representation learning models. Our findings indicate
that object-centric models using pre-trained encoders already exhibit notable zero-shot capabilities
when trained on real-world data. We then presented a finetuning procedure for adapting pre-trained
encoders to the task of object discovery, demonstrating that this approach achieves state-of-the-art
results across 8 datasets in both in-distribution and out-of-distribution scenarios. We believe that our
contributed tools — the zero-shot benchmark and stable finetuning — are important stepping stones
towards an object-centric foundation model.
Our benchmark showed the importance of the type of training data for zero-shot transfer. Our
experiments indicate that training on complex natural data is important, suggesting an exciting
direction to design curated datasets for zero-shot object-centric learning. Moreover, our benchmark
revealed that current object-centric models are highly sample-efficient but fail to leverage larger
datasets to improve performance at current model sizes. This result is significant because it suggests
that, unlike other deep learning domains, stronger object-centric models cannot be achieved simply by
scaling up data alone. We hope our findings will encourage the community to develop object-centric
models that scale effectively with both data and model size.
Finally, to build general-purpose object-centric models, it is crucial that the learned object-centric
representation are useful for real-world downstream tasks. In this work, we evaluated downstream
property prediction, which can already serve as a proxy for more complex tasks. While the down-
stream applicability of object-centric representations has been explored with various tasks — such as
reinforcement learning (Yoon et al., 2023), dynamics prediction (Wu et al., 2023a), compositional
image generation (Wu et al., 2023b), or visual question answering (Xu et al., 2024; Mamaghan et al.,
2024) — the zero-shot scenario has not been comprehensively studied so far. Thus, an exciting
direction for future work is to extend our benchmark to include a suite of zero-shot downstream tasks.



                                                                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7    ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the ERC - 101045454 REAL-RL and funded by EXC number 2064/1
– Project number 390727645. We acknowledge the support from the German Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (BMBF) through the Tübingen AI Center (FKZ: 01IS18039B). Andrii
Zadaianchuk is funded by the European Union (ERC, EVA, 950086). Views and opinions expressed
are, however, those of the author only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union
or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting
authority can be held responsible for them. The authors thank the International Max Planck Research
School for Intelligent Systems (IMPRS-IS) for supporting Maximilian Seitzer. Aniket Didolkar was
partly funded by the UNIQUE Excellence Scholarship. Aniket Didolkar would like to thank Mila for
providing part of the compute resources used in this work.

C ONTRIBUTIONS
This project was initiated by AD and MS, and MS had the role of project lead. AD and MS contributed
equally. AZ joined the project from the start and had critical input at all stages. AD, AZ, and MS
shaped the project direction, with advise from AG, MM, YB, and GM. MS implemented most of
the code, with contributions from AD. AD and MS performed the exploratory experiments. AD
performed most of the final experiments and evaluations, with some experiments ran by MS. AZ
performed the analysis of encoder features and created the corresponding figures (Fig. 4, Fig. A.4),
AD created the model figure (Fig. 3), and MS created the remaining figures. The first draft was
written by AD, AZ and MS, with AG and GM contributing to the final version.

R EFERENCES
Görkay Aydemir, Weidi Xie, and Fatma Güney. Self-supervised object-centric learning for videos. In
  NeurIPS, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06907.
Jack Brady, Roland S. Zimmermann, Yash Sharma, Bernhard Schölkopf, Julius Von Kügelgen,
  and Wieland Brendel. Provably learning object-centric representations. In ICML, 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/brady23a.html.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. NeurIPS, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
Christopher P Burgess, Loic Matthey, Nicholas Watters, Rishabh Kabra, Irina Higgins, Matt
  Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Monet: Unsupervised scene decomposition and representation.
  arXiv:1901.11390, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.11390.
Berk Calli, Aaron Walsman, Arjun Singh, Siddhartha Srinivasa, Pieter Abbeel, and Aaron M. Dollar.
  Benchmarking in manipulation research: Using the Yale-CMU-Berkeley object and model set.
  IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, 2015. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
  document/7254318.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging Properties in Self-Supervised Vision Transformers. ICCV, 2021. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14294.
Angela Dai, Angel X. Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Halber, Thomas Funkhouser, and Matthias
  Nießner. ScanNet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes. In CVPR, 2017. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.04405.
Mostafa Dehghani, Josip Djolonga, Basil Mustafa, Piotr Padlewski, Jonathan Heek, Justin Gilmer,
 Andreas Steiner, Mathilde Caron, Robert Geirhos, Ibrahim M. Alabdulmohsin, Rodolphe Jenatton,
 Lucas Beyer, Michael Tschannen, Anurag Arnab, Xiao Wang, Carlos Riquelme, Matthias Minderer,
 Joan Puigcerver, Utku Evci, Manoj Kumar, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Gamaleldin F. Elsayed, Aravindh
 Mahendran, Fisher Yu, Avital Oliver, Fantine Huot, Jasmijn Bastings, Mark Collier, Alexey A.
 Gritsenko, Vighnesh Birodkar, Cristina Nader Vasconcelos, Yi Tay, Thomas Mensink, Alexander


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Kolesnikov, Filip Pavetić, Dustin Tran, Thomas Kipf, Mario Lučić, Xiaohua Zhai, Daniel Keysers,
  Jeremiah Harmsen, and Neil Houlsby. Scaling vision transformers to 22 billion parameters. In
  ICML, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.05442.
Aniket Rajiv Didolkar, Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Cycle consistency driven object discovery.
  In ICLR, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=f1xnBr4WD6.
Andrea Dittadi, Samuele S Papa, Michele De Vita, Bernhard Schölkopf, Ole Winther, and Francesco
  Locatello. Generalization and robustness implications in object-centric learning. In ICML, 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.00637.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit,
  and Neil Houlsby. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale.
  In ICLR, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Chebotar,
  Pierre Sermanet, Daniel Duckworth, Sergey Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karol Hausman, Marc
  Toussaint, Klaus Greff, Andy Zeng, Igor Mordatch, and Pete Florence. PaLM-E: An embodied mul-
  timodal language model. In ICML, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.03378.
Gamaleldin Fathy Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Klaus Greff, Michael Curtis
  Mozer, and Thomas Kipf. SAVi++: Towards End-to-End Object-Centric Learning from Real-World
  Videos. In NeurIPS, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=fT9W53lLxNS.
Martin Engelcke, Adam R. Kosiorek, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. GENESIS: Generative
 Scene Inference and Sampling with Object-Centric Latent Representations. In ICLR, 2020. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=BkxfaTVFwH.
S. M. Ali Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, David Szepesvari, Koray
  Kavukcuoglu, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Attend, Infer, Repeat: Fast Scene Understanding with Gen-
  erative Models. In NeurIPS, 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
  2016/hash/52947e0ade57a09e4a1386d08f17b656-Abstract.html.
M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams, J. Winn, and A. Zisserman. The PASCAL Visual
 Object Classes Challenge 2012 (VOC2012), 2012. URL http://www.pascal-network.
 org/challenges/VOC/voc2012/workshop/index.html.
Anirudh Goyal and Yoshua Bengio. Inductive biases for deep learning of higher-level cog-
  nition. Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 478(2266):20210068, 2022. URL https:
 //royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rspa.2021.0068.
Klaus Greff, Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Rishabh Kabra, Nick Watters, Christopher Burgess, Daniel
  Zoran, Loic Matthey, Matthew Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-Object Representation
  Learning with Iterative Variational Inference. In ICML, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1903.00450.
Klaus Greff, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. On the Binding Problem in Artifi-
  cial Neural Networks. arXiv:2012.05208, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.
  05208.
Klaus Greff, Francois Belletti, Lucas Beyer, Carl Doersch, Yilun Du, Daniel Duckworth, David J.
  Fleet, Dan Gnanapragasam, Florian Golemo, Charles Herrmann, Thomas Kipf, Abhijit Kundu,
  Dmitry Lagun, Issam Laradji, Hsueh-Ti (Derek) Liu, Henning Meyer, Yishu Miao, Derek
  Nowrouzezahrai, Cengiz Oztireli, Etienne Pot, Noha Radwan, Daniel Rebain, Sara Sabour, Mehdi
  S. M. Sajjadi, Matan Sela, Vincent Sitzmann, Austin Stone, Deqing Sun, Suhani Vora, Ziyu Wang,
  Tianhao Wu, Kwang Moo Yi, Fangcheng Zhong, and Andrea Tagliasacchi. Kubric: A Scalable
  Dataset Generator. In CVPR, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.03570.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altch’e, Corentin Tallec, Pierre H. Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Ávila Pires, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi
  Azar, Bilal Piot, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Rémi Munos, and Michal Valko. Bootstrap your own latent:


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  A new approach to self-supervised learning. In NeurIPS, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2006.07733.
Mark Hamilton, Zhoutong Zhang, Bharath Hariharan, Noah Snavely, and William T. Freeman.
 Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation by Distilling Feature Correspondences. In ICLR, 2022. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=SaKO6z6Hl0c.
Dan Haramati, Tal Daniel, and Aviv Tamar. Entity-centric reinforcement learning for object ma-
  nipulation from pixels. In ICLR, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  uDxeSZ1wdI.
Bharath Hariharan, Pablo Arbeláez, Lubomir Bourdev, Subhransu Maji, and Jitendra Malik. Semantic
  contours from inverse detectors. In ICCV, 2011. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
  document/6126343.
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification.
  In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2018. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1801.06146.
Lawrence Hubert and Phipps Arabie. Comparing partitions. Journal of classification, 1985. URL
  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF01908075.
A. Jabri, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Emiel Hoogeboom, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, and Thomas Kipf. DORSal:
  Diffusion for object-centric representations of scenes et al. In ICLR, 2023. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2306.08068.
Jindong Jiang, Fei Deng, Gautam Singh, and Sungjin Ahn. Object-centric slot diffusion. In NeurIPS,
   2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.10834.
Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens Van Der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C Lawrence Zitnick, and
  Ross Girshick. Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary visual
  reasoning. In CVPR, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.06890.
Ioannis Kakogeorgiou, Spyros Gidaris, Konstantinos Karantzalos, and Nikos Komodakis. SPOT: Self-
  training with patch-order permutation for object-centric learning with autoregressive transformers.
  CVPR, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.00648.
Laurynas Karazija, Iro Laina, and Christian Rupprecht. ClevrTex: A Texture-Rich Benchmark for
  Unsupervised Multi-Object Segmentation. In NeurIPS Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, 2021.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.10265.
Nan Rosemary Ke, Aniket Didolkar, Sarthak Mittal, Anirudh Goyal, Guillaume Lajoie, Stefan Bauer,
  Danilo Rezende, Yoshua Bengio, Michael Mozer, and Christopher Pal. Systematic evaluation of
  causal discovery in visual model based reinforcement learning. arXiv:2107.00848, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.00848.
Alexander Kirillov, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, Carsten Rother, and Piotr Dollár. Panoptic segmen-
  tation. In CVPR, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.00868.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment anything. In ICCV, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02643.
Hugo Larochelle, Dumitru Erhan, and Yoshua Bengio. Zero-data learning of new tasks. In AAAI,
  2008. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/1620163.1620172.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge J. Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. In ECCV, 2014.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0312.
Zhixuan Lin, Yi-Fu Wu, Skand Vishwanath Peri, Weihao Sun, Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, Jindong
  Jiang, and Sungjin Ahn. SPACE: Unsupervised object-oriented scene representation via spatial
  attention and decomposition. ICLR, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.02407.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-Centric Learning with Slot
  Attention. In NeurIPS, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/
  file/8511df98c02ab60aea1b2356c013bc0f-Paper.pdf.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In ICLR,
   2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.03983.
Sindy Löwe, Phillip Lippe, Francesco Locatello, and Max Welling. Rotating features for object
  discovery. NeurIPS, 36, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.00600.
Qi Lu, Jason Kuen, Shen Tiancheng, Gu Jiuxiang, Guo Weidong, Jia Jiaya, Lin Zhe, and Yang
  Ming-Hsuan. High-quality entity segmentation. In ICCV, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2211.05776.
Amir Mohammad Karimi Mamaghan, Samuele Papa, Karl Henrik Johansson, Stefan Bauer, and
 Andrea Dittadi. Exploring the effectiveness of object-centric representations in visual question
 answering: Comparative insights with foundation models. arXiv:2407.15589, 2024. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2407.15589.
OpenAI Team. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv:2303.08774, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2303.08774.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Theo Moutakanni, Huy V. Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Russell Howes, Po-Yao
 Huang, Hu Xu, Vasu Sharma, Shang-Wen Li, Wojciech Galuba, Mike Rabbat, Mido Assran, Nico-
 las Ballas, Gabriel Synnaeve, Ishan Misra, Herve Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Armand
 Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. DINOv2: Learning robust visual features without supervision.
 TMLR, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.07193.
Steven Pinker. Visual cognition: An introduction. Cognition, 1984. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1016/0010-0277(84)90021-0.
Jordi Pont-Tuset, Pablo Arbeláez, Jonathan T. Barron, Ferran Marques, and Jitendra Malik. Multiscale
  Combinatorial Grouping for Image Segmentation and Object Proposal Generation. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2017. URL https://ieeexplore.
  ieee.org/document/7423791.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever,
  et al.    Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog,
  2019. URL https://cdn.openai.com/better-language-models/language_
  models_are_unsupervised_multitask_learners.pdf.
William M Rand. Objective criteria for the evaluation of clustering methods. Journal of the American
 Statistical association, 1971. URL https://www.jstor.org/stable/2284239.
Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Daniel Duckworth, Aravindh Mahendran, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Filip Pavetic,
 Mario Lucic, Leonidas J Guibas, Klaus Greff, and Thomas Kipf. Object scene representation
 transformer. In NeurIPS, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.06922.
Mohammadreza Salehi, Efstratios Gavves, Cees G.M. Snoek, and Yuki M. Asano. Time does
 tell: Self-supervised time-tuning of dense image representations. In ICCV, 2023. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2308.11796.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Towards Causal Representation Learning. IEEE - Advances
  in Machine Learning and Deep Neural Networks, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2102.11107.
Maximilian Seitzer, Max Horn, Andrii Zadaianchuk, Dominik Zietlow, Tianjun Xiao, Carl-Johann
 Simon-Gabriel, Tong He, Zheng Zhang, Bernhard Schölkopf, Thomas Brox, and Francesco
 Locatello. Bridging the gap to real-world object-centric learning. In ICLR, 2023. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=b9tUk-f_aG.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, and Sungjin Ahn. Illiterate DALL-E Learns to Compose. In ICLR, 2022a.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=h0OYV0We3oh.
Gautam Singh, Yi-Fu Wu, and Sungjin Ahn. Simple Unsupervised Object-Centric Learning for
  Complex and Naturalistic Videos. In NeurIPS, 2022b. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=eYfIM88MTUE.
Elizabeth S. Spelke. Principles of object perception. Cognitive Science, 1990. URL https:
  //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1207/s15516709cog1401_3.
Elizabeth S. Spelke. Core knowledge. The American psychologist, 2000. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1037/0003-066X.55.11.1233.
Manuel Traub, Sebastian Otte, Tobias Menge, Matthias Karlbauer, Jannik Thuemmel, and Martin V.
 Butz. Learning what and where: Disentangling location and identity tracking without supervision.
 In ICLR, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=NeDc-Ak-H_.
Narek Tumanyan, Assaf Singer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Dino-tracker: Taming dino for self-
  supervised point tracking in a single video. arXiv:2403.14548, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2403.14548.
A Vaswani. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Nicholas Watters, Loïc Matthey, Christopher P. Burgess, and Alexander Lerchner. Spatial broadcast
  decoder: A simple architecture for learning disentangled representations in vaes. arXiv:1901.07017,
  2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.07017.
Thaddäus Wiedemer, Jack Brady, Alexander Panfilov, Attila Juhos, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland
  Brendel. Provable compositional generalization for object-centric learning. In ICLR, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=7VPTUWkiDQ.
Ziyi Wu, Nikita Dvornik, Klaus Greff, Thomas Kipf, and Animesh Garg. SlotFormer: Unsupervised
  visual dynamics simulation with object-centric models. In ICLR, 2023a. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=TFbwV6I0VLg.
Ziyi Wu, Jingyu Hu, Wuyue Lu, Igor Gilitschenski, and Animesh Garg. Slotdiffusion: Object-centric
  generative modeling with diffusion models. In NeurIPS, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2305.11281.
Jiaqi Xu, Cuiling Lan, Wenxuan Xie, Xuejin Chen, and Yan Lu. Slot-VLM: Slowfast slots for
   video-language modeling. arXiv:2402.1308, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
   13088.
Linjie Yang, Yuchen Fan, and Ning Xu. Video instance segmentation. In ICCV, 2019. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.04804.
Yafei Yang and Bo Yang. Promising or Elusive? Unsupervised Object Segmentation from Real-
  world Single Images. In NeurIPS, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  DzPWTwfby5d.
Jaesik Yoon, Yi-Fu Wu, Heechul Bae, and Sungjin Ahn. An investigation into pre-training object-
  centric representations for reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2302.04419.
Andrii Zadaianchuk, Maximilian Seitzer, and Georg Martius. Self-supervised Visual Reinforcement
  Learning with Object-centric Representations. In ICLR, 2020. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=xppLmXCbOw1.
Andrii Zadaianchuk, Matthaeus Kleindessner, Yi Zhu, Francesco Locatello, and Thomas Brox.
  Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation with Self-supervised Object-centric Representations. In
 ICLR, 2023a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=1_jFneF07YC.
Andrii Zadaianchuk, Maximilian Seitzer, and Georg Martius. Object-centric learning for real-
 world videos by predicting temporal feature similarities. In NeurIPS, 2023b. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2306.04829.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     A PPENDIX
A     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

A.1    Z ERO -S HOT B ENCHMARK

We show additional results complementary to the results in the main part. Figure A.1 shows
benchmark results in terms of varying models, training data distribution, and training dataset size,
but with the mBO metric instead of the FG-ARI metric. The results largely mirror those in Fig. 1; it
can be seen that D INOSAUR generally has worse mBO than S POT and SlotDiffusion, whereas with
FG-ARI, this trend is reversed.
Figure A.3 shows the data scaling behavior of our FT-D INOSAUR method trained on different subsets
of the C OCO dataset, showing performance on the individual datasets in Fig. A.3a, and comparing
the aggregated performance to D INOSAUR in Fig. A.3b. While D INOSAUR is better in the very-low
sample regime (less than 5 000 samples), FT-D INOSAUR overall shows better scaling behavior. In
particular, FT-D INOSAUR exhibits a slightly upward trending scaling curve for OOD evaluation with
FG-ARI; while the effect is too weak to conclude that FT-D INOSAUR scales well with data, it would
be interesting to extend this experiment to include 1–2 magnitudes more data.

A.2    O BJECT-C ENTRIC F INETUNING

Targets from EMA teacher We can also frame our setup as Table A.1: Analysis of targets. τ
a variant of the student-teacher framework common in self- is the momentum for teacher up-
supervised methods (Grill et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2021; dates.
Oquab et al., 2023). There, the weights of the teacher model
are continuously updated from the student’s weights through an         τ FG-ARI mBO
exponential moving average (EMA), with a momentum param-               0  0.09   13.6
eter τ ∈ [0, 1] controlling the speed of adaptation. Through this  0.999  23.6   16.4
lens, our approach uses τ = 1, corresponding to not updating      0.9999  37.8   21.0
the teacher. This view suggests to use τ < 1 to improve the            1  48.5   30.7
targets throughout training.
In Table A.1, we analyze the effect of introducing student-teacher style EMA updates. Directly using
the features of the student as the targets (τ = 0) leads to collapse, as reported previously (Seitzer
et al., 2023). With momentum updates, we still find a high value for τ to be necessary to stabilize
training. Using fixed targets (τ = 1) gives the best results. We speculate this is because there is no
missing information in the auto-encoder setup, leading to a gradual loss of information.

Training Encoder from Scratch Here, we build upon the approach mentioned in Section 4.1 where
the model is trained with a ViT encoder initialized from scratch while still predicting DINOv2 features

                      Average                                             Average
                                     En
           i-C


                              0.8
                                        tity
        OV


                                                                                    0.8                   Model
                                         Se


                                                                                                Entit
       M


                                                           i-C


                          0.4
                                           g


                                                                                                          DINOSAUR
                                                         MOV


                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                    ySe


                                                                                                          SlotDiffusion
                        0.0
                                                                                                    g


                                                                            0.0
                                               Tex
      MOVi-


                                                                                                          SPOT
                                           Clevr


                                                                                                          SAM (comp.)
       E


                                                                                                          SAM (best)

              Sc                                                 MO                             x
                anN                 B                              Vi                        rTe
                                YC                                   -E                    ev
                   et                                                                   Cl

        (a) Object discovery (mBO).                  (b) Linear probing of category (Accuracy).

Figure A.1: Evaluating zero-shot transfer of current object-centric models trained on the C OCO
dataset. Corresponds to Fig. 1, but shows (a) mBO instead of FG-ARI and (b) linear probing accuracy
of object category from slots.


                                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        ClevrTex


                                                              mBO normalized by ID
                                                                                             0.4                                                    Evaluation Dataset
    Training Dataset


                         MOVi-C                                                                                                                           COCO (ID)
                         MOVi-E                             1.5
                                                                                             0.3
                                                                                                                                                          Mean OOD
                        ScanNet                                                                                                                           EntitySeg


                                                                                       mBO
                                                            1.0                                                                                           ScanNet
                            YCB                                                              0.2                                                          YCB
                        PASCAL                              0.5                                                                                           MOVi-C
                       EntitySeg                                                             0.1                                                          MOVi-E
                                                                                                                                                          ClevrTex
                          COCO
                                                                                             0.0
                                                                                                      29           211         213     215    217
                          En SC B
                               O x
                               O C
                               an -E
                           PA YC t
                             tit AL

                                    O
                             C eg
                                   e
                            M rTe
                            M Vi-


                                  C
                                  N
                           Sc Vi


                                yS
                                O

                                                                                                              Size of Training Dataset
                                v
                            le
                         C


                                     Evaluation Dataset                                               .
                          (a) Varying train datasets.                                                              (b) Varying train dataset size.

Figure A.2: Effect of training data on transfer of the D INOSAUR model. Corresponds to Fig. 2,
but shows mBO instead of FG-ARI.


           0.8                                                                             0.4                                                      Evaluation Dataset
                                                                                                                                                           COCO (ID)
           0.6                                                                             0.3                                                             Mean OOD
 FG-ARI


                                                                                     mBO


                                                                                                                                                           EntitySeg
           0.4                                                                             0.2                                                             ScanNet
                                                                                                                                                           YCB
           0.2                                                                             0.1                                                             MOVi-E
                                                                                                                                                           MOVi-C
           0.0                                                                             0.0                                                             ClevrTex
                         29       211    213   215    217                                        29          211         213     215    217
                               Size of Training Dataset                                                   Size of Training Dataset
                              (a) Scaling behavior of FT-D INOSAUR, showing OOD performance on individual datasets.
            0.8                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                                                      DINOSAUR
            0.6                                                                            0.3                                                             Mean OOD
                                                                                                                                                           COCO (ID)
 FG-ARI


                                                                                     mBO


            0.4                                                                            0.2                                                        FT-DINOSAUR
                                                                                                                                                           Mean OOD
            0.2                                                                            0.1                                                             COCO (ID)

            0.0                                                                            0.0
                         29        211   213   215   217                                         29          211         213     215   217
                              Size of Training Dataset                                                    Size of Training Dataset
                                                (b) Scaling behavior of FT-D INOSAUR vs. D INOSAUR.

Figure A.3: Scaling behaviour of FT-D INOSAUR on trained on differently sized subsets of
C OCO. Our method uses a ViT-S/14 with D INOv2 with finetuning, but no top-k decoding and hi-res
adaptation.


                                                                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table A.2: Zero-shot performance without a pre-trained encoder. Comparison of FG-ARI and
mBO across multiple datasets. Scratch-DINOSAUR is identical to FT-DINOSAUR except that
the ViT encoder is initialized from scratch and trained to predict DINOv2 targets. The average is
computed as a weighted average, normalizing with the size of the evaluation datasets.

                                     M OVi-C             M OVi-E         S CAN N ET           Y CB
                                  FG-ARI mBO        FG-ARI mBO        FG-ARI mBO         FG-ARI mBO
 DINOSAUR                           67.0    34.5      71.1     24.2     57.4     40.8      60.2      42.2
 SlotDiffusion                      66.9    43.6      67.6     26.4     52.0     51.7      62.5      59.2
 SPOT                               63.0    40.8      47.8     21.5     48.6     43.2      52.9      45.1
 FT-DINOSAUR (ViT-S/14)             71.3    44.2      71.1     29.9     54.8     48.4      67.4      54.5
 Scratch-DINOSAUR (ViT-S/14)        68.3    31.9      67.9     23.1     50.5     36.9      57.3      35.8

                                    C LEVRT EX       E NTITY S EG         COCO              Average
                                  FG-ARI mBO        FG-ARI mBO        FG-ARI mBO         FG-ARI mBO
 DINOSAUR                           82.5    35.2      43.5     19.4     42.4     29.4      68.4      32.7
 SlotDiffusion                      77.0    45.0      43.7     25.1     37.3     31.4      65.8      41.2
 SPOT                               63.3    40.0      41.7     27.4     37.0     34.8      55.4      35.9
 FT-DINOSAUR (ViT-S/14)             86.0    50.1      48.1     28.4     48.5     30.7      71.2      42.9
 Scratch-DINOSAUR (ViT-S/14)        78.8    31.4      46.6     22.7     42.3     27.3      67.1      36.4


as targets. Note that, fully removing the pre-trained targets is not feasible on real-world data because,
in that case, the representations collapse and the model fails to discover objects. In this setting, the
model is trained solely on the COCO dataset, and we refer to this variant as Scratch-DINOSAUR.
Table A.2 presents the results of zero-shot object discovery across the benchmark. Even though the
encoder was not pre-trained, Scratch-DINOSAUR achieves 42.3 FG-ARI and 27.3 mBO on COCO,
and it transfers to the other datasets with performance mostly on par with DINOSAUR in FG-ARI
(even outperforming certain baselines in some cases), albeit with a drop in mBO. Thus, a pre-trained
encoder is not strictly mandatory for robust zero-shot transfer of object-centric representations, but
the combination of pre-trained features with slot attention remains advantageous. In fact, adding
our proposed finetuning strategy (FT-DINOSAUR) on top of a high-quality encoder yields the best
performance overall.

Zero-Shot Performance with Learnable Slot Initialization We investigate the impact of learnable
slot initialization on zero-shot object discovery performance. Unlike our proposed approach, which
uses random slot initialization, this variant employs learnable initial slots while keeping all other
components unchanged.
On COCO, this model achieves 44.3 FG-ARI and 29.9 mBO, compared to 48.5 FG-ARI and 30.7
mBO achieved by our proposed method. To further evaluate its effectiveness, we test the model under
zero-shot conditions on multiple datasets. We denote this variant as FT-DINOSAUR (learnable init.)
and summarize its performance in Table A.3.
As shown in Table A.3, the learnable slot initialization approach performs competitively in FG-ARI
but significantly underperforms in mBO compared to our proposed FT-DINOSAUR method. This
indicates that while the learnable initialization still allows for reasonable object discovery, it produces
less precise segmentation masks, leading to reduced mask quality.
Additionally, using learnable slots has a major drawback in zero-shot settings: the number of slots
is fixed at training time and cannot be adjusted during inference. In contrast, our proposed random
initialization approach enables the model to generalize across different slot configurations at test time,
which is particularly useful when dealing with novel datasets.
Overall, these results validate the importance of using random initialization for achieving both strong
object discovery and high-quality segmentation masks.

Analysis of Finetuned Features In Fig. A.4, we show additional examples for visualizing the PCA
on the finetuned features compared to D INOv2 features (similar to Fig. 4). Similar to the discussion


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table A.3: Zero-shot performance with learnable slot initialization. We compare FG-ARI and
mBO across datasets for FT-DINOSAUR variants. The learnable initialization approach performs
competitively in FG-ARI but shows significantly lower mBO, indicating weaker mask sharpness.

                                     M OVi-C             M OVi-E       S CAN N ET           Y CB
                                  FG-ARI mBO       FG-ARI mBO         FG-ARI mBO       FG-ARI mBO
 FT-DINOSAUR (learnable init.)     72.2     30.8        65.6   18.2    54.9    42.9      67.3      42.8
 FT-DINOSAUR (ViT-S/14)            71.3     44.2        71.1   29.9    54.8    48.4      67.4      54.5
 FT-DINOSAUR (ViT-B/14)            73.3     42.9        69.7   27.9    55.8    48.6      70.1      54.1

                                   C LEVRT EX       E NTITY S EG         COCO             Average
                                  FG-ARI mBO       FG-ARI mBO         FG-ARI mBO       FG-ARI mBO
 FT-DINOSAUR (learnable init.)     81.7     31.8        47.7   24.2    44.3    29.9      68.2      31.3
 FT-DINOSAUR (ViT-S/14)            86.0     50.1        48.1   28.4    48.5    30.7      71.2      42.9
 FT-DINOSAUR (ViT-B/14)            83.9     45.9        49.7   29.0    46.9    29.5      71.5      40.8


in Sec. 4.2, we find that after finetuning, the encoder features are noticeably more object-centric.
For example, in the first and last examples, D INOv2 features show a part-based split of the shown
persons in the dominant PCA components; the finetuned features highlight the whole persons better.
In the second example, D INOv2 features group semantic instances (human) together in the dominant
components; after finetuning, the features clearly split the persons. However, note that is not necessary
that the features highlight the instances in the dominant components to derived an instance-based
grouping; in all examples, the masks discovered by D INOSAUR (last column) feature a correct
instance split (while also splitting further into parts in the last two examples). This may be because
the necessary information for the correct split is contained in the less dominant components of the
features (e.g. in PCA dimensions 4–6). However, we conjecture that the finetuned features simplify
the grouping task for slot attention, leading to better and more consistent object discovery.

A.3   E VALUATION

We include the following additional results for the evaluation of FT-D INOSAUR conducted in Sec. 5
of the main paper:

       • Finetuning In-Distribution (Sec. 5.1): we show the numeric values corresponding to Fig. 5
         in the main part in Table A.4. This table also shows the results for the in-distribution vs.
         zero-shot comparison in Fig. 6.
       • Extended Comparison To Prior Work on Real-World Object-Centric Learning
         (Sec. 5.2): we conduct an extended comparison to prior work for real-world object-centric
         learning on the C OCO dataset in Table A.5.
       • Zero-Shot Evaluation (Sec. 5.3): for object discovery, we show the full results all datasets
         of the zero-shot benchmark, corresponding to Fig. 1a and Fig. 7 in the main part in Ta-
         ble A.6. For downstream property prediction, we show the per-dataset results in Table A.7,
         corresponding to Fig. 1b in the main part.


B     M ODEL L IMITATIONS
Even though FT-D INOSAUR brings large improvements over D INOSAUR, the model still exhibits
problems with certain types of scenes. In Fig. B.5, we show several examples of such failure cases,
grouped into modes of failure. Two typical categories of failure are the overgrouping of semantically-
related objects (Fig. B.5a), and the split of objects into parts (Fig. B.5b). Both problems are primarily
caused by the model using the wrong number of slots. But note that even having access to the “correct”
number of slots per image can not resolve all problems, as the model may still allocate the slots in
undesirable ways. Consider the last example in Fig. B.5a: here, the model could correctly split the
two persons into individual slots if the motorbike is grouped as one object instead of as parts. A third
category of failure broadly stems from difficult or unusual images (Fig. B.5c): for example, grouping


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Image                            PCA (1-3)   PCA (4-6)   Masks


                                      DINOSAUR
                                      OC Finetuning
                     Image                            PCA (1-3)   PCA (4-6)   Masks

                                      DINOSAUR
                                      OC Finetuning


                     Image                            PCA (1-3)   PCA (4-6)   Masks
                                      DINOSAUR
                                      OC Finetuning


                     Image                            PCA (1-3)   PCA (4-6)   Masks
                                      DINOSAUR
                                      OC Finetuning


Figure A.4: Visualization of encoder features in D INOSAUR (frozen D INOv2 features) and for
encoder features adapted with object-centric finetuning, similar to Fig. 4 in the main paper. The
second column shows 1st to 3rd PCA components, and the third column shows 4th to 6th PCA
components grouped in one image by using different RGB channels. The last column shows object
discovery masks by each method.


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table A.4: Evaluation of adding finetuning to D INOSAUR when training in-distribution, using
a ViT-S/14 DINOv2 backbone. Finetuning shows strong performance improvements on all eight
datasets. We also show transfer when finetuning on C OCO, which performs comparable or better to
training in-distribution on 5 out of 7 datasets. Results corresponding to experiment in Fig. 5 in the
main paper.

                       M OVi-C                M OVi-E                S CAN N ET             Y CB
                    FG-ARI    mBO          FG-ARI       mBO        FG-ARI   mBO       FG-ARI        mBO
D INOSAUR            63.1      33.3         74.0        25.5        52.8     38.8      67.5         28.9
+Finetuning          71.9      36.8         82.0        28.1        63.8     43.8      71.1         27.5
Zero-shot (C OCO)    76.4      34.9         75.1        24.5        55.4     42.8      69.9         44.4

                      C LEVRT EX           PASCAL VOC               E NTITY S EG            C OCO
                    FG-ARI    mBO          FG-ARI       mBO        FG-ARI   mBO       FG-ARI        mBO
D INOSAUR            91.3      40.1         26.2        40.1        43.0     19.6      42.4         29.4
+Finetuning          95.8      40.1         29.7        40.8        45.7     20.9      48.5         30.7
Zero-shot (C OCO)    87.5      38.2         31.7        40.4        47.7     21.8      48.5         30.7


Table A.5: Extended comparison of FT-D INOSAUR to prior work on the C OCO dataset, corre-
sponding to Table 2 in the main paper. For our proposed approach, we average results across 5 seeds
for FT-D INOSAUR, ViT-S/14 and across 3 seeds for FT-D INOSAUR, ViT-B/14. Results marked with †
are from evaluating official checkpoints; results marked with ∗ are taken from the respective papers.
Supervised models (S AM) colored in gray.

   Model                                                           FG-ARI    mBO     P-ARI     PQ
                                                               ∗
   Slot Attention (Locatello et al., 2020), (Wu et al., 2023b)      21.4      17.2
   S LATE (Singh et al., 2022a), (Wu et al., 2023b)∗                32.5      29.1
   D INOSAUR (MLP Dec.) (Seitzer et al., 2023)                      40.5      27.7   37.1      14.4
   D INOSAUR (TF. Dec.) (Seitzer et al., 2023)∗                     34.1      31.6
   Stable-LSD (Jiang et al., 2023)∗                                 35.0      30.4
   SlotDiffusion (Wu et al., 2023b)†                                37.3      31.4   47.6      21.0
   S POT (Kakogeorgiou et al., 2024)†                               37.0      34.8   52.4      21.3
   FT-D INOSAUR, ViT-S/14                                           46.6      35.6   49.7      23.5
   FT-D INOSAUR, ViT-B/14                                           48.8      36.3   49.4      23.9
   S AM (comp.) (Kirillov et al., 2023)†                            12.1      19.0   10.8       9.4
   S AM (best.) (Kirillov et al., 2023)†                            44.9      56.9   54.4      10.9


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table A.6: Per-dataset zero-shot performance, corresponding to Fig. 7 in the main paper. All
unsupervised object-centric methods (D INOSAUR, SlotDiffusion, S POT, FT-D INOSAUR) are trained
on the C OCO dataset. Furthermore, we compare with the supervised Segment Anything model (S AM).
Average is computed as a weighted average normalizing with the size of the evaluation datasets (cf.
Table E.9), and only includes the zero-shot datasets (first 6 columns). For completeness, we also
include the performance when transferring from C OCO to PASCAL VOC in the last column. Results
marked † are from evaluating official checkpoints. Supervised models (S AM) are colored in gray.

                              M OVi-C               M OVi-E                     S CAN N ET                    Y CB
                           FG-ARI mBO          FG-ARI mBO                  FG-ARI mBO                  FG-ARI mBO
 D INOSAUR                   67.0    34.5       71.1             24.2           57.4       40.8          60.2        42.2
 SlotDiffusion†              66.9    43.6       67.6             26.4           52.0       51.7          62.5        59.2
 S POT †                     63.0    40.8       47.8             21.5           48.6       43.2          52.9        45.1
 FT-D INOSAUR (ViT-S/14)     71.3    44.2       71.1             29.9           54.8       48.4          67.4        54.5
 FT-D INOSAUR (ViT-B/14)     73.3    42.9       69.7             27.9           55.8       48.6          70.1        54.1
 S AM (comp.)†               57.6    45.3       38.5             27.4           45.8       45.5          46.9        40.9
 S AM (best.)†               79.7    73.5       84.7             69.7           62.2       64.7          69.4        69.8

                             C LEVRT EX         E NTITY S EG                     Average                PASCAL VOC
                           FG-ARI mBO          FG-ARI mBO                  FG-ARI mBO                  FG-ARI mBO
 D INOSAUR                   82.5    35.2       43.5             19.4           68.4       32.7          24.0        37.2
 SlotDiffusion†              77.0    45.0       43.7             25.1           65.8       41.2          21.1        42.0
 S POT †                     63.3    40.0       41.7             27.4           55.4       35.9          21.2        50.6
 FT-D INOSAUR (ViT-S/14)     86.0    50.1       48.1             28.4           71.2       42.9          24.0        37.6
 FT-D INOSAUR (ViT-B/14)     83.9    45.9       49.7             29.0           71.3       41.1          25.9        37.8
 S AM (comp.)†               82.9    70.3       25.9             16.5           55.2       45.7          31.0        51.5
 S AM (best.)†               94.0    90.0       53.4             51.0           79.5       73.2          31.1        64.2


Table A.7: Per-dataset downstream property linear prediction performance. We report in-
distribution property prediction performance for each dataset (D INOSAUR (ID)) and zero-shot perfor-
mance of models trained on the COCO dataset (D INOSAUR, SlotDiffusion, SPOT, FT-D INOSAUR,
FT-D INOSAUR + Hi-Res). Results marked † are from evaluating official checkpoints.

                                              M OVi-C                     M OVi-E                      Y CB
                                                             2                         2
                                            Acc (%)      R          Acc (%)        R          Acc (%)         R2
       D INOSAUR (ID)                        70.7        0.69            64.3      0.44            –          0.54
       D INOSAUR                             77.1        0.69            70.4      0.45            –          0.77
       SlotDiffusion†                        69.3        0.58            78.4      0.29            –          0.76
       S POT †                               68.2        0.55            66.8      0.35            –          0.76
       FT-D INOSAUR (ViT-S/14)               75.9        0.65            67.4      45.5            –          0.83
       FT-D INOSAUR (ViT-S/14) + Hi-Res      74.6        0.65            69.3      0.47            –          0.83

                                             C LEVRT EX                 E NTITY S EG              S CAN N ET
                                                             2                         2
                                            Acc (%)      R          Acc (%)        R          Acc (%)         R2
       D INOSAUR (ID)                        90.7        0.90            25.9      0.53            –           –
       D INOSAUR                             83.4        0.76            24.1      0.54            –          0.80
       SlotDiffusion†                        77.8        0.67            21.5      0.36            –          0.82
       S POT †                               70.7        0.55            29.7      0.42            –          0.82
       FT-D INOSAUR (ViT-S/14)               77.8        0.68            18.1      0.45            –          0.80
       FT-D INOSAUR (ViT-S/14) + Hi-Res      79.9        0.70            19.4      0.51            –          0.79


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tiny objects together with the background (cars on bridge); incorrect 3D inference due to unusual
camera perspective (rail and light post); sub-optimal decompositions in OOD scenes (grass stalk in
forest, sand patterns).
How could the failure modes regarding overgrouping and oversplitting be resolved? First, like all slot
attention/D INOSAUR-based methods, FT-D INOSAUR decomposes the scene into a fixed number of
regions/objects. However, especially on real-world images, the number of objects varies significantly
from image to image. Therefore, it is important to develop methods that infer a suitable number of
objects for an image; however, further innovations are needed to deal with the slot allocation problem
we have alluded to before. Second, unsupervised scene decomposition is inherently an ill-defined
task on real-world data as scenes can be split in numerous ways (cf. Figs. B.5a and B.5b). Thus,
predicting only a single set of masks might ultimately be insufficient. Instead, it may be beneficial
to model the full part-whole hierarchy, producing various decompositions of different granularity.
Such models could further allow control over the level of granularity through external conditioning
variables or text. However, the examples in Figs. B.5a and B.5b also demonstrate the limitations
of current evaluation techniques. Arguably, these are not failures of the model, but are treated as
such by the evaluation metrics. This is because current datasets have annotations that prescribe a
single ground truth labeling for each image. Instead, datasets should be annotated with multi-level
labelings, e.g. by including parts of objects, or further splitting the background into specific elements
(e.g. splitting the background "tree" class into particular trees). To evaluate methods that model the
full part-whole hierarchy, such annotations even become a necessity.


C     M ETHOD D ETAILS

C.1    D INOSAUR

D INOSAUR (Seitzer et al., 2023) proposes to use pretrained encoders for unsupervised object dis-
covery. The image is processed using a pretrained DINO encoder (Caron et al., 2021) into a set of
feature vectors {f1 , f2 , . . . fN }. The slot attention module (see App. C.2) is applied to the outputs of
the pretrained encoder to produce a set of slot vectors {s1 , s2 , . . . , sM }. The slots are decoded using
a broadcast MLP decoder (Watters et al., 2019) to produce a set of feature vectors fˆ1 , fˆ2 , . . . fˆN .
The MLP decoder decodes each slot sk separately to output a mask logit m̂ik and feature values fˆik .
Here, i ∈ {1, . . . N } indexes the features and k ∈ {1, . . . , K} indexes the slots. The mask logits
are converted to probabilities mik by taking their softmax across all slots. Here, mik denotes the
probability that slot sk produces feature fi and fˆik denotes the feature value assigned to feature fi
by slot sk . The final value for each feature is obtained by taking a weighted sum across all slots:
      PK
fˆi = k=1 mik fˆik . The training objective is the feature-reconstruction objective: L = ∥f − fˆ∥2 .
Note that the mask mk ∈ RN is the mask obtained for a given slot. This mask is resized to the
original image size and overlayed over the image to produce the visualizations shown in Table 1.

C.2    S LOT ATTENTION

Slot attention (Locatello et al., 2020) is a differentiable clustering procedure that operates on a set of
visual features (usually output by a CNN) and outputs a set of slot vectors {z1 , z2 , . . . zK } where
each slot represents an object. The differentiable clustering procedure is iterative in nature. We now
describe the procedure in detail.
Consider that we have a set of features {f1 , . . . fN }, where fi ∈ RD , and a set of slots {z1 , . . . , zK },
where zi ∈ RD . The features {f1 , . . . fN } are output by a CNN encoder given input image x and the
slots are sampled from a Gaussian distribution. The attention mechanism computes the assignment
of features to slots. Ideally, the set of features belonging to a particular object will map to a single
slot and each slot will bind to a distinct object. To induce this behavior, the attention mechanism
implements a competition between the slots to represent parts of the feature space.
First, following the general process of query-key-value (QKV) attention (Vaswani, 2017), the slots
are projected to queries qi = Linearq (zi ) and the features are projected to keys ki = Lineark (fi )
and values vi = Linearv (fi ). This results in queries q ∈ RK×D , keys k ∈ RN ×D , and values


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              (a) Joining semantically-related objects together.


                                       (b) Splitting objects into parts.


       (c) Complex or unusual images: (1) tiny objects, (2) incorrect 3D inference, (3, 4) OOD scenes.

Figure B.5: Failure modes of FT-D INOSAUR. We show typical failure cases grouped into three
categories: (a) joining semantically related objects into a single object; (b) splitting objects into parts;
and (c) incorrect decomposition of complex or unusual scenes. Note that the model’s decompositions
in (a) and (b) arguably are correct but do not correspond to the labeling prescribed by the ground
truth annotations; without knowledge of the intended downstream task, the “correct” grouping is
ambiguous. We use the model from Table 2; it uses a ViT-B/14 encoder with hi-res adaptation and is
trained on the C OCO dataset. All images show zero-shot predictions on the E NTITY S EG dataset.


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


v ∈ RN ×D . The dot-product attention then computes the affinities between the queries and the
keys: attn = q × kT , where attn ∈ RN ×K . To induce a competition between the slots to
represent the features, they take a softmax across the queries as opposed to taking it across the
keys which is what is usually done in QKV attention. Therefore, the final attention values become
                      T                   √
attn = softmax( q×k√
                     D
                        , axis = q), where D is the softmax temperature. The final attention outputs
                                                                                              attn
                                                                                              ij
ẑ are obtained by taking a weighted mean of the values ẑ = W · v, where Wij = PN attn             .
                                                                                          n=1    in
Therefore, the attention computation used in each iteration of slot attention can be implemented as
follows:


                                             q(z) · k(f )T

                         attn = softmax          √         , axis = query ,                          (1)
                                                    D
                                            attn
                         attn =                             ,                                        (2)
                                 Sum(attn, axis = keys)
                            ẑ = attn · v(f ).                                                       (3)

The authors find it useful from a stability viewpoint to process the inputs f and slots z using layer
normalization. The output of the attention mechanism is used to update the current estimate of the
slots in an iterative procedure which will describe next.

Iterative Procedure The iterative updates to the slots are carried out using a GRU and an MLP.
The slots z1 , . . . zK are first initialized as the hidden states of a GRU. Given the updates from the
attention mechanism, the slots are updated as follows:
         zi = GRU(input = ẑi , state = zi ) zi             = MLP(LayerNorm(zi )) + zi .             (4)

These updates happen for a fixed number of iterations T which is set as a hyperparameter.
This whole process can be viewed as soft k-means clustering. The slots are analogous to cluster
centers and each attention computation computes the assignments of features to slots. Next, the slots
(cluster centers) are updated with the information from the features assigned to each slot.

C.3   T OP -K D ECODING

We first recap the MLP decoder from D INOSAUR Seitzer et al. (2023). For N patches and K slots,
the MLP decoder produces a reconstruction ŷ ∈ RN ×K×D , as well as an alpha mask α ∈ RN ×K
that shows how active each slot is at each patch. The final reconstruction y ∈ RN ×D is then given by
taking a weighted average over the slots, that is, the reconstruction yi for patch i is given by
                           XK
                     yi =       ŷi,κ ⊙ mi,κ ,      mi,κ = softmax αi,j         .                 (5)
                                                                  j
                            κ=1                                               κ

With top-k decoding, we only take the k ∈ Ki most active slots into account for each patch i, as
determined by the slot attention mask a ∈ [0, 1]N ×K :
              X
        yi =       ŷi,κ ⊙ mi,κ ,     mi,κ = softmax   i
                                                         αi,j   ,   Ki = topk (ai , k) ,     (6)
                                                    j∈K           κ
               κ∈Ki
                                               P
where topk(x, k) = arg maxI⊆{1,...,n}:|I|=k i∈I xi is the function that selects the indices of the k
highest values of the vector x ∈ Rn . In practice, we can efficiently implement the decoding step by
first broadcasting slots to patches and adding the positional encoding, then packing the top-k slots for
each position together using a gather operation, directly resulting in reconstructions ŷ ∈ RN ×k and
alpha masks α ∈ RN ×k .

C.4   I MPROVED H YPERPARAMETERS

As discussed in Sec. 4.1 in the main paper, we found an improved set of hyperparameters that
work well for finetuning the pre-trained ViT encoder. We split these into general hyperparameters


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(G-HPs), affecting all modules of the model, and encoder hyperparameters (E-HPs), only affecting the
finetuning of the encoder (see also Table C.8). We ablate the effect of these groups of hyperparameters
in Table 1 in the main paper.
The general hyperparameter changes are as follows:

          • Increasing batch size from 64 to 128.
          • Decreasing base learning rate from 0.0004 to 0.0003.
          • Switching from an exponential decay learning rate schedule to a cosine schedule.
          • Lowering gradient clipping from 1.0 to 0.1.

The hyperparameter for encoder finetuning are as follows:

          • Lowering the base learning rate for the encoder by a factor of 0.5 from 0.0003 to 0.00015.
          • Introducing blockwise learning rate decay with a decay rate of 0.85.
          • Adding weight decay of 0.01 to the encoder parameters in conjunction with the AdamW
            optimizer.

Note that these changes resulted from a joined hyperparameter search over all individual hyperparam-
eters and it is highly likely that (1) not all of these parameters changes are necessary, and (2) an even
better set of hyperparameters can be found.


D       M ETHODS & H YPERPARAMETERS

D INOSAUR (Seitzer et al., 2023) D INOSAUR introduced the idea of applying slot attention on a
pre-trained encoder and training the model by reconstructing the features of this pre-trained encoder.
This also forms the base of our proposed approach. In D INOSAUR, the encoder is kept fixed while
the slot attention and the decoder modules are trainable. While the original paper considers two kinds
of decoders — (1) Transformer Decoder and (2) MLP decoder — in this work we mainly compare
against D INOSAUR with the MLP decoder. We consider two variants of D INOSAUR, using D INO
(Caron et al., 2021) and D INOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023) pre-trained backbones respectively. We list the
hyperparameters used for D INOSAUR in Table C.8 (first column).

FT-D INOSAUR Our method is implemented upon D INOSAUR and thus shares low-level implemen-
tation details. In Table C.8, we list the hyperparameters for the following models mentioned in Sec. 4
and listed in Table 1: (1) D INOSAUR + Training from Random Init., (2) D INOSAUR + FT w/G-HP’s,
(3) D INOSAUR + FT w/G-HP’s & E-HP’s, (4) D INOSAUR + FT, + Top-k, + High-Res. Finetuning.
While the models listed in Table Table C.8 all use D INOv2 with the ViT-S/14 backbone, the same
hyperparamters are applicable for models using ViT-B/16 and ViT-B/14 backbones as well. For
training our model, we use a single A100 GPU per run. Each training run of the proposed finetuning
approach requires 2–3 days of training.

SlotDiffusion (Wu et al., 2023b) SlotDiffusion utilizes a latent diffusion model as the decoder. The
specific variant of the SlotDiffusion model which we consider here is the one which uses a pretrained
D INO encoder (ViT-B/16) to encode the images similar to D INOSAUR. We use the pre-trained
checkpoint released by the authors2 for all the comparisons in this work.

S POT (Kakogeorgiou et al., 2024) SPOT uses a two-stage training procedure. In the first stage, a
D INOSAUR model is trained similar to Seitzer et al. (2023). In the second stage, a student-teacher
setup is employed, where the model trained model from the first stage acts as a teacher and the
student is a new model. During this stage, the model is trained with two objectives: (1) a feature
reconstruction loss, where the targets come from the teacher, and (2) a attention distillation loss,
where the teachers attention masks from slot attention are distilled into the student. Moreover, S POT
uses a Transformer encoder as opposed to an MLP decoder. Similar to SlotDiffusion, for S POT,
    2
        https://github.com/Wuziyi616/SlotDiffusion


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table C.8: Hyperparameters for the D INOSAUR and FT-D INOSAUR models displayed in Table 1.
The second column (D INOSAUR +Enc. Train (random init.)) also lists hyperparameters for training
with random encoder initialization, as discussed in Sec. 4.1. Results in Fig. 5 use the settings in the
fourth column (D INOSAUR +FT w/G-HP’s w/E-HP’s). Results in Table 2 and Fig. 7 use the settings
in the last column, but with a ViT-B/14 encoder. See also App. C.4 for a concise description of the
improved hyperparameters for finetuning (G-HP’s and E-HP’s).

Models                                                D INOSAUR      D INOSAUR D INOSAUR D INOSAUR D INOSAUR
                                                                    +Enc. Train      +FT.      +FT       +FT
                                                                  (random init.) w/G-HP’s w/G-HP’s    +Top-k
                                                                                          w/E-HP’s +High-Res.
Training Steps                                             300k           300k        300k        300k         10k
Batch Size                                                   64            128         128         128          64
Image/Crop Size                                             224            224        224         224         518
Cropping Strategy                                       Random         Random     Random      Random      Random
Augmentations                                                 –              –          –           –           –
Image Tokens                                            784/256            256        256         256        1369
                 LR Warmup Steps                   10000                 10000       10000       10000         333
                 Base LR Total LR = Base LR ·     0.0004                0.0003      0.0003      0.0003      0.0001
LR               p Batch Size
                   ( 64 )
                 Exp. Decay Half-Life               100k                 100k        100k        100k         10k
                 Schedule                     Exponential               Cosine      Cosine      Cosine      Cosine
                 Blockwise LR                                ✗              ✓            ✗          ✓           ✓
                 LR Factor           Total LR =              ✗             0.5           ✗         0.5         0.5
Encoder LR           Base LR
                                     p Batch Size
                 Encoder LR Factor ·  ( 64 )
                 Layerwise LR Decay Factor      (η)          ✗            0.85           ✗        0.85        0.85
                  LRlayer l = η · LRlayer l+1
                 Weight Decay                                ✗            0.01           ✗        0.01        0.01
                 Type                   ViT-B/16 / ViT-S/14           ViT-S/14    ViT-S/14    ViT-S/14    ViT-S/14
                 Pre-training               DINO/DINOv2                       –   DINOv2      DINOv2      DINOv2
Encoder          Patch Size                           16/14                  14          14          14          14
                 Feature Dim. Dfeat                 768/384                384         384         384         384
                 Gradient Norm Clipping                  1.0                0.1         0.1         0.1         0.1
                 Type                      ViT-B/16 / ViT-S/14        ViT-S/14    ViT-S/14    ViT-S/14    ViT-S/14
Target Encoder
                 Pre-training                  DINO/DINOv2            DINOv2      DINOv2      DINOv2      DINOv2
               Slots                                          7              7           7           7           7
               Iterations                                     3              3           3           3           3
Slot Attention
               Slot Dim. Dslots                             256            256         256         256         256
               MLP Hidden Dim.                             1024           1024        1024        1024        1024
                 Type                                      MLP           MLP         MLP         MLP         MLP
                 Layers                                       4             4           4           4           4
Decoder
                 MLP Hidden Dim.                           2048          2048        2048        2048        2048
                 Top-k                                        ✗             ✗           ✗           ✗           3


                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table E.9: Number of images per dataset and the number of slots used for training and evaluating
on each dataset.

                   Dataset                              Num. Images     Num. Slots
                    C OCO 2017 train                      118 287            7
                    C OCO 2017 validation                  5 000             7
                    E NTITY S EG train                    31 789             7
                    E NTITY S EG validation                1 498             7
                    PASCAL VOC 2012 train                 10 582             7
                    PASCAL VOC 2012 validation             1 449             7
                    M OVi-C train                         87 633            11
                    M OVi-C validation                     4 200            11
                    M OVi-E train                         87 633            11
                    M OVi-E validation                     4 176            11
                    S CAN N ET train                      10 000             6
                    S CAN N ET validation                  2 000             6
                    Y CB train                            10 000             6
                    Y CB validation                        2 000             6
                    C LEVRT EX train                      40 000            11
                    C LEVRT EX validation                  5 000            11


also we use a pre-trained checkpoint released by the authors3 for the evaluations in this work. The
pre-trained checkpoint uses a ViT-B/16 encoder initialized with D INO weights.

Segment Anything (Kirillov et al., 2023) The Segment Anything model (S AM) is a large founda-
tion model for object detection and segmentation trained supervised. It has three stages of training: (1)
a manual stage, where the model is trained using 120k images annotated with 4.3M masks obtained
from human labelers; (2) a semi-automatic stage, where the model is trained on 180k annotated
with 5.9M masks partly annotated by human labelers and partly annotated by itself; and (3) a fully
automatic stage, where the model is trained on 11M images with 1.1B masks annotated by the model
itself. We consider 2 variants of S AM: comp. (Comparable) and best. Note that S AM includes an
IoU prediction MLP which outputs an estimated IoU for each predicted mask. For the comp. variant,
we use the ViT-Base model considering the top K masks by predicted IoU, where the value of K is
based on the optimal number of objects for each dataset as listed in Table E.9. For the best variant,
we use the ViT-Huge model keeping all masks above a IoU threshold τ . We evaluated values for
τ ∈ {0.9, 0.95, 0.99} and found that τ = 0.9 works best across all datasets.
For inference, we use a single A100 GPU for each of the baselines and the proposed approach.

E       DATASETS

This section gives a detailed description of the datasets we use in this work. See also Table E.9 for an
overview over the number of images per dataset.
Note that current object-centric models are sensitive to the number of objects. As a concession to that,
we evaluate the models with the number-of-slots parameter matching the expected complexity of the
target dataset (mostly following prior work, see Table E.9). We leave it to future work to remove this
limitation of the models.

C OCO (Lin et al., 2014) This dataset contains complex images containing real-world objects in
their natural context. For training, we use the C OCO 2017 dataset which consists of 118 287 images.
For evaluation, we use 5 000 images from the validation sets. Similar to Seitzer et al. (2023), we
use instance masks to evaluate object discovery. Additionally, we also add the task of panoptic
segmentation to our evaluation suite for the C OCO dataset, using the panoptic labeling provided by
Kirillov et al. (2019). Panoptic segmentation combines the task of instance segmentation, which
    3
        https://github.com/gkakogeorgiou/spot


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


requires the model to segment each object/foreground/thing instance, and semantic segmentation,
which requires the model to segement each background/stuff class. The metrics we use for measuring
panoptic segmentation are panoptic ARI and panoptic quality (see App. F). Following Seitzer et al.
(2023), we evaluate square center crops, where the input images are resized to 224 × 224 pixels, and
the targets masks are resized to 320 × 320 pixels.

E NTITY S EG (Lu et al., 2023) This dataset consists of complex real world images spanning a
diverse range of entities. In contrast to C OCO, E NTITY S EG is an open-world dataset and does not
have a pre-defined set of object classes. It consists of a large number of high-resolution images
(71.25% and 86.23% of the images are of high resolution with at least 2 000px for the width and
1 000px for the height). Each image is annotated with high-quality fine-grained mask annotations.
The version of the dataset utilized in this work consists of 31 789 images for training and 1 498
images for evaluation. We evaluate the instance segmentation masks for object discovery. As in
C OCO, we evaluate square center crops, where the input images are resized to 224 × 224 pixels, and
the targets masks are resized to 320 × 320 pixels.

PASCAL VOC (Everingham et al., 2012) Similar to Seitzer et al. (2023), we use the “trainaug”
variant of the PASCAL VOC dataset for training. It consists of a total of 10 582 images for training,
where 1 464 are from the segmentation train set and 9 118 are from the SBD dataset (Hariharan et al.,
2011). For evaluating object discovery, we use the official instance segmentation validation split
with 1 449 images. Following Seitzer et al. (2023), we evaluate square center crops, where the input
images are resized to 224 × 224 pixels, and the targets masks are resized to 320 × 320 pixels.

M OVi-C and M OVi-E (Greff et al., 2022) The M OVi datasets are synthetically generated video
datasets consisting of multiple objects per video. Each video is generated by placing 3D scanned
objects on real-world backgrounds. M OVi-C contains up to 11 objects per video and MOVI-E
contains up to 23 objects per video. Additionally, M OVi-E also features the camera moving in
random directions. For our case, we treat these datasets as image datasets. We sample 9 frames per
video which yields a total of 87 633 training images for M OVi-C and 87 741 images on M OVi-E. For
evaluation, we use 4 200 frames for M OVi-C and 4 176 frames for M OVi-E from the validation sets
in each case. We use a resolution of 128 × 128 for both input images and target masks.

S CAN N ET and Y CB (Yang & Yang, 2022) These datasets consist of real-world objects on
black backgrounds and were originally introduced to test limitations of object-centric learning
methods (Yang & Yang, 2022). S CAN N ET (originally from Dai et al. (2017)) consists of objects
that can be typically be found in indoor scenes (e.g. furniture) and Y CB (originally from Calli et al.
(2015)) consists of 21 different classes of everyday objects (e.g. food items, kitchen items, tools, etc.).
Each of these dataset consist of 10 000 training images and 2 000 evaluation images. Both datasets
consist of 2–6 objects per scene. We use a resolution of 128 × 128 for both input images and target
masks.

C LEVRT EX (Karazija et al., 2021) This is a synthetically constructed dataset where each scene
consists of 3–10 simple geometric 3D shapes arranged in a background sampled from a catalogue of
60 different materials. The materials of the objects are also sampled from the same catalogue. This
dataset contains 40 000 images for training and 10 000 for validation and test each. We use the 5 000
images from the validation set for our evaluation. C LEVRT EX also offers various OOD splits which
utilize materials not seen during training. We do not use these splits; for our zero-shot generalization
evaluation, we can directly use the main split since it usually is not a part of the training set we use to
train the object-centric model. We use a resolution of 240 × 240 for both input images and target
masks.

F     M ETRICS
F.1   O BJECT D ISCOVERY

FG-ARI The adjusted rand index (ARI) measures the similarity between two clusterings (Hubert
& Arabie, 1985). We use the instance/object masks as the targets. We only compute this metric for
pixels in the foreground (hence, FG-ARI). Unlabeled pixels are treated as background.


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


mBO To compute the mBO (Pont-Tuset et al., 2017), each predicted mask is assigned to the ground
truth mask with highest overlap in terms of IoU. The mBO is computed as the average IoU of these
mask pairs.

Panoptic ARI Panoptic ARI is computed as ARI, but uses panoptic mask annotations as ground
truth targets. Panoptic masks (Kirillov et al., 2019) provide more detailed mask annotations for an
image by assigning a different mask for separate instances of the same object (“things”) and also
segmenting background regions (“stuff”). We only compute the Panoptic ARI for those images which
have at least two masks.

Panoptic Quality The Panoptic Quality (PQ) (Kirillov et al., 2019) is computed by first assigning
each predicted mask to the ground truth mask with the highest overlap in terms of IoU, removing all
matches that do not have an IoU overlap of at least 0.5; this results in a unique matching (Kirillov
et al., 2019). These mask pairs form the set of true positives (TP). Ground truth masks that were not
assigned a predicted mask form the set of false negatives (FN). Similarly, predicted masks that were
not assigned to a ground truth mask form the set of false positives (FP). Predicted masks that have an
IoU overlap of more than 0.5 with pixels labeled as “void” or “crowd” are removed from the set of
false positives. The panoptic quality is then computed as:
                                            P
                                               (p,g)∈TP IoU(p, g)
                                 PQ =                                                              (7)
                                          |TP| + 0.5|FP| + 0.5|FN|

F.2   D OWNSTREAM P ROPERTY P REDICTION

For downstream property prediction, we closely follow the protocol of Dittadi et al. (2022) and Seitzer
et al. (2023). In particular, we train linear probes on top of the slots, training them using categorical
cross entropy for discrete properties and MSE for continuous properties. Predicted properties for the
set of slots are matched to the target set of properties using the Hungarian method, minimizing the
total loss of the matching. For discrete properties, we report classification accuracy; for continuous
properties, we report the R2 -score. We report metrics on the the same test sets used for object
discovery.
We designate a portion of the training set as a validation set to measure overfitting; for this purpose,
we sample a number of images equal to the size of the test set from the training set. We train for
15 000 steps, and evaluate the model with the lowest validation loss. Images without any objects (due
to cropping) are filtered out. Following Seitzer et al. (2023), for each image, we only keep the N
largest objects, where N equals the number of slots used on that dataset. This way, each object can in
principle be matched to a slot.
As properties, we use:

       • Location: x- and y-coordinate of the object, using the center-of-mass of the object mask.
         We report the average R2 -score for x- and y-dimension.
       • Category: we use the class label with which the objects are annotated on most datasets; on
         C LEVRT EX, we use the object shape as the category. The used versions of the S CAN N ET
         and Y CB datasets do not contain any class annotation; as such, we do not report category
         prediction on these datasets. Note that the number of classes differs per dataset and thus
         classification results between datasets are not directly comparable. In particular, C LEVRT EX
         has 4 categories; M OVi-C and M OVi-E have 17 categories; E NTITY S EG has 256 categories.

We report the property prediction for each individual dataset in Table A.7.

G     E XAMPLES
In this section, we show example predictions for D INOSAUR, S POT, Slot Diffusion, FT-D INOSAUR,
and S AM, where all methods besides S AM were trained on the C OCO dataset. FT-D INOSAUR uses a
ViT-B/14 encoder with top-k and hi-res adaptation, i.e. the model evaluated in Table 2 and Fig. 7.

       • Fig. G.6: in-distribution predictions on C OCO.


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • Fig. G.7: zero-shot predictions on E NTITY S EG.
      • Fig. G.8: transfer predictions on PASCAL VOC.
      • Fig. G.9: zero-shot predictions on C LEVRT EX.
      • Fig. G.10: zero-shot predictions on M OVi-C.
      • Fig. G.11: zero-shot predictions on M OVi-E.
      • Fig. G.12: zero-shot predictions on S CAN N ET.


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



      Image        D INOSAUR         S POT          SlotDiffusion   FT-D INOSAUR   S AM


                        Figure G.6: In-distribution examples on C OCO.


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



      Image       D INOSAUR         S POT       SlotDiffusion FT-D INOSAUR   S AM


                       Figure G.7: Zero-shot examples on E NTITY S EG.


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



      Image        D INOSAUR         S POT          SlotDiffusion   FT-D INOSAUR   S AM


                      Figure G.8: Transfer examples on PASCAL VOC.


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



      Image       D INOSAUR         S POT       SlotDiffusion FT-D INOSAUR   S AM


                       Figure G.9: Zero-shot examples on C LEVRT EX.


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Image        D INOSAUR         S POT          SlotDiffusion   FT-D INOSAUR   S AM


                        Figure G.10: Zero-shot examples on M OVi-C.


      Image        D INOSAUR         S POT          SlotDiffusion   FT-D INOSAUR   S AM


                        Figure G.11: Zero-shot examples on M OVi-E.


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Image        D INOSAUR         S POT          SlotDiffusion   FT-D INOSAUR   S AM


                       Figure G.12: Zero-shot examples on S CAN N ET.


                                               37
