Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


N UMBER C OOKBOOK : N UMBER U NDERSTANDING OF
L ANGUAGE M ODELS AND H OW TO I MPROVE I T
 Haotong Yang123 Yi Hu12 Shijia Kang12 Zhouchen Lin1234∗ Muhan Zhang23∗
 1
   School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
 2
   Institution for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
 3
   State Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
 4
   Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
 haotongyang@pku.edu.cn {huyi2002,kangshijia}@stu.pku.edu.cn
 {zlin,muhan}@pku.edu.cn



                                               A BSTRACT
            Large language models (LLMs) can solve an increasing number of complex rea-
            soning tasks while making surprising mistakes in basic numerical understanding
            and processing (such as 9.11 > 9.9). The latter ability is essential for tackling
            complex arithmetic and mathematical problems and serves as a foundation for
            most reasoning tasks, but previous work paid little attention to it or only discussed
            several restricted tasks (like integer addition). In this paper, we comprehensively
            investigate the numerical understanding and processing ability (NUPA) of
            LLMs. Firstly, we introduce a benchmark covering four common numerical rep-
            resentations and 17 distinct numerical tasks in four major categories, resulting
            in 41 meaningful combinations in total. These tasks are derived from primary
            and secondary education curricula, encompassing nearly all everyday numerical
            understanding and processing scenarios, and the rules of these tasks are very simple
            and clear. Through the benchmark, we find that current LLMs fail frequently in
            many of the tasks. To study the problem, we train small models with existing and
            potential techniques for enhancing NUPA (such as tokenizers, positional encoding,
            and number formats), comprehensively evaluating their effectiveness using our
            testbed. We also finetune practical-scale LLMs on our proposed NUPA tasks
            and find that 1) naive finetuning can significantly improve NUPA on many but
            not all tasks, and 2) surprisingly, techniques designed to enhance NUPA prove
            ineffective for finetuning pretrained models. We further explore the impact of
            chain-of-thought techniques on NUPA. Our work provides a more detailed and
            comprehensive understanding of NUPA in LLMs. Our benchmark and codes are
            released at https://github.com/GraphPKU/number_cookbook.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The mathematical and reasoning abilities of large language models (LLMs) are currently quite
impressive (OpenAI, 2023; Meta, 2024a; OpenAI, 2024a; Yang et al., 2024a), capable of solving
problems at the level of a high-school student or even more difficult ones like GAOKAO (a nation-
wide examination of high school students applying to universities in China) (Zhang et al., 2024b),
Olympiad-level problems (He et al., 2024), and college mathematics (Tang et al., 2024). However,
upon closer examination of the models’ outputs, we find that although the models demonstrate
remarkable proficiency in problem-solving approaches, they often struggle with basic numerical
understanding and processing — like a careless student who claims, “I know how to do it, but I
didn’t get it right.” Some of these errors are quite surprising, such as believing that 9.11 > 9.9 or
making mistakes in simple addition 8/7 + 3/5. These errors are a major cause of hallucinations
when dealing with math, reasoning, and data analysis tasks, as the model presents seemingly correct
problem-solving approaches, but ultimately produces incorrect results (Huang et al., 2024; Li et al.,
2024b; Jiang et al., 2024). Therefore, investigating and improving the fundamental “numerical
understanding and processing abilities” (NUPA) of models is crucial.
    ∗
        Corresponding Authors


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Task overview of NUPA Test. The four rows represent four numerical representations, and
the 17 columns correspond to different tasks. ✓: 41 tasks included in our test. ✗: Not included,
too complex. ⃝: Not directly included but can be easily adapted from an included task. −: Not
applicable. The detailed explanation for these non-included tasks is provided in Appendix A.1.5
                Elementary arithmetic          Comparison         Digit Understanding            Conversion
                                                        Digit Digit Digit Get               To      To      Sig.
          Add Sub Multiply Truediv Floordiv Mod Max Min                       Length Count
                                                        Max Min Add Digit                  Float Scientific Fig.
Integer    ✓ ✓      ✓         ✓       ✓      ✓ ✓     ✓   ✓     ✓     ✓    ✓     ✓     ✓     −        ✓       ✓
Float      ✓ ✓      ✓         ✗       −      − ✓     ✓   ✓     ✓     ✓    ✓     ✓     ⃝     −        ✓       ✓
Fraction ✓ ✓        ✓         ✓       −      − ✓     ✓   − − − −                −     ⃝     ✓       ⃝        ⃝
Scientific ✓ ✓      ✓         ✗       −      − ✓     ✓   − − − −                −     ⃝     ✓        −       ⃝

However, in current research, reasoning ability and NUPA are often tested together, both on classic
datasets such as GSM8k (Cobbe et al., 2021), MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021b), MMLU (Hendrycks
et al., 2021a), and in more challenging tests mentioned above. For example, a problem in GSM8k
is: “Natalia sold clips to 48 of her friends in April, and then she sold half as many clips in May.
How many clips did Natalia sell altogether in April and May?” Solving this problem requires two
aspects: on the one hand, mathematical reasoning including understanding the text, extracting relevant
information, formulating mathematical equations (or finding other solution methods), solving the
equations or executing an algorithm, and obtaining the result; on the other hand, it also requires
understanding and processing the numbers provided in the problem or produced as intermediate
results at each step, like 48/2 = 24 and 48 + 24 = 72. While these two abilities are both essential to
correctly solving the problems, tests on such datasets do not distinguish between them.
A more severe issue is that the numerical content is often deliberately simplified in these datasets.
In various exam questions (like in the American Invitational Mathematics Examination (Li et al.,
2024a)), to focus on assessing students’ understanding of mathematical concepts — such as how
to set up the correct equations and apply the right theorems — the numbers in both the questions
and answers are often specially chosen to be integers. However, this is not the case in real-world
scenarios (Chen et al., 2021).
Despite the importance of NUPA, there is still a lack of accurate, detailed, and comprehensive
formalization, measurement, and analysis of this fundamental capability. In this paper, we take the
preliminary step towards formalizing the NUPA of LLMs. We categorize the numerical concepts
and operations from primary and secondary education into four representations: integers, floating-
point numbers (finite decimals), fractions, and scientific notation, along with four ability categories
comprising 17 tasks. Pairing these representations results in 41 meaningful tasks, forming our NUPA
benchmark (Table 1). These representations and tasks cover the most common scenarios involving
number understanding and processing, which are typically not challenging for humans, as we read,
use, or process such numbers nearly every day.
On this benchmark, we rigorously test several state-of-the-art LLMs containing GPT-4o (OpenAI,
2024a), Llama-3.1 (Meta, 2024a) and Qwen2 (Qwen Team, 2024). We ask the models to directly
output the answers without calling external tools. Although the latest LLMs perform well on some
of the easiest tasks, their performance declines significantly as tasks become slightly more complex
(such as multiplication, modulus operations, or digit-based calculations), or as the representation
of numbers extends beyond basic integers. See Figure 2 of Section 2.4. The overall unsatisfactory
performance highlights a pronounced mismatch between the claimed strong mathematical reasoning
abilities and the poor practical, everyday numerical understanding and processing abilities of today’s
LLMs.
To address this issue, we explore three categories of approaches to enhance the NUPA of models.
The first category of techniques aims at improving models’ NUPA during the pretraining stage,
including alternative tokenization, specially designed positional encoding (PE) (Haviv et al., 2022;
Kazemnejad et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024b), changing number formats (like zero-padding, index-
hint (Zhou et al., 2024a) and reverse representation (Lee et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024b)). We evaluate
and analyze them on our newly introduced benchmark, verifying their effectiveness/ineffectiveness
on respective tasks/representations, which extends over previous evaluation mainly on the integer
addition/multiplication tasks. Further, we summarize these techniques into three mechanisms:
simplifying the reasoning process, aiding digit alignment, and providing regularization, and discuss
the potential of these mechanisms to be applied across a broader range of numerical representations.
The second category of approaches aim to improve NUPA for an already trained model. We find
that while simple direct finetuning can significantly enhance NUPA performance, applying the


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


aforementioned techniques (PEs, data formats and tokenizers) at this stage may have adverse effects.
We test various settings and finetuning configurations, but none are able to achieve performance equal
to or better than the original model. Our results suggest that these modifications can significantly
disrupt the models’ established behavior or conflict with its pre-existing knowledge, leading to a
decrease in performance.
Finally, we discuss the potential of using chain-of-thought (CoT) techniques (Wei et al., 2022) for
numerical processing. Although CoT methods can break down complex problems into simpler sub-
tasks and significantly increase the likelihood of obtaining correct answers, their drawbacks — such
as consuming a large context window and requiring extended processing time — become particularly
apparent in numerical tasks. We test a general CoT method known as RFFT (Hu et al., 2024), and
find that for more complex tasks (such as multiplication and fraction addition), chain-of-thought
methods face scalability challenges, making them difficult to be applied in practical scenarios. It
is noteworthy that in this paper, we do not discuss tool use methods (Schick et al., 2023; Lu et al.,
2023a) for NUPA as 1) we want to study the self-contained NUPA of LLMs, 2) calling external tools
whenever encountering numbers increases the inference latency (Xu et al., 2024), and 3) we believe
NUPA without tools is a necessary ability of AGI.
In summary, we propose a more comprehensive benchmark on the basic numerical understanding
and processing abilities (NUPA) of LLMs, evaluate several SOTA LLMs’ performance on it, and
further study three categories of approaches to improve NUPA: pretraining, finetuning and CoT. Our
results reveal that the current research is insufficient to fully address the NUPA problem, despite it
being a fundamental capability for solving many more complex tasks. We hope that by introducing a
systematic classification and more comprehensive evaluation of NUPA, we can bring greater attention
from the community to this important but overlooked fundamental capability.

2     NUPA T EST: A BENCHMARK FOR NUMBER UNDERSTANDING AND
      PROCESSING ABILITY

In this section, we will introduce our NUPA benchmark from the following four aspects: number
representations, tasks, metrics, and result analysis of current LLMs. We will explain the rationale
behind the inclusion (or exclusion) of specific representations and tasks in our benchmark, highlighting
their distinctive features.

2.1   N UMBER REPRESENTATION
As discussed above, we believe that the educational curricula on the (Chinese) primary and secondary
school levels serve as a valuable reference for determining the essential NUPAs that LLMs should
master. We identify four number formats in these curricula that are both common and sufficient to
cover most practical scenarios.
• Integer: The most common number and the foundation of other number representations.
• Floating-Point Number (Float): Floats, or finite decimals, are a useful subset of fractions.
  Calculations with floats like addition and comparison, work similarly to integers, making them
  common in daily life.
• Fraction: We consider fractions with integer numerators and denominators. In practical situations
  involving distribution, fractions become unavoidable, especially when the inaccuracy introduced
  by converting fractions to floats is unacceptable.
• Scientific Notation: Scientific notation is characterized by separating a number’s precise value
  from its order of magnitude. It is widely used in fields like physics, economics, and computer
  science because it efficiently handles a wide range of numbers and clearly conveys significant
  figures and precision. For LLMs, mastering scientific notation can significantly enhance their
  ability to handle practical tasks, such as interpreting financial reports or reading scientific texts.
Details of these four representations in our benchmark can be found in Appendix A.1.1. There are
possible representations of numbers that are not included in these four formats, like complex
                                                                                         √ numbers,
infinite decimal representation (repeating and non-repeating), radical expression (like 2), ... These
representations either occur infrequently in practical conversations (e.g., complex numbers) or present
significant challenges for language models to process without the aid of external tools (e.g., radicals).
For these reasons, we have opted not to include them in our benchmark at this stage.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.2   TASKS IN FOUR ABILITY CATEGORIES

Another aspect of NUPA is defining the tasks that models need to handle. The tasks should have
clear calculation rules. Furthermore, most practical numerical processing tasks should either fall
within these tasks or can be easily transformed into some of them. Extracted from the primary and
secondary education curricula, we propose 17 tasks in four ability categories and students who have
completed the stage of education are expected to solve them. The complete task list is shown in
Table 1 and we provide a more detailed discussion in Appendix A.1.2 and an example for each task
in Appendix A.1.3. Below we discuss the rationales for including some tasks in detail.
• Elementary arithmetic: addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. The most funda-
  mental mathematical operations. For division, we consider three types of related operators: True
  division, floor division and modulus.
• Comparison: max and min. Understanding numbers on the concept of “order”.
• Digit understanding: When we care about a language model’s understanding, processing (and
  generation) of numbers, digit is a crucial concept, as numbers are not read and processed by
  the language model as a whole, but rather as a sequence of digits. We specially designed some
  digit-related tasks to test whether LLMs truly handle digits, including:
    – Get digit: Given a number and an integer i, return the i-th digit. This task is important when
       certain digits have special meanings in a number (such as a phone number or SSN).
    – Length: Return the total length (i.e., the number of digits) of a number.
    – Count: Count the times that a particular digit occurs in an integer.
    – Digit compare: Compare and return the larger (smaller) digits one by one.
    – Digit add: Perform the normal addition digit by digit but ignore any carrying. For example,
       digit_add(12345, 34567) = 46802. It can test a model’s understanding of digit alignment
       and its mastery of single-digit addition.
• Conversion between representations: Converting a number to two representations: to float and
  to scientific notation, as they are frequently used to present final results. These two tasks test
  whether models can understand the relationship between various numerical formats. In particular,
  since many tasks present answers as approximate values, we designed a “significant digit” (sig.
  fig.) task to evaluate a model’s ability to round long numbers to fixed-length significant digits.
The combination of representations and tasks ultimately results in a total of 41 meaningful pairs.
Without confusion, we refer to each combination as a task. The tasks receive either one or two
numbers as inputs and return a number as result, and the input numbers and results share the same
representation for most tasks unless otherwise stated (refer to Appendix A.1.4). The remaining
combinations are excluded due to being excessively complex, uncommon, inapplicable, or redundant
with other tasks. For further details, see the discussion in Appendix A.1.5.
The difficulty of each task depends not only on the nature of the task itself but also on the length of
the numbers to be processed — longer tasks involve longer inputs and outputs as well as more steps
of internal operations. Therefore, we test on different problem lengths. For tasks that are inherently
more difficult, we limit the size of the problem to 1-20 digits, and for easier tasks to 1-100 digits.
(For which tasks are considered difficult or easy, please refer to the Appendix A.1.6.)
We generated 1,000 questions for each task and each length. Unlike some previous works that set
the lengths of two numbers to be the same, in our tests, the length L of a question is determined by
the longer of the two numbers, while the length of the shorter number follows a uniform distribution
between L/2 and L. We implemented additional handling to ensure that generated problems do not
result in overly simple, complex, or meaningless results. Some tasks are further split into a hard and
an easy version. More details about generating the benchmark are provided in Appendix A.1.7.

2.3   M ETRICS ABOUT NUPA                                           Generation:    425.925535321
Measuring the performance of NUPA benchmarks on these               Groundtruth: 31415.92653582
tasks is not trivial. “Exact match” accuracy is the golden          Exact match:          0
standard of the performance where the answer is considered as       Digit match:  8 / (8 + 5) =0.62
correct when it exactly matches the groundtruth. However, a         dlength:              3
smoother and more detailed metric is useful to understand the
behavior and capabilities of a model. Therefore, we also report    Figure 1: An example of metrics.

                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

   1
   1
 0.9
 0.9
 0.8
 0.8
 0.7
 0.7
 0.6
 0.6
 0.5
 0.5
 0.4
 0.4
 0.3
 0.3
 0.2
 0.2
 0.1
 0.1
   0
   0
       SS

            MM

                  LL

                         XLXL


                                SS

                                     MM

                                             LL

                                                  XLXL


                                                         SS

                                                              MM

                                                                   LL

                                                                          XLXL


                                                                                 SS

                                                                                      MM

                                                                                           LL

                                                                                                 XLXL


                                                                                                        SS

                                                                                                             MM

                                                                                                                  LL

                                                                                                                         XLXL


                                                                                                                                SS

                                                                                                                                     MM

                                                                                                                                          LL

                                                                                                                                                 XLXL


                                                                                                                                                        SS

                                                                                                                                                             MM

                                                                                                                                                                  LL

                                                                                                                                                                        XLXL


                                                                                                                                                                               SS

                                                                                                                                                                                     MM

                                                                                                                                                                                           LL

                                                                                                                                                                                                XLXL


                                                                                                                                                                                                       SS

                                                                                                                                                                                                             MM

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          XLXL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MM

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  XLXL
               Add                        Add                    Add                     Add                    Max                     Max                  Max Hard                Max Hard                 Get Digit                 Length
               Add                        Add                    Add                     Add                    Max                     Max                  Max Hard                Max Hard                 Get Digit                 Length
             Integer                      Float                Fraction           ScientificNotation          Integer                 Fraction                Integer                  Float                  Integer                   Integer
             Integer                      Float                Fraction           ScientificNotation          Integer                 Fraction                Integer                  Float                  Integer                   Integer
   1
   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GPT-4o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GPT-4o
 0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GPT-4o-mini
 0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GPT-4o-mini
 0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-3.1-8B-ft
 0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-3.1-8B-ft
 0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-3.1-8B
 0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-3.1-8B
 0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-3.1-70B
 0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-3.1-70B
 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mixtral-8x7B
 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mixtral-8x7B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Qwen2-72B
 0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Qwen2-72B
 0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Qwen2-7B
 0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Qwen2-7B
 0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-2-7b-hf
 0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-2-7b-hf
 0.2
 0.1
 0.1
   0
   0
       SS

            MM

                  LL

                         XLXL


                                SS

                                     MM

                                             LL

                                                  XLXL


                                                         SS

                                                              MM

                                                                   LL

                                                                          XLXL


                                                                                 SS

                                                                                      MM

                                                                                           LL

                                                                                                 XLXL


                                                                                                        SS

                                                                                                             MM

                                                                                                                  LL

                                                                                                                         XLXL


                                                                                                                                SS

                                                                                                                                     MM

                                                                                                                                          LL

                                                                                                                                                 XLXL


                                                                                                                                                        SS

                                                                                                                                                             MM

                                                                                                                                                                  LL

                                                                                                                                                                        XLXL


                                                                                                                                                                               SS

                                                                                                                                                                                     MM

                                                                                                                                                                                           LL

                                                                                                                                                                                                XLXL


                                                                                                                                                                                                       SS

                                                                                                                                                                                                             MM

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          XLXL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MM

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  XLXL
             Digit Max                Truediv                  Floordiv               Mod Easy                To Float                 Count                    Sig                 Multiply Easy           Multiply Easy             Multiply Easy
             Digit Max                Truediv                  Floordiv               Mod Easy                To Float                 Count                    Sig                 Multiply Easy           Multiply Easy             Multiply Easy
               Float                  Integer                  Integer                 Integer                Fraction                Integer                 Integer                 Integer                 Fraction                    Float
               Float                  Integer                  Integer                 Integer                Fraction                Integer                 Integer                 Integer                 Fraction                    Float



Figure 2: Parts of performance of state-of-the-art LLMs on NUPA benchmark.1 “-ft” denotes a Llama
model we finetuned on these tasks. (See Section 3.4)
the “digit match” and “dlength” (difference of length) metrics, as metrics of digit accuracy and
length accuracy respectively. We first split numbers into parts (e.g., integer and decimal parts of a
float, numerator and denominator of a fraction) and align the generated answer with the groundtruth
digit by digit. Integer parts are aligned from the least significant digit; and the decimal parts of float
are aligned from the most significant digit. For “digit match”, we measure the correctness of each
digit, with missing digits considered as errors, and report the overall accuracy. For “dlength”, we
report the sum of absolute difference in length between each part of the prediction and the groundtruth.
Figure 1 illustrates these three metrics.
For each task, we divide the digits into four intervals (S, M, L, XL). For tasks with lengths 1-20, the
four intervals correspond to 1-4 5-8, 9-14, 15-20 digits respectively. For tasks with lengths 1-100,
they correspond to 1-10, 11-20, 21-60, 61-100 digits respectively. We average the results in each
interval for each task and metric. More details of our metrics are given in Appendix A.1.8

2.4          P ERFORMANCE OF CURRENT LLM S
We test some commonly used LLMs on our benchmark, including three Llama models: Llama-2-
7b, Llama-3.1-8b and Llama-3.1-70b (Meta, 2024a), one of the most popular open-source model
families from Meta; Mixtral-8×7B (MistralAI, 2024), a strong MoE model; and Qwen2-7B and
Qwen2-72B (Qwen Team, 2024) which are also open-source models that are believed to have strong
math abilities. Finally, we also test state-of-the-art commercial models GPT-4o-2024-08-06 and
GPT-4o-mini-2024-07-18 (OpenAI, 2024a). We use prompts to control models to directly output
result numbers without relying on external tools or CoT. The prompts used for each model and
task are included in Appendix A.2. We select the results of some typical tasks in each category
in Figure 2, while the complete results1 and discussion on all metrics are shown in Appendix A.3.
Here, we mainly focus on the zero-shot performance while we discuss few-shot performance in
Appendix A.3.1. We have several observations regarding the results:
The best model performs well on typical tasks, but its performance declines on more specialized
tasks. We find that GPT-4o, GPT-4o-mini and Qwen2 handle typical tasks, such as integer addition,
float addition, integer max, and integer length, with high accuracy in the S and M ranges. This aligns
with their strong performance on various mathematical datasets. However, their accuracy drops
sharply when working with less common representations, like fractions and scientific notation, with
average accuracy falling below 20%, even for the shortest S-range (1-4 digits). Similarly, for tasks
such as significant figures, modulus operations, and digit-based calculations, their performance was
unsatisfactory. This highlights the current limitations of LLMs in understanding numerical diversity
and complexity. Despite their good performance on a narrow set of numerical tasks, they struggle
with many others, failing to produce accurate results in these areas.
Length remains a significant challenge for NUPA of LLMs. We observe a noticeable decline in
accuracy for even simple tasks like integer addition as the problem length increases. For instance,
GPT-4o’s accuracy drops from nearly 100% in the S range and 80% in the M range to around 40%
in the L range and just 15% in the XL range. In the more complex task float addition, the accuracy
       1
           An interactive performance report is shown in https://huggingface.co/spaces/kangshijia/NUPA-Performance.


                                                                                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


decreases from 90% (S) and 60% (M) to merely 15% (L) and less than 5% (XL). This trend is
consistent across other models and tasks. For example, Qwen2’s performance in the integer-length
task declines from almost 100% in the S range to 50% in the M range, and falls below 5% in the L
and XL ranges.
Length impedes learning both individual digits and overall length. To understand why models
struggle with longer input numbers, we examine digit match and dlength performance in Figure 6 and
Figure 7 in Appendix A.3. These metrics reveal that length affects both the accuracy of individual
digits (digit match) and the answer’s overall length (dlength), with variations across tasks. For
example, GPT-4o and Llama-3.1 display consistently low dlength in the add-integer task, with digit
match decreasing sharply as length increases, suggesting that length primarily impacts per-digit
accuracy on this task. Conversely, in the max-float task, dlength increases significantly with length
(about 30-60 in the XL range), while digit match remains at 60% in the XL range. Note that since
missing digits are treated as errors, this 0.6 digit match is likely due to these missing digits. This
suggests that the main challenge here lies in generating answers of the correct length, rather than
individual digit accuracy. In other tasks like fraction, both length and digit accuracy issues arise, as
reflected in rising dlength and declining digit match.
“Digit” is more challenging than expected. We were surprised to find that LLMs struggle to fully
grasp “digits”. For instance, in the “get digit” task, where the model is asked to return the i-th digit of
a long integer, performance drops significantly as the length of the number increases. This suggests
that current LLMs lack a consistent ability to simply find a digit. Note that the performance is good in
the shorter S-range, which indicates that the models can at least comprehend the task instruction. In
the XL-range, GPT-4o achieves only 20% accuracy, barely above the random guessing 10% baseline
(since the correct answer is always a digit between 0 and 9). This fundamental limitation may
explain why current LLMs struggle with numerical understanding and processing, especially as task
complexity and input length increase. If a model cannot reliably identify a specific digit in a given
number, it casts doubt on its ability to generalize to more complex arithmetic tasks, such as addition.
We also have some interesting observations: (1) LLMs find the “max-hard” task easier than “max”
with integer inputs. The difference between the tasks is that in the max task, the two numbers often
differ in length, whereas in max-hard, they are always the same length and share some left-most
digits, requiring more digits to be compared. While max-hard intuitively seems more difficult, models
actually perform better on it. This is likely because they struggle to effectively use sequence length
information, as reflected in their weaker performance on the “length” tasks in the longer ranges. It
suggests that models might process tasks in different ways from humans. They could have to compare
two numbers digit by digit. In this situation, the “harder” subtasks are actually easier because the
numbers are already aligned. (2) GPT-4o and GPT-4o-mini show nearly identical performance across
most tasks, similar to the comparison between Qwen2-72B and Qwen2-7B. This suggests that once a
model reaches a certain size, NUPA performance relies more on factors like architecture, training
strategies, data diversity, and post-training refinements, rather than simply on increasing model size.

3     H OW DO TOKENIZERS , PE S AND DATA FORMATS AFFECT NUPA?
We have observed that the NUPA Test poses significant challenges even for the most advanced LLMs.
In this section, we aim to investigate the factors that can influence the NUPA of LLMs during their
pretraining phase, including tokenization strategies, PEs, and different data formats. We utilize the
architecture of decoder-only transformers and alter the size to create models with 0.1B, 0.9B and 3B
parameters. These models are trained from scratch, incorporating a wide range of techniques that
could potentially impact NUPA. In this section, each model is trained on a single task . The details of
the training process and models are included in Appendix A.4.1.
                                                                       (a) 31415.926535897932

3.1   O NE - DIGIT TOKENIZERS ARE GOOD ENOUGH                          (b) 31415.926535897932

LLMs interpret numbers as segmented tokens rather than                 (c) 31415.926535897932
whole numbers. With the development of language models,
                                                                       (d) 31415.926535897932
various tokenization strategies have emerged, including mixed
tokenizers, one-digit tokenizers, and k-digit tokenizers (k ≥ 2),   Figure 3: Different tokenization of
as shown in Figure 3. In the BPE tokenizer used by GPT-2, the       a long number. (a) GPT2: mixed
numbers are not specially treated, which resulted in irregular      digit tokenizer, (b) Llama-2: one-
number cutting and is harmful to digit alignment. The cutting       digit tokenizer. (c) GPT-3.5, GPT-4
                                                                    and Llama-3: three-digit tokenizer.
                                                                    (d) Aligned three-digit tokenizer.
                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Exact Match D6           1.00
                                                                Exact Match D7                         Exact Match D8           0.80
                                                                                                                                              Exact Match D9                         Exact Match D10
           1.00                                                                                                                                                        0.20
           0.75                                   0.75                                   0.75                                   0.60


Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                       0.15
           0.50          1-digit                  0.50                                   0.50                                   0.40                                   0.10
           0.25          2-digit                  0.25                                   0.25                                   0.20                                   0.05
                         3-digit
           0.00                                   0.00                                   0.00                                   0.00                                   0.00
                  0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M          0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M          0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M          0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M          0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M
                                                                                                  (a) int add
                         Exact Match D6                         Exact Match D7                         Exact Match D8                         Exact Match D9                         Exact Match D10
           1.00                                   1.00                                   1.00                                   0.80
           0.75                                   0.75                                   0.75                                   0.60                                   0.30
Accuracy


           0.50          1-digit                  0.50                                   0.50                                   0.40                                   0.20
           0.25          2-digit                  0.25                                   0.25                                   0.20                                   0.10
                         3-digit
           0.00                                   0.00                                   0.00                                   0.00                                   0.00
                  0.1M   3.3M 6.5M      9.7M             0.1M    3.3M   6.5M   9.7M             0.1M    3.3M   6.5M   9.7M             0.1M    3.3M   6.5M   9.7M             0.1M    3.3M   6.5M   9.7M
                                                                                                 (b) float add
                         Exact Match D6                         Exact Match D7                         Exact Match D8                         Exact Match D9                         Exact Match D10
                                                  0.20                                                                          0.10                                   0.04
           0.20                                   0.15                                   0.10
Accuracy


                                                                                                                                0.08
                       1-digit                                                                                                                                         0.03
                                                  0.10                                                                          0.05
           0.10        2-digit                                                           0.05
                       3-digit                    0.05                                                                          0.03                                   0.02
                                                                                                                                0.00
                  0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M                    0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M                    0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M                    0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M                    0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M
                                                                                            (c) int multiply
Figure 4: Accuracy of 0.9B models trained with 1-3 digit tokenizer on three tasks of integer addition,
float addition and integer multiplication. Shadow shows the standard error. Dn means n digits. X-axis
is the number of seen training samples.
of numbers in modern tokenizers has become more aligned. These tokenizers greedily segment a
number from left to right into k-digit tokens until a remainder shorter than k digits is left, which is
then segmented into a single token. Llama-2 uses a one-digit tokenizer, but all of the latest LLMs
use a tokenizer with k = 3, which comes with an extended vocabulary for numbers. Additionally,
Singh & Strouse (2024) discovers that just alternating the greedy direction from “left-to-right” to
“right-to-left” (for integers) can improve performance of Llama-3 and GPT-4.
There is a growing tendency to expand the vocabulary size as the number of parameters in LLMs
rapidly increases. Recent work has shown that a larger vocabulary is more suitable for larger
LLMs (Tao et al., 2025) because longer tokens can encapsulate more complex and precise meanings
for text tokens. However, numbers behave differently:
• The long-tail phenomenon (Raunak et al., 2020), common in text tokens, is not as pronounced for
  the number tokens. The distribution of number tokens is closer to a uniform distribution.
• Two smaller number tokens can always be combined into a valid new one (e.g., 3 and 7 form 37),
  which is not true for text tokens (e.g., “hello” and “hi” cannot form “hellohi”). So the number of
  possible number tokens grows exponentially as k increases, much faster than text tokens.
• The next token prediction of number tokens is harder than predicting the next text token because
  number prediction often involves calculation and operations, whereas word mapping tends to be
  more intuitive.
We trained 0.9B models on 1- to 8-digit length samples including integer addition, float addition, and
integer multiplication, using aligned k-digit tokenizers where k = 1, 2, 3 (d in Figure 3). Figure 4
shows the in-domain performance of these models in the first three columns and their out-of-domain
(OOD) performance in the last two columns, evaluated using the exact match metric.
From the figure, the one-digit tokenizer shows the best in-domain performance in these three tasks,
while three-digit tokenizer exhibits poor performance. In out-of-domain tests, the one-digit tokenizer
also exceeds the others by large margins. Tokenizers with an increasing number of digits significantly
hinder sub-billion models’ NUPA. We also performed experiments on models of 3 different sizes
including 0.1B, 0.9B, and 3B in Appendix A.4.2 and got similar results. Even as the model size
increases, the performance of 2- or 3- digit tokenizer improves but remains either similar or worse
than that of the one-digit tokenizers. For these experiments, we also report the digit match and dlength
results in Appendix A.4.2 Figure 10 and 11, where one-digit tokenizer performs better both on digit
learning (larger digit match) and length learning (less dlength). On the contrary, larger vocabularies
significantly increase the model size requirements. In conclusion, we find no evidence to support the
idea that increasing the vocabulary size improves NUPA performance.
Recently, Sathe et al. (2024) found that the “random tokenizer” (Kudo, 2018; Provilkov et al.,
2020) which splits words like "Hello world" into variable tokens such as "He/llo/ world" or "Hell/o/
world" enhances reasoning by introducing variability in generation path. We also test it in number
domain and find the random tokenizers consistently outperform their standard counterparts in length
generalization, but still fall short of the performance achieved by the one-digit tokenizer. See the
details in Appendix A.4.2.


                                                                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   S PECIALIZED PE S ACT AS L ENGTH R EGULARIZERS

Previous work has suggested that PE could be the key factor (Zhou et al., 2024b) of length gener-
alization. To further investigate whether the influence is specific on a certain task, we train 100M
models with different PEs: RoPE (Su et al., 2024), NoPE (Kazemnejad et al., 2023) and Alibi (Press
et al., 2022) on four tasks: integer addition, float addition, fraction multiplication (easy) and scientific
notation addition respectively. Models are trained on 1-8 lengths (S and M range), then test them on
full range (S to XL, 1-20). RoPE, widely used in Llama and its derivatives, is the most classic relative
PE. Then Alibi, another relative PE, is proposed to address RoPE’s length overfitting issues. NoPE
(transformers without PE, relying solely on the causal mask to encode the position information) offers
a surprisingly easy way to achieve length generalization. Therefore, we compare these three typical
PEs to evaluate the performance on NUPA.
Our results, presented in Figure 13 in Appendix A.4.3, align with conclusions from previous works.
Alibi and NoPE demonstrate superior length generalization across various representations and tasks,
indicating that the influence of PEs is relatively consistent across these common representations,
tasks within the number domain.
Moreover, we aim to characterize further the mechanism underlying these differences. Specifically,
we found that RoPE leads the model to learn a length-related shortcut, while Alibi and NoPE act
as a form of regularization by avoiding this, thereby preventing length overfitting. For more details,
please refer to the appendix A.4.3.

3.3   DATA FORMATS HELP DIGIT ALIGNMENT

A series of works have proposed specific data formats including reverse formatting, zero padding
and index hints. Reverse formatting (Lee et al., 2024; Shen et al., 2023) presents numbers in
reverse order from the least significant digit to the most significant one to align with the models’
autoregressive mechanism, simplifying the learning process for addition. Zero padding (Lee et al.,
2024; Shen et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024b; Cho et al., 2024) adds leading zeros to numbers to
standardize the lengths of operands, helping models align operands. Index Hints (Zhou et al., 2024a)
explicitly incorporate positional information by prefixing each digit with its corresponding position
index in both input and output sequences.
While previous work mainly focuses on integer addition or multiplication, we extend the techniques
to various tasks in the NUPA Test of different number domains. To compare the effects of reverse
formatting and zero padding, we demonstrate in Table 16 how the combination of reverse formatting
and zero padding impacts length generalization. Reverse formatting, zero padding, and their
combination all outperform vanilla formats in integer and float addition, while their performance is
comparable to each other, suggesting that their functionality largely overlaps. Zero padding helps
ensure proper alignment, while reverse formatting also plays a crucial role in maintaining alignment.
The previously believed “helping calculation” function of reverse formatting is minor. As for index
hint, we find it doesn’t work for our models. We discuss the details of these experiment results and
the reasons in Appendix A.4.4.

3.4   D OES FINETUNING IMPROVE NUPA PERFORMANCE OF LLM S ?

The existing techniques aimed at enhancing NUPA have rarely been applied to practical LLMs,
mostly being tested on toy models and isolated tasks. This raises the question of whether it is possible
to enhance the NUPA capabilities of large models through post-training finetuning. To explore this,
we generate training sets (105 samples for each digit and each task) and validation sets for our NUPA
tasks, ensuring no overlap with the original test set. We then use them to finetune a pretrained model.
Specifically, we finetune a Meta-Llama-3.1-8B model with LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) (rank 128, α=32)
on a mixed training set comprising all of our NUPA tasks. Remarkably, we find only 800 steps
training (about 50M training samples, ≪ 1 epoch) leads to significant improvement, as shown in
Figure 2 with the finetuned model labeled as “Llama-8B-ft”. Though Llama-3.1-8B is not a
strong baseline, this finetuned version achieves much better performance. For example, in max,
max-hard, add-float and truediv tasks, this model even surpassed or matched GPT-4o, confirming our
hypothesis: for many NUPA tasks, the model’s base capacity may not be the main limiting factor, but
rather the lack of numerical diversity and task variety in the training data.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


However, we also found that such finetuning does not provide much improvement on certain tasks,
such as understanding digits. Furthermore, when we tried to incorporate the various tricks, such
as modifying the model’s original PEs, tokenizers, or number formats, into an already trained
model, these methods proved ineffective. When we altered the PE or adjusted the tokenization and
representation of the model, the changes significantly disrupted the model’s original behavior, causing
a substantial performance drop. This suggests that enhancing a model’s NUPA capabilities through
post-training may require more revolutionary innovations beyond the current tricks. The detailed
results of these attempts are presented in Table 18 in Appendix A.4.5.

4     I S C OT SUITABLE AND VALID FOR NUPA?
CoT has been proven to be effective in enhancing the capacity of LLMs both theoretically (Feng
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024b) and experimentally (Wei et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2024b). Thus, we
are also interested in whether CoT is the ultimate solution for improving NUPA. Due to the task and
representation diversity in our benchmark, it is hard to cover all issues with a single form of CoT. So
we adapt a special CoT form called Rule-Following CoT (Hu et al., 2024) (RF-CoT), where LLMs
are trained to follow a provided code or pseudo-code that outlines the procedure to solve the task.
RF-CoT is capable of handling any problem with a solving procedure that can be broken down into
recurrences and basic unit operations, making it well-suited for our benchmark tasks. The detailed
introduction with an example of RF-CoT can be found in Appendix A.5.1.
    Table 3: Performance of RF CoT. “-” means exceeding context window limitation (2k tokens).
Exact Match           Add Float              Multiply Fraction             Max Scientific            Mod Integer
  # Digit        5       6         7        2        3        4       38        39        40     6       7         8
   RF CoT 1.00±.00 1.00±.00        -    0.93±.01 0.88±.03     -    1.00±.00 1.00±.00 1.00±.00 0.67±.05 0.43±.07     -
   GPT-4o      0.78     0.66     0.49     0.53     0.20     0.00     0.37     0.46     0.36     0.01     0.00     0.00
 Qwen2-72B 0.62         0.50     0.70     0.05     0.00     0.00     0.96     0.98     0.95     0.03     0.00     0.00
 Llama-8B-ft 0.88±.02 0.79±.04 0.74±.04 0.50±.02 0.20±.03 0.01±.00 0.98±.01 0.97±.01 0.98±.01 0.08±.02 0.05±.04 0.05±.04


To evaluate the performance of this CoT method, we finetuned Table 2: Average inference time.
the LLaMA 3.1-8B model on a subset of the NUPA tasks with                     batchsize sec / sample
RF-CoT. During both training and testing, we set a context
window of 2000 tokens, with any data exceeding this limit          RF CoT        128         5.625
being ignored. Table 3 shows the performance on selected            Direct       128         0.371
                                                                    Direct       256         0.336
tasks. Accuracy and standard error for RF-CoT and finetuned
Llama-3.1-8B are averaged over three runs. For GPT-4o and Qwen2, which are not finetuned, we
report single-run accuracy without standard error. Within the context length limit, the rule-following
finetuned LLaMA 3.1-8B significantly outperformed GPT-4o and Qwen2-72B as well as the one
finetuned without RF-CoT in most situations.
However, it requires a significantly longer context window and causes much slower inference speed
compared to directly generating the answer. As shown in Table 3, with the 2000-token limit, CoT
can only handle fraction addition involving numbers up to three digits. We provide the maximal
digit length within the 2k context window limitation for each task in Appendix A.5.2 to show the
context window limitation for complex tasks. As for inference time, Table 2 demonstrates the
average inference time for generating each sample using “RF-CoT” and “direct answer” during the
NUPA Test where both experiments are operated on an A800 GPU. In the table, the “direct answer”
with batch size 256 uses a similar amount of CUDA memory as RF-CoT with batch size 128. The
RF-CoT method is approximately 17 times slower than directly generating the answer, causing an
unsustainable burden for such a basic operation that is frequently encountered in solving real-world
problems, especially considering that number calculations may only account for a small part of a
complex, real-world reasoning problem (such as analyzing a financial report).

5     R ELATED WORK
We have discussed some related work in the corresponding section. This section highlights some
other studies related to NUPA in language models.
Numerical understanding in natural language comprehension Earlier studies explored numeri-
cal reasoning within language comprehension contexts. For example, Dua et al. (2019) introduced a
reading comprehension dataset requiring discrete reasoning, such as sorting and addition. Similarly,


                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ravichander et al. (2019) proposed a benchmark for evaluating quantitative understanding in textual
entailment. However, these datasets blend numerical reasoning with broader language understanding
tasks, making it challenging to isolate numerical processing abilities.
Probing numerical understanding in LMs Several works have probed numerical comprehension
in encoder models. Wallace et al. (2019) trained probing models to assess numerical understanding
embedded in model representations, while Johnson et al. (2020) extend this conclusion to multi-
language settings. Naik et al. (2019) used contrastive tests to evaluate models’ understanding of
number magnitudes. Geva et al. (2020) demonstrated that finetuning on numerical reasoning data
enhances the understanding. Unlike these studies, which focus on embeddings, our work emphasizes
generating correct answers in autoregressive models. Recent efforts on such models include Razeghi
et al. (2022), who studied few-shot learning correlations between term frequency and performance,
and Zhang et al. (2024a), who identified key components in LLMs for basic arithmetic tasks. These
works focus on some most classic tasks and our benchmark expands on these by incorporating diverse
numerical representations, tasks, and digit ranges, offering a more comprehensive analysis.
Numerical dataset in specific domains Datasets like those proposed by Spithourakis & Riedel
(2018) and Lin et al. (2020) test numerical commonsense reasoning, while others focus on specific
contexts, such as financial reasoning (Chen et al., 2021; 2022) or tabular data (Akhtar et al., 2023).
These works highlight numerical reasoning within specific domains rather than general numerical
processing tasks. In contrast, our benchmark targets core numerical understanding, emphasizing tasks
decoupled from domain-specific constraints.
Mathematical Reasoning Datasets Despite its close relationship with NUPA, mathematical
reasoning is a broader field involving diverse skills such as task comprehension, equation solving,
tool usage, and more (Lu et al., 2023b). While correct numerical processing is a critical component of
mathematical reasoning, it is not the entirety of it (Stolfo et al., 2023). Datasets like MathQA (Amini
et al., 2019), GSM8k (Cobbe et al., 2021), MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021b), and SVAMP (Patel
et al., 2021) focus on math word problems requiring multi-step reasoning and problem-solving. Few
works isolate numerical processing from mathematical reasoning. Saxton et al. (2019) introduced a
dataset for numerical tasks, such as adding floating-point numbers, but lacked task categorization by
difficulty or length. Moreover, mixing numerical and algebraic tasks complicated analyses of pure
numerical processing. Our benchmark addresses this gap, offering fine-grained categorization and
evaluation of numerical understanding tasks.

6   C ONCLUSION
We investigate NUPA of LLMs and introduce a comprehensive benchmark, the NUPA Test, to reveal
that numerical problems remain challenging for modern LLMs. Our comprehensive test, which
includes a variety of numerical representations and tasks, has exposed the surprising vulnerability of
LLMs in this fundamental area. To explore ways to improve NUPA, we extend and evaluate previous
pretraining techniques on the NUPA benchmark. While direct finetuning on the NUPA tasks does
improve the performance, utilizing those tricks specifically designed for NUPA in the finetuning tends
to harm NUPA, suggesting that these methods are not easily transferable to practical LLMs. We also
explore the potential of chain-of-thought techniques to enhance NUPA and discuss their limitations.

7   L IMITATION
As a benchmark that specifically focuses on number understanding and processing abilities, we
acknowledge that the range of tasks could still be incomplete and biased toward certain aspects. We
will continue updating our benchmark, including but not limited to adding new tasks and refining
existing ones to ensure appropriate difficulty. Additionally, the number of models we have tested so
far is limited, and we plan to include more promising pretrained models in future evaluations.
On the other hand, although we have identified the limitations of LLMs’ NUPA, the existing solutions
each have their own drawbacks. We have yet to find a path that fully addresses the problem. Solving
this issue may require research across multiple fields, such as enhancing the diversity of pretraining
corpora, developing new techniques, or enabling more efficient reasoning paradigms that make more
complex CoT approaches feasible. We hope our work can contribute to and be complemented by
advancements in these areas.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We have made every effort to ensure that the results presented in this paper are fully reproducible.
Detailed descriptions of the number formats, construction and metrics of our NUPA dataset are pro-
vided in Section 2 and A.1.5, and examples for each task in A.4.4. To further facilitate reproducibility,
we have included the complete dataset and the source code, enabling the generation of the entire
dataset and the training and assessment of models, within the supplementary materials and the github
page https://github.com/GraphPKU/number_cookbook. Researchers wishing to generate NUPA
benchmark or replicate our experiments can refer to these resources for all necessary information.


E THICS S TATEMENT

In conducting this research, we have adhered to the highest ethical standards to ensure the integrity
and fairness of our work. For source code releases, we have ensured compliance with applicable legal
standards. During the construction of the dataset, all data was entirely generated randomly, without
including any personal identity information or other private data of individuals.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2022ZD0160300) and the NSF
China (No. 62276004).


R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe, Samy Bengio, Aryo Lotfi, and Kevin Rizk. Generalization on the unseen, logic
 reasoning and degree curriculum. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(331):1–58, 2024.

Mubashara Akhtar, Abhilash Shankarampeta, Vivek Gupta, Arpit Patil, Oana Cocarascu, and Elena
 Simperl. Exploring the numerical reasoning capabilities of language models: A comprehensive
 analysis on tabular data. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 15391–15405, Singapore, December
 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1028.

Aida Amini, Saadia Gabriel, Shanchuan Lin, Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh
  Hajishirzi. MathQA: Towards interpretable math word problem solving with operation-based
  formalisms. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and
  Short Papers), pp. 2357–2367, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1245.

Yang Chen, Yitao Liang, and Zhouchen Lin. Low-dimension-to-high-dimension generalization
  and its implications for length generalization, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.
  08898.

Zhiyu Chen, Wenhu Chen, Charese Smiley, Sameena Shah, Iana Borova, Dylan Langdon, Reema
  Moussa, Matt Beane, Ting-Hao Huang, Bryan R Routledge, et al. Finqa: A dataset of numerical
  reasoning over financial data. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing: EMNLP 2021, pp. 3697–3711, 2021.

Zhiyu Chen, Shiyang Li, Charese Smiley, Zhiqiang Ma, Sameena Shah, and William Yang Wang.
  Convfinqa: Exploring the chain of numerical reasoning in conversational finance question an-
  swering. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing: EMNLP 2022, pp. 6279–6292, 2022.

Hanseul Cho, Jaeyoung Cha, Pranjal Awasthi, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Anupam Gupta, and Chul-
  hee Yun. Position coupling: Leveraging task structure for improved length generalization of
  transformers. In First Workshop on Long-Context Foundation Models@ ICML 2024, 2024.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168,
  2021.
Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel Stanovsky, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner.
  DROP: A reading comprehension benchmark requiring discrete reasoning over paragraphs. In
 Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp.
  2368–2378, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/N19-1246.
Guhao Feng, Bohang Zhang, Yuntian Gu, Haotian Ye, Di He, and Liwei Wang. Towards revealing
  the mystery behind chain of thought: A theoretical perspective. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 70757–70798. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023.
Mor Geva, Ankit Gupta, and Jonathan Berant. Injecting numerical reasoning skills into language
 models. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics, pp. 946–958, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.89.
Adi Haviv, Ori Ram, Ofir Press, Peter Izsak, and Omer Levy. Transformer language models without
  positional encodings still learn positional information. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and
 Yue Zhang (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp.
 1382–1390, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-emnlp.99.
Chaoqun He, Renjie Luo, Yuzhuo Bai, Shengding Hu, Zhen Thai, Junhao Shen, Jinyi Hu, Xu Han,
  Yujie Huang, Yuxiang Zhang, Jie Liu, Lei Qi, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Olympiadbench:
  A challenging benchmark for promoting agi with olympiad-level bilingual multimodal scientific
  problems. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3828–3850, 2024.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021a.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn
  Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. In
 Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track
 (Round 2), 2021b.
Edward J Hu, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen,
  et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022.
Yi Hu, Xiaojuan Tang, Haotong Yang, and Muhan Zhang. Case-based or rule-based: how do
  transformers do the math? In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 19438–19474, 2024.
Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong
  Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. A survey on hallucination in large
  language models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst.,
  November 2024. ISSN 1046-8188. doi: 10.1145/3703155.
Zhuoxuan Jiang, Haoyuan Peng, Shanshan Feng, Fan Li, and Dongsheng Li. Llms can find mathe-
  matical reasoning mistakes by pedagogical chain-of-thought. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third
  International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 3439–3447, 2024.
Devin Johnson, Denise Mak, Andrew Barker, and Lexi Loessberg-Zahl. Probing for multilingual
  numerical understanding in transformer-based language models. In Proceedings of the Third
  BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 184–192,
  2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Amirhossein Kazemnejad, Inkit Padhi, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, Payel Das, and Siva Reddy.
 The impact of positional encoding on length generalization in transformers. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 36:24892–24928, 2023.
Taku Kudo. Subword regularization: Improving neural network translation models with multiple sub-
  word candidates. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 66–75, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P18-1007.
Nayoung Lee, Kartik Sreenivasan, Jason D. Lee, Kangwook Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Teach-
  ing arithmetic to small transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024.
Jia Li, Edward Beeching, Lewis Tunstall, Ben Lipkin, Roman Soletskyi, Shengyi Huang, Kashif
   Rasul, Longhui Yu, Albert Q Jiang, Ziju Shen, et al. Numinamath: The largest public dataset in
   ai4maths with 860k pairs of competition math problems and solutions. 2024a.
Xiaoyuan Li, Wenjie Wang, Moxin Li, Junrong Guo, Yang Zhang, and Fuli Feng. Evaluating
  mathematical reasoning of large language models: A focus on error identification and correction.
  In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024, pp. 11316–11360, 2024b.
Bill Yuchen Lin, Seyeon Lee, Rahul Khanna, and Xiang Ren. Birds have four legs?! numersense:
  Probing numerical commonsense knowledge of pre-trained language models. In Proceedings of
  the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: EMNLP 2020, pp.
  6862–6868, 2020.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2019.
Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Michel Galley, Kai-Wei Chang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu,
  and Jianfeng Gao. Chameleon: Plug-and-play compositional reasoning with large language models.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:43447–43478, 2023a.
Pan Lu, Liang Qiu, Wenhao Yu, Sean Welleck, and Kai-Wei Chang. A survey of deep learning
  for mathematical reasoning. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 14605–14631, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.817.
Meta. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
Meta. Model cards and prompt formats of llama 3.1, 2024b. https://www.llama.com/docs/
 model-cards-and-prompt-formats/llama3_1/.
MistralAI. Mixtral of experts, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.04088.
Aakanksha Naik, Abhilasha Ravichander, Carolyn Rose, and Eduard Hovy. Exploring numeracy in
  word embeddings. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 3374–3380, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1329. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1329.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
OpenAI. Gpt-4o system card, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.21276.
OpenAI. Gpt-o1 system card, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.16720.
Arkil Patel, Satwik Bhattamishra, and Navin Goyal. Are NLP models really able to solve simple
  math word problems? In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2080–2094,
  Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.
  168.
Ofir Press, Noah Smith, and Mike Lewis. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases enables
  input length extrapolation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=R8sQPpGCv0.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ivan Provilkov, Dmitrii Emelianenko, and Elena Voita. BPE-dropout: Simple and effective subword
  regularization. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 1882–1892, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.170.
Alibaba Group Qwen Team. Qwen2 technical report, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2407.10671.
Vikas Raunak, Siddharth Dalmia, Vivek Gupta, and Florian Metze. On long-tailed phenomena in
  neural machine translation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
  2020, pp. 3088–3095, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.276.
Abhilasha Ravichander, Aakanksha Naik, Carolyn Rose, and Eduard Hovy. EQUATE: A benchmark
  evaluation framework for quantitative reasoning in natural language inference. In Proceedings
  of the 23rd Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), pp. 349–361,
  Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/K19-1033.
Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Matt Gardner, and Sameer Singh. Impact of pretraining term
  frequencies on few-shot numerical reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp. 840–854, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-emnlp.59.
Ashutosh Sathe, Divyanshu Aggarwal, and Sunayana Sitaram. Improving self consistency in LLMs
  through probabilistic tokenization. In ICML 2024 Workshop on LLMs and Cognition, 2024.
David Saxton, Edward Grefenstette, Felix Hill, and Pushmeet Kohli. Analysing mathematical
  reasoning abilities of neural models. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach
  themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:68539–68551,
  2023.
Ruoqi Shen, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, and Yi Zhang. Positional
  description matters for transformers arithmetic, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2311.14737.
Aaditya K Singh and DJ Strouse. Tokenization counts: the impact of tokenization on arithmetic
  in frontier llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14903, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2402.14903.
Georgios Spithourakis and Sebastian Riedel. Numeracy for language models: Evaluating and
  improving their ability to predict numbers. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2104–2115, Melbourne,
  Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P18-1196.
Alessandro Stolfo, Zhijing Jin, Kumar Shridhar, Bernhard Schoelkopf, and Mrinmaya Sachan. A
  causal framework to quantify the robustness of mathematical reasoning with language models. In
  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 545–561, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.32.
Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: Enhanced
   transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomput., 568(C), February 2024. ISSN 0925-
   2312. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2023.127063.
Zhengyang Tang, Xingxing Zhang, Benyou Wang, and Furu Wei. Mathscale: scaling instruction
  tuning for mathematical reasoning. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 47885–47900, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chaofan Tao, Qian Liu, Longxu Dou, Niklas Muennighoff, Zhongwei Wan, Ping Luo, Min Lin, and
  Ngai Wong. Scaling laws with vocabulary: Larger models deserve larger vocabularies. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:114147–114179, 2025.
Eric Wallace, Yizhong Wang, Sujian Li, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. Do NLP models know
  numbers? probing numeracy in embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 5307–5315, Hong Kong, China, November 2019.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1534.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Yechen Xu, Xinhao Kong, Tingjun Chen, and Danyang Zhuo. Conveyor: Efficient tool-aware
  llm serving with tool partial execution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00059, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2406.00059.
An Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bofei Gao, Bowen Yu, Chengpeng Li, Dayiheng Liu,
 Jianhong Tu, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Keming Lu, Mingfeng Xue, Runji Lin, Tianyu Liu,
 Xingzhang Ren, and Zhenru Zhang. Qwen2.5-math technical report: Toward mathematical expert
  model via self-improvement, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.12122.
Haotong Yang, Fanxu Meng, Zhouchen Lin, and Muhan Zhang. Parrot mind: Towards explaining
  the complex task reasoning of pretrained large language models with template-content structure,
  2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05452.
Wei Zhang, Chaoqun Wan, Yonggang Zhang, Yiu-ming Cheung, Xinmei Tian, Xu Shen, and Jieping
 Ye. Interpreting and improving large language models in arithmetic calculation. In Proceedings of
 the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 59932–59950, 2024a.
Xiaotian Zhang, Chunyang Li, Yi Zong, Zhengyu Ying, Liang He, and Xipeng Qiu. Evaluating the
  performance of large language models on gaokao benchmark, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2305.12474.
Hattie Zhou, Arwen Bradley, Etai Littwin, Noam Razin, Omid Saremi, Joshua M. Susskind, Samy
  Bengio, and Preetum Nakkiran. What algorithms can transformers learn? a study in length
  generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024a.
Yongchao Zhou, Uri Alon, Xinyun Chen, Xuezhi Wang, Rishabh Agarwal, and Denny Zhou. Trans-
  formers can achieve length generalization but not robustly. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Mathemati-
  cal and Empirical Understanding of Foundation Models, 2024b.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     NUPA T EST

A.1.1    R EPRESENTATIONS
We present the four representations as follows:

        • Integer: we use no comma or point as a digit group separator like 1234567. The integer
          has only one part as itself. In this paper, we have not considered negative numbers for the
          time being.
        • Float: A float has two parts: integer and decimal. We use a decimal point to split these two
          parts and also do not use any digit group separator. An example is 1234.567891. Trailing
          zeros in the decimal part are usually omitted.
        • Fraction: A fraction has two parts: numerator and denominator and we use a “/” to separate
          the numerator and denominator parts. Unless otherwise specified, all fractions mentioned in
          this paper are in their simplest form (that is the numerator and denominator are coprime),


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          but they may be greater than 1. An example is 12/7. Only in the “truediv” task between
          two fractions, because the “/” is also the division operator, we enclose fractions in a pair of
          parentheses like (12/7) / (2/3) = 18/7 to make it clear.
        • Scientific Notation: A scientific notation has two parts: significand and exponent. In our
          benchmark, the significand is always a float larger than 1 and less than 10 and the exponent
          should be a positive integer (and we also set an upper bound of 99). We use a “e” to separate
          these two parts. An example is 1.5e8.

A.1.2    D ETAILED I NTRODUCTION AND D ISCUSSION ABOUT TASKS
In addition to the brief introduction of the 17 tasks in our benchmark, here we provide a detailed
discussion on why these tasks are significant and the specific abilities they aim to evaluate.
• Elementary arithmetic: addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. They are the
  most fundamental mathematical operations and the first branch of mathematics taught in schools.
  However, some operations can be complicated when different number representations are involved.
  For example, fraction addition is more complicated than multiplication because it needs to be
  reduced to a common denominator first.
     – True division, floor division and modulus: The division is somewhat unique because
        it is not closed for integers and floats. Here, we consider three common division-related
        calculations. True division: To maintain precision, we represent the division of two integers
        as a simplified fraction. Combined with the “significant digits” task we will mention later, this
        can approximate the result of dividing two integers as a float. Integer division and modulus:
        Represent approximate multiple relationships, frequently used in practical applications, such
        as dividing individuals into batches.
• Comparison: max and min. Another important aspect of understanding numbers lies in the
  concept of “order”. To truly comprehend a number, we must know how large it is and whether it
  is greater or smaller than another one. Moreover, comparison serves as the foundation for other
  significant operations. For instance, when adding negative and positive numbers, we determine the
  sign first and then subtract with their absolute values — this involves identifying which of the two
  numbers has a greater absolute value.
• Digit understanding: The concept of a digit is fundamental. Unlike the “value” of a number, a
  digit is tied to its specific representation. When we care about a language model’s understanding,
  processing (and generation) of numbers, digit is a crucial concept, as numbers are not read and
  processed by the language model as a whole, but rather as a sequence of digits. We are curious
  whether LLMs truly understand the concept of digits. Therefore, we specially designed some
  digit-related tasks, including:
     – Get digit: Given a number and an integer i, return the i-th digit. This task is important when
        certain digits have special meanings in a number (such as a phone number or SSN).
     – Length: Return the total length (i.e., the number of digits) of a number.
     – Count: Count the times that a particular digit occurs in an integer.
     – Digit compare: Compare and return the larger (smaller) digits one by one.
     – Digit add: Perform the normal addition digit by digit but ignore any carrying. For example,
        digit_add(12345, 34567) = 46802. It can test a model’s understanding of digit alignment
        and its mastery of single-digit addition.
  Through these tasks, we can assess whether models correctly understand the concepts of digits,
  length, positions, and the alignment of the digits between two numbers.
• Conversion between representations: we design tasks for converting a number to two representa-
  tions: to float and to scientific notation, as they are frequently used to present final results. These
  two tasks also create transformations between different representations to test whether models can
  understand the relationship between various numerical formats. In particular, since many tasks
  present answers as approximate values, we designed a “significant digit” (sig. fig.) task to evaluate
  a model’s ability to round long numbers to fixed-length significant digits.

A.1.3    E XAMPLES FOR EACH TASK
We provide each tasks with an example. To test the models, we also add some model specific system
messages like “You are a helpful assistant to process numbers. Please directly answer the question


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


after the =”. The context before “=” is the question and the context after “=” is the groundtruth and
is removed when testing.

      • Add-Integer: Add two numbers: 744 + 543 = 1287
      • Add-Float: Add two numbers: 93.81 + 9.976 = 103.786
      • Add-Fraction: Add two numbers: 3/8 + 2/5 = 31/40
      • Add-Scientific: Add two numbers: 9.92e16 + 9.731e18 = 9.8302e18
      • Sub-Integer: Subtract two numbers: 744 − 543 = 201
      • Sub-Float: Subtract two numbers: 93.81 − 9.976 = 83.834
      • Sub-Fraction: Subtract two numbers: 2/5 − 3/8 = 1/40
      • Sub-Scientific: Subtract two numbers: 9.731e38 − 9.92e36 = 9.6318e38
      • Multiply-Integer: Multiply two numbers: 968 × 8 = 7744
      • Multiply-Float: Multiply two numbers: 8.4 × 9.555 = 80.262
      • Multiply-Fraction: Multiply two numbers: 8/7 × 5/2 = 20/7
      • Multiply-Scientific: Multiply two numbers: 9.92e16 × 9.731e38 = 9.653152e55
      • Truediv-Integer: Divide two numbers and return the result as a fraction. 744 / 543 =
        248/181
      • Truediv-Fraction: Divide two numbers and return the result as a fraction. (3/8) / (2/5) =
        15/16
      • Floordiv-Integer: Divide two numbers and return the result as an integer. 845 // 152 = 5
      • Mod-Integer: Divide two numbers and return the remainder. 845 % 152 = 85
      • Max-Integer: Get the maximal number: 50404 and 97871 = 97871
      • Max-Float: Get the maximal number: 44.418 and 65.669 = 65.669
      • Max-Fraction: Get the maximal number: 3/5 and 3/8 = 3/5
      • Max-Scientific: Get the maximal number: 8.15e64 and 1.063e73 = 1.063e73
      • Digit_max-Integer: Compare two numbers digit by digit and return the larger digit at each
        position, treating any missing digits as 0. 50194 and 14283 = 54294
      • Digit_max-Float: Compare two numbers digit by digit and return the larger digit at each
        position, treating any missing digits as 0. 35.905 and 8.4 = 38.905
      • Digit_add-Integer: The task is to add two given numbers digit by digit and return the result
        modulo 10 (ignoring carry), treating any missing digits as 0. 50404 digit add 97871 =
        47275
      • Digit_add-Float: The task is to add two given numbers digit by digit and return the result
        modulo 10 (ignoring carry), treating any missing digits as 0. 44.418 digit add 65.669 =
        9.077
      • Get_digit-Integer: Get the digit at the given position (from left to right, starting from 0).
        50404 at position 4 = 4
      • Get_digit-Float: Get the digit at the given position (from left to right, starting from 0).
        44.418 at position 3 = 1
      • Length-Integer: The total number of digits of 50404 = 5
      • Length-Float: The total number of digits of 262.534 = 6
      • Count-Integer: Count the number of the given digit in the given number:
        27422 count the occurrence time of digit 2 = 3
      • To_float-Fraction: Convert the number to float: 9/5 = 1.8
      • To_float-Scientific: Convert the number to float: 8.538e2 = 853.8
      • To_scientific-Integer: Convert the number to scientific notation: 50400 = 5.04e4
      • To_scientific-Float: Convert the number to scientific notation: 262.534 = 2.62534e2


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        • Sig.Fig-Integer: Convert the number to scientific notation: 50194 and keep significant
          figures as 3 = 5.02e4
        • Sig.Fig-Float: Convert the number to scientific notation: 65.669 and keep significant figures
          as 2 = 6.6e1

A.1.4    E XPECTED REPRESENTATION IN EACH TASK
Each task in the 41 ones receives one or two input numbers and expects one number as the result. We
name the representation by the first input numbers. For simplicity, the second input number shares
the same representation as the first one for most tasks. Calculations between different representations
can be performed by first converting them to the same representation. Two types of tasks are the
exception. Tasks “length”, “to float” and “to scientific” do not have the second input. The second
inputs in tasks “get digit”, “count”, “sig. fig.” are always a short Integer, representing a position,
length, or a digit number from 0 to 9. To distinguish them from potentially long integers to be
processed, we call the former int and the latter integer.
We summarize the second number representation and result representation in each task in Table 4
and Table 5 where I means integer, i means (shorter) int, Fl means float, Fr means fraction, S means
scientific notation and N means no such a number.

                           Table 4: The second input number representation
                Elementary arithmetic          Comparison         Digit Understanding            Conversion
                                                        Digit Digit Digit Get               To      To      Sig.
          Add Sub Multiply Truediv Floordiv Mod Max Min                       Length Count
                                                        Max Min Add Digit                  Float Scientific Fig.
Integer    I   I     I        I       I      I   I   I    I     I     I    i    N      i    −        N       i
Float      Fl Fl    Fl        ✗       −      − Fl   Fl   Fl Fl Fl          i    N     ⃝     −        N       i
Fraction Fr Fr      Fr       Fr       −      − Fr   Fr   − − − −                −     ⃝     N       ⃝        ⃝
Scientific S S      S         ✗       −      − S     S   − − − −                −     ⃝     N        −       ⃝


                                 Table 5: Result number representation
                Elementary arithmetic          Comparison         Digit Understanding            Conversion
                                                        Digit Digit Digit Get               To      To      Sig.
          Add Sub Multiply Truediv Floordiv Mod Max Min                       Length Count
                                                        Max Min Add Digit                  Float Scientific Fig.
Integer    I   I     I       Fr       I      I   I   I    I     I     I    i    i      i    −        S       S
Float      Fl Fl    Fl        ✗       −      − Fl   Fl   Fl Fl Fl          i    i     ⃝     −        S       S
Fraction Fr Fr      Fr       Fr       −      − Fr   Fr   − − − −                −     ⃝     Fl      ⃝        ⃝
Scientific S S      S         ✗       −      − S     S   − − − −                −     ⃝     Fl       −       ⃝



A.1.5    N ON - INCLUDED TASKS
We exclude some compositions between number representations and tasks because of the following
three reasons:

        • ✗ too complex. We exclude the truediv between float and scientific. Division between float
          numbers is difficult to define accurately in our scenario. It is very common to divide two
          floating point numbers into an infinite decimal, which means that even very short decimals
          can still result in a very long and unpredictable result after division. And in this task we do
          not want to discuss the case of rounding the result. (This is another task of ours.) For the
          same reason, we also exclude division in scientific notation.
        • ⃝: can be easily transferred to from an included task.
            – Converting fractions to scientific notation can be done by first converting to a
              float. (Fraction-to_scientific = Fraction-to_float + Float-to_scientific). Fraction-
              SignificantFigure is similar.
            – Scientific notation retains significant digits and is virtually identical to floating point
              numbers.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             – count is a special task where we just consider a number as “a set of digits” so count in
               a float, fraction and scientific notation is as the same as in a integer.
        • −: not applicable.
             – In fraction and scientific notation, the digit concept is not well-defined so the tasks
               about digit (digit-compare, digit-add, get-digit and length) are not applicable.
             – Floordiv and mod is only defined on integer.
             – Integer and float do not need to be further converted to float. Similarly, scientific has
               no need to converted to scientific.

A.1.6     E ASY / HARD SPLIT OF NUPA TASKS

We divide the tasks into easy and hard as shown in Table 6, where the hard tasks marked as H with
maximal test digit as 20 and the easy tasks marked as E with maximal test digit as 100.


                            Table 6: Tasks can be divided into Easy and Hard.
                 Elementary arithmetic          Comparison         Digit Understanding            Conversion
                                                         Digit Digit Digit Get               To      To      Sig.
           Add Sub Multiply Truediv Floordiv Mod Max Min                       Length Count
                                                         Max Min Add Digit                  Float Scientific Fig.
 Integer    H H      H         H       H      H E     E   E     E     E     E    E     E              E       E
 Float      H H      H                            E   E   E     E     E     E    E                    E       E
 Fraction H H        H         H                  H   H                                      H
 Scientific H H      H                            E   E                                       E



A.1.7     P REPROCESS AND QUESTION GENERATION FOR NUPA TASKS

We define the length of a number as the number of digits in the longest part of a number. The “integer”
part and “decimal” part of a float (as well as the significand of a scientific notation), the “numerator”
and “denominator” of a fraction, the “exponent” of a scientific notation are considered as different
“parts”. In order to generate a pair of numbers with the larger length L, we first generate a L-length
number and then generate a l-length number where l follows a uniform distribution from L/2 to L. If
the operation is commutative, we swap the two numbers with probability 0.5.
After we select two random numbers, we have some preprocessing to generate the final questions:

        • For “Multiply”, the difficulty also affected by the shorter number severely, so we split the
          task into two sub-tasks as “multiply-hard” and “multiply-easy”. For the hard subset, we
          require that the shorter number must be longer than half of the longer one. For an easy
          subset, we require that the length of the shorter number is less than 3, so that the complexity
          is O(n) instead of O(n2 ). And because the addition of fractions also involves multiplication,
          we also add an add-easy for this task in the same way.
        • For “max” and “min” tasks, we additionally provide a harder version. For Integers and
          floats, we make sure that two compared numbers share the same length. At the same time,
          they should have more digits as the same like 12949 and 12961 to avoid models that can
          solve the problem by only counting the length or comparing the first digit. For scientific
          notation, we ensure 70% pairs of compared numbers with the same exponential part so that
          models cannot directly get the answer without comparing the significand part. For fractions,
          we ensure the numbers are both less than one, avoiding the model can just compare them
          with 1 to get more than 50% accuracy.
        • For “to_float-Fraction”, we require that the fraction can be converted into a finite decimal,
          that is the denominator contains only factors 2 and 5.
        • For “add/sub-Scientific”, we require the exponential part of each number to have a difference
          less than 5 to make sure that the generated answer will not be too long.

The pre-processing could introduce additional duplicated data, so we implement a post-filtering step
to remove duplicates and ensure data integrity.


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.1.8    M ETRICS
For digit match, we should first align the numbers. For the integers and integer parts in floats, the
numerator and denominator of fractions, and the exponential part of the scientific notation, we use
the right alignment. For the decimal part in floats (as well as the in the significand part in scientific
notation), we use the left alignment.
For dlength, we first measure the difference of each part of a number and then add the absolute values
up.
Besides the average metrics in each range, we also present the following metrics: well-learned digits
and performance-preserving digits to demonstrate the model’s upper and lower performance limits
on length. These represent the maximum number of digits that can maintain over 90% and 10%
accuracy, respectively. (For digit match, the thresholds are set to 90% and 50%, and for dlength,
where smaller is better, the thresholds are 0.1 and 1).
We ensure that there is no duplicated sample in dataset, so for some range, the test samples could be
less than 1000. We also omit 1 digit or some 2 digit test in our testbed to make sure that unit rules
can be included in a training set.

A.2     P ROMPTS AND OTHER DETAILS TO TEST BASELINE MODELS

For all models in our test, we first provide a “format prompt” describing the expected return format
(and avoiding models generating complex CoT), and a “task prompt” describing the task. We use some
easy problems to ensure powerful models (gpt-4o-mini and Llama-3.1-8B) can correctly understand
the tasks and expected return format by the prompts. The expected return representation of each task
is referred to in Appendix A.1.4.
The format prompt based on the expected return type of the task is as follows:

        • Integer: Directly return the answer as an integer without any comma separator, like 123 .
        • float: Directly return the answer as a float without any comma separator, like 10.4 .
        • Fraction: Directly return the answer as an **irreducible** fraction without any comma
          separator, like 7/13 .
        • Scientific Notation: Directly return the answer as a scientific notation without any comma
          separator, like 1.23e4 . The float part should be in the range [1, 10).

The task prompts are listed as follows where <a> and <b> are numbers.

        • Add: Add two numbers: <a> + <b> =
        • Sub: Subtract two numbers: <a> - <b> =
        • Multiply: Multiply two numbers: <a> * <b> =
        • Truediv: Divide two numbers and return the result as a fraction. <a> / <b> =
        • Floordiv: Divide two numbers and return the result as an integer. <a> // <b> =
        • Mod: Divide two numbers and return the remainder. <a> % <b>
        • Max: Get the maximal number: <a> and <b> =
        • Min: Get the minimal number: <a> and <b> =
        • Digit max: Compare two numbers digit by digit and return the larger digit at each position,
          treating any missing digits as 0. <a> and <b> =
        • Digit min: Compare two numbers digit by digit and return the smaller digit at each position,
          treating any missing digits as 0. <a> and <b> =
        • Digit add: The task is to add two given numbers digit by digit and return the result modulo
          10 (ignoring carry), treating any missing digits as 0. <a> digit add <b> =
        • Get digit: Get the digit at the given position (from left to right, starting from 0). <a> at
          position <b> =
        • Length: The total number of digits of <a> =


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        • Count: Count the number of the given digit in the given number: <a> count the occurrence
          time of digit <b> =
        • To_float: Convert the number to float: <a> =
        • To_scient: Convert the number to scientific notation: <a> =
        • Sig_fig: Convert the number to scientific notation: <a> and keep significant figures as <b>.

Notice that all prompts are ended with an “=” so that we can easily separate the input question and
the generation of models. When we use the texts in supervised finetuning (SFT), the context before
the “=” is not involved in the loss calculation.
For GPT-4o and GPT-4o-mini, we also add a system message as follows and use the aforementioned
question as user message:

          You are a capable math assistant. Return your solution without any process in the
          format: The answer is [YOUR ANSWER]. The final answer must strictly match
          the format <regex>.

where the <regex> is a regular expression based on the expected return format:

        • Integer: r"\d+"
        • Float: r"\d+\.\d+"
        • Fraction: r"\d+/\d+"
        • Scientific Notation: r"\d+\.\d+e\d+"

We use the models expect GPT from huggingface and use the default tokenizer, model and generation
configuration provided by the models. We test GPT-4o and GPT-4o-mini by the OpenAI API, where
GPT-4o means gpt-4o-2024-0806 and GPT-4o-mini means GPT-4o-mini-2024-07-18. For Qwen2-
72B and Llama-3.1-70B, we additionally use 4-bit quantization but we also test several samples
without quantization and ensure this quantization does not affect generation quality.
We retrieve the first match of the corresponding regular expression after the “=” as the answer. If
there is no retrieve, we use an empty answer to calculate the metrics, where exact match and digit
match is both zero and the dlength is the total length of the groundtruth number.

A.3     F ULL TEST RESULTS OF LLM S

We show the full NUPA Test results in Figures 5 (exact match), 6 (digit match), 7 (dlength) and
Table 7, 8, 9 (well-learned digits and performance-preserving digits for each metrics).
With the detailed metrics, we can more clearly understand the behavior of some models on some
tasks. For example, we find that the “exact match” and “digit match” of some models like Qwen-2
and GPT-4o on the “integer-max” task are similar, suggesting that when the models know which one
is correct, they can always copy the answer from question correctly. So the wrong answer comes
from incorrect comparison. Another example is the Llama-2 performance on max-hard. Because the
length of two input numbers and the groundtruth answer in the max-hard task are all the same, most
models show less dlength on this task suggesting they know that “the answer should have the same
length of inputs”, but we find Llama-2 shows dlength approximately equal to the average length in
the range, suggesting that Llama-2 cannot generate a valid answer on this task. These are just a few
examples to illustrate how more detailed metrics can help us gain a deeper understanding of model
behavior. There are many possible conclusions, but there are too many to list here.

A.3.1    F EW- SHOT LEARNING
To ensure the output format of models is as precise as possible, we employ 5-shot learning. For each
task, we select one sample from 5 different lengths respectively and test the few-shot performance.
Table 10 summarizes the exact match score performance across three selected tasks and Figure 8 shows
more tasks. Notably, providing an explicit output format results in general performance improvements
across tasks and input lengths. In most tasks, the models can usually produce accurately formatted


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


outputs even in the zero-shot setting, with limited additional benefit observed from few-shot examples,
while the few-shot examples can indeed provide some performance improvement.
We find that the conclusions mentioned in main paper have still holds. For example, the performance
also significantly decreases as the length increases or the tasks and representations become unfamiliar
(like Add-Fraction, Add-Scientific or floordiv). And the performance of digit-related tasks are still
unsatisfying.

                                                               Table 10: Few-shot performance on selected tasks
                      Model                                                     Add Int                                                              Max Float                                                         Floordiv Int
                                                               S               M      L                          XL               X                  M      L                        XL                    X            M       L                    XL
  Llama-2-7b-hf-5-shot                                     0.61             0.12             0.00            0.00                0.68           0.55                0.49            0.43               0.04            0.01          0.01            0.00
     Llama-2-7b-hf                                         0.74             0.11             0.00            0.00                0.44           0.47                0.28            0.15               0.04            0.01          0.00            0.00
  Llama-3.1-8B-5-shot                                      0.94             0.41             0.10            0.01                0.88           0.81                0.63            0.54               0.23            0.02          0.01            0.00
     Llama-3.1-8B                                          0.95             0.38             0.06            0.02                0.70           0.57                0.41            0.36               0.19            0.01          0.01            0.01
   Qwen2-7B-5-shot                                         0.83             0.82             0.37            0.04                1.00           0.98                0.81            0.64               0.28            0.08          0.03            0.01
      Qwen2-7B                                             0.93             0.70             0.23            0.03                0.68           0.72                0.55            0.43               0.22            0.05          0.01            0.02
                                                                                                                 Exact Match


 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-2-7b-hf-5-shot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Llama-3.1-8B-5-shot
0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Llama-3.1-70B-5-shot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mixtral-8x7B-v0.1-5-shot
0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Qwen2-7B-5-shot
0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Qwen2-72B-5-shot


0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 0
      S

          M

               L

                      XL

                           S

                               M

                                      L

                                           XL

                                                S

                                                    M

                                                        L

                                                               XL

                                                                    S

                                                                        M

                                                                             L

                                                                                   XL

                                                                                         S

                                                                                             M

                                                                                                 L

                                                                                                        XL

                                                                                                             S

                                                                                                                 M

                                                                                                                     L

                                                                                                                            XL

                                                                                                                                 S

                                                                                                                                     M

                                                                                                                                          L

                                                                                                                                                XL

                                                                                                                                                     S

                                                                                                                                                         M

                                                                                                                                                                L

                                                                                                                                                                     XL

                                                                                                                                                                          S

                                                                                                                                                                              M

                                                                                                                                                                                     L

                                                                                                                                                                                            XL

                                                                                                                                                                                                 S

                                                                                                                                                                                                     M

                                                                                                                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  XL
             Add                   Add                Add                  Add                 Max                 Max               Max Hard             Max Hard              Get Digit               Length
           Integer                 Float            Fraction        ScientificNotation       Integer             Fraction             Integer              Float                 Integer                Integer



                                                                                                                 Exact Match


 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-2-7b-hf-5-shot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Llama-3.1-8B-5-shot
0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Llama-3.1-70B-5-shot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mixtral-8x7B-v0.1-5-shot
0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Qwen2-7B-5-shot
0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Qwen2-72B-5-shot

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 0
      S

          M

               L

                      XL

                           S

                               M

                                      L

                                           XL

                                                S

                                                    M

                                                        L

                                                               XL

                                                                    S

                                                                        M

                                                                             L

                                                                                   XL

                                                                                         S

                                                                                             M

                                                                                                 L

                                                                                                        XL

                                                                                                             S

                                                                                                                 M

                                                                                                                     L

                                                                                                                            XL

                                                                                                                                 S

                                                                                                                                     M

                                                                                                                                          L

                                                                                                                                                XL

                                                                                                                                                     S

                                                                                                                                                         M

                                                                                                                                                                L

                                                                                                                                                                     XL

                                                                                                                                                                          S

                                                                                                                                                                              M

                                                                                                                                                                                     L

                                                                                                                                                                                            XL

                                                                                                                                                                                                 S

                                                                                                                                                                                                     M

                                                                                                                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  XL


          Digit Max            Truediv              Floordiv            Mod Easy             To Float             Count                 Sig              Multiply Easy        Multiply Easy          Multiply Easy
            Float              Integer              Integer              Integer             Fraction            Integer              Integer              Integer              Fraction                 Float



Figure 8: Parts of performance of state-of-the-art LLMs on NUPA benchmark with 5-shot examples.
A.4           T OKENIZER , PE AND DATA FORMATS

A.4.1                 E XPERIMENT DETAILS
We train several models to test the effectiveness of tokenizers, PEs and data formats. Unless otherwise
mentioned, our model architecture uses the Llama-3.1 architecture (Decoder-only Transformers with
causal masking, autoregressive generation, and RoPE as the default PEs). We modify the layer
numbers, hidden size and the number of heads to change the parameter size of models. See Table 11.
We keep all hyperparameters, except model size, consistent with the original Llama setup in the
implementation from Huggingface. We use the default sampling generation strategy with default
hyperparameters, where the temperature is set as 0.6 and top_p is 0.9. About the meaning of these
settings please refer to Llama technique report (Meta, 2024a) and model cards (Meta, 2024b).
To train these models, we use the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) with a learning
rate of 5e-5, weight decay of 0.01, and batch sizes of 256, 64, and 32 for 0.1B, 0.9B, and 3B models,
respectively. Other optimizer settings follow the default values in the Transformers library. We
sample 1e7 samples for each length (where feasible) and concatenate them into a single training


                                                                                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


set. Models are trained for one epoch using a cosine decay learning rate scheduler, and the best
checkpoint on validation data is reported.
Our experiments were conducted on a cluster equipped with Nvidia A800 GPUs (80GB memory).
Training a 100M model takes 5–8 hours, a 1B model approximately 1 day, and a 3B model around 2
days on a single A800 GPU. Finetuning a pretrained model typically takes about 1 day.


                                                      Table 11: Detailed model settings for experiments.
     parameter size                   num hidden layers                 hidden size              intermediate size              num attention heads                     num KV heads
                  100M                                 8                     1024                        3584                                 8                                  2
                  0.9B                                16                     2048                        7168                                16                                  4
                  3.0B                                24                     3072                       10752                                24                                  6



                        Exact Match D6                      Exact Match D7                      Exact Match D8                      Exact Match D9                      Exact Match D10
           1.0                                  1.0                                1.0                                 1.0
                                                                                                                                                          0.25
           0.8                                  0.8                                0.8                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                          0.20
Accuracy


           0.6                                  0.6                                0.6                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                          0.15
           0.4                                  0.4                                0.4                                 0.4                                0.10
                             1-digit tokenizer
           0.2               2-digit tokenizer 0.2                                 0.2                                 0.2                                0.05
                             3-digit tokenizer
           0.0                                 0.0                                 0.0                                 0.0                                0.00
                 0.1M    9.3M 18.5M 27.8M          0.1M      9.3M   18.5M 27.8M          0.1M    9.3M   18.5M 27.8M          0.1M    9.3M   18.5M 27.8M          0.1M     9.3M   18.5M 27.8M
                                                                                 (a) 0.1B model int add
                        Exact Match D6                      Exact Match D7         1.0
                                                                                                Exact Match D8                      Exact Match D9                      Exact Match D10
           1.0                                  1.0                                                                    0.8                           0.200
                                                                                   0.8                                 0.7                           0.175
           0.8                                  0.8                                                                    0.6                           0.150
Accuracy


           0.6                                  0.6                                0.6                                 0.5                           0.125
                                                                                                                       0.4                           0.100
           0.4                                  0.4                      0.4                                           0.3                           0.075
                          1-digit tokenizer
           0.2            2-digit tokenizer 0.2                          0.2                                           0.2                           0.050
                          3-digit tokenizer                                                                            0.1                           0.025
           0.0                              0.0                          0.0                                           0.0                           0.000
               0.0M 0.6M 1.2M 1.8M 2.4M         0.0M 0.6M 1.2M 1.8M 2.4M     0.0M 0.6M 1.2M 1.8M 2.4M                        0.0M 0.6M 1.2M 1.8M 2.4M      0.0M 0.6M 1.2M 1.8M 2.4M
                                                                                 (b) 0.9B model int add
                        Exact Match D10                    Exact Match D25                      Exact Match D40                     Exact Match D45                     Exact Match D50
           1.0                                                                                                        0.30                              0.040
                                                0.8                                0.6                                0.25                              0.035
           0.8                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                      0.20                              0.030
                                                0.6
Accuracy


           0.6                                                                     0.4                                                                  0.025
                                                                                                                      0.15                              0.020
           0.4                                  0.4                                0.3
                            1-digit tokenizer                                                                         0.10                              0.015
                                                                                   0.2                                                                  0.010
           0.2              2-digit tokenizer   0.2                                                                   0.05
                            3-digit tokenizer                                      0.1                                                                  0.005
           0.0                                  0.0                                0.0                                0.00                              0.000
               0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M 5.2M               0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M 5.2M           0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M 5.2M            0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M 5.2M            0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M 5.2M
                                                                                 (c) 3B model int add

Figure 9: Accuracy of models of 0.1B, 0.9B and 3B parameters trained with 1-3 digit tokenizer on
the task of integer addition. X-axis is the number of seen training samples.


A.4.2                    T OKENIZATION
We experiment on models of 3 different size, including 0.1B, 0.9B and 3B. For the 0.1B and 0.9B
models, we train them on integer addition of 1-8 digits; for the 3B model, we train it on the same task
of 1-40 digits.
Figure 9 illustrates the in-domain performance of these three models in the first three columns and
their out-of-domain (OOD) performance in the last two columns. Here we use the exact match metric.
In our experiments of the 0.1B and 0.9B models, the one-digit and the two-digit tokenizer demonstrate
comparable performance in the in-domain test, while the one-digit tokenizer exceeds the others to a
large extent in length generalization. In contrast, the three-digit tokenizer exhibits poor performance
in both in-domain and out-of-domain evaluations. Tokenizers with an increasing number of digits
significantly hinder subbillion models’ NUPA. In the experiments of the 3B model, the two-digit
tokenizer matches the one-digit tokenizer in both in-domain and OOD performance. In addition, the
three-digit tokenizer shows the potential in length generalization for the first time, yet its performance
remains inferior to that of the smaller tokenizers. This indicates that scaling up the model size


                                                                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


indeed alleviate the challenges in developing NUPA caused by larger tokenizers. Nevertheless, larger
tokenizers do not present any distinct benefits in either in-domain or out-of-domain generalization in
both small and large models.
We report the results according to different metrics from Figure 4 including digit match and dlength
in Figure 10 and Figure 11.


                         Digit Match D6                    Digit Match D7                        Digit Match D8                        Digit Match D9                        Digit Match D10
           1.00                                1.00                        1.00                                                        0.70
                                               0.90                        0.90                          0.80                          0.60
           0.80                                0.80                        0.80
                                                                                                                                       0.50
Accuracy


                                               0.70                        0.70                          0.60
           0.60                                0.60                                                                                    0.40
                                                                           0.60
           0.40                                0.50                        0.50                          0.40                          0.30
                             1-digit tokenizer 0.40
                             2-digit tokenizer                             0.40                          0.20                          0.20
           0.20              3-digit tokenizer 0.30                        0.30                                                        0.10
                                               0.20
                0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M 0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M 0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M 0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M 0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M
                                                                               (a) 0.9B model int add
                         Digit Match D6                    Digit Match D7                        Digit Match D8                        Digit Match D9                        Digit Match D10
           1.00                                1.00                                1.00                                  1.00
                                               0.90                                0.90                                                                        0.80
           0.80                                0.80                                0.80                                  0.80
Accuracy


                                               0.70                                0.70                                  0.60                                  0.60
           0.60                                0.60                                0.60
                                               0.50                                0.50                                  0.40                                  0.40
           0.40              1-digit tokenizer 0.40
                             2-digit tokenizer 0.30                                0.40                                                                        0.20
           0.20                                                                    0.30                                  0.20
                             3-digit tokenizer
                                               0.20
                  0.1M   3.3M 6.5M 9.7M             0.1M   3.3M   6.5M      9.7M          0.1M   3.3M   6.5M      9.7M          0.1M   3.3M   6.5M      9.7M          0.1M    3.3M   6.5M   9.7M
                                                                              (b) 0.9B model float add
                         Digit Match D6                    Digit Match D7                        Digit Match D8                        Digit Match D9                        Digit Match D10
           0.70                                                                    0.55                                  0.50                                  0.40
                                               0.60
                                                                                   0.50                                  0.45
           0.60                                                                                                                                                0.35
                                               0.50                                0.45                                  0.40
Accuracy


           0.50                                                                    0.40                                  0.35                                  0.30
                                               0.40                                0.35                                  0.30
           0.40                                                                                                                                                0.25
                          1-digit tokenizer 0.30                                   0.30                                  0.25
           0.30                                                                    0.25                                  0.20                                  0.20
                          2-digit tokenizer
           0.20           3-digit tokenizer 0.20                                   0.20                                  0.15
                                                                                   0.15                                                                        0.15
                0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M              0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M                      0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M                   0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M                   0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M
                                                                            (c) 0.9B model int multiply

Figure 10: Accuracy of 0.9B models trained with 1-3 digit tokenizer on three tasks of integer addition,
float addition and integer multiplication according to digit match. X-axis is the number of seen
training samples.


Random tokenizer Introduced as “sub-word regularization” by Kudo (2018); Provilkov et al.
(2020), the random tokenizer splits words like "Hello world" into variable tokens such as "He/llo/
world" or "Hell/o/ world". Though not widely used in LLMs, Sathe et al. (2024) found that it enhances
reasoning by introducing variability in generation path. Inspired by this, we apply this to the numbers,
segmenting numbers into tokens with lengths randomly chosen between 1 and a predefined maximum,
instead of using greedy left-to-right segmentation.


                                                                                                  24
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Dlength D6           0.25
                                                                         Dlength D7                             Dlength D8                             Dlength D9                            Dlength D10
                      0.30                                                                      0.35                                                                          2.00
                                                                                                                                       1.75                                   1.75
                      0.25

  Log (Dlength + 1)
                                                           0.20                                 0.30                                   1.50
                                                                                                0.25                                                                          1.50
                      0.20                                 0.15                                                                        1.25
                                                                                                0.20                                                                          1.25
                      0.15                                                                                                             1.00
                                                            0.10                                0.15                                                                          1.00
                      0.10                                                                                                             0.75
                                          1-digit tokenizer                                     0.10                                   0.50                                   0.75
                      0.05                2-digit tokenizer 0.05                                0.05                                   0.25                                   0.50
                                          3-digit tokenizer                                                                                                                   0.25
                      0.00                                  0.00                                0.00                                   0.00
                             0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M 0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M               0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M          0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M          0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M
                                                                                           (a) 0.9B model int add
                                      Dlength D6                          Dlength D7                             Dlength D8                             Dlength D9                           Dlength D10
                      0.80                                 0.70                                 0.60                                   2.00                                   2.00
                                                                                                                                       1.75                                   1.75
  Log (Dlength + 1)


                                                           0.60                                 0.50
                      0.60                                 0.50                                                                        1.50                                   1.50
                                                                                                0.40                                   1.25                                   1.25
                                                           0.40                                                                        1.00
                      0.40                                                                      0.30                                                                          1.00
                                                           0.30                                                                        0.75
                                         1-digit tokenizer 0.20                                 0.20                                                                          0.75
                      0.20               2-digit tokenizer 0.10                                                                        0.50                                   0.50
                                                                                                0.10                                   0.25
                                         3-digit tokenizer                                                                                                                    0.25
                      0.00                                 0.00                                 0.00                                   0.00
                             0.1M    3.3M 6.5M 9.7M             0.1M    3.3M   6.5M     9.7M           0.1M     3.3M   6.5M    9.7M           0.1M     3.3M   6.5M    9.7M           0.1M    3.3M   6.5M   9.7M
                                                                                          (b) 0.9B model float add
                                      Dlength D6                          Dlength D7                             Dlength D8                             Dlength D9                           Dlength D10
                      0.25
                                                       0.35                                     0.40                                   0.80                                   0.80
  Log (Dlength + 1)


                      0.20                             0.30
                                                       0.25                                     0.30                                   0.60                                   0.60
                      0.15
                                                       0.20
                      0.10                                                                      0.20                                   0.40                                   0.40
                                                       0.15
                                     1-digit tokenizer 0.10
                      0.05           2-digit tokenizer 0.05                                     0.10                                   0.20                                   0.20
                                     3-digit tokenizer
                      0.00                             0.00                                     0.00                                   0.00                                   0.00
                           0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M              0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M                        0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M                    0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M                    0.1M 1.4M 2.7M 4.0M
                                                                                        (c) 0.9B model int multiply

 Figure 11: Accuracy of 0.9B models trained with 1-3 digit tokenizer on three tasks of integer addition,
 float addition and integer multiplication according to dlength. Here we report log2 (dlength + 1).X-
 axis is the number of seen training samples.


                                    Exact Match D6        1.00
                                                                       Exact Match D7                         Exact Match D8                         Exact Match D9                      Exact Match D10
               1.00                                                                                                                   0.80
                                                                                                                                      0.70                                   0.20
               0.80                                       0.80                                 0.80
                                                                                                                                      0.60                                   0.15
                                                                               0.60                                                   0.50
Accuracy


               0.60                                0.60
                          1-digit tokenizer                                                                                           0.40                                   0.10
               0.40       2-digit tokenizer        0.40                        0.40                                                   0.30
                          3-digit tokenizer                                                                                           0.20                                   0.05
               0.20       2-digit random tokenizer 0.20                        0.20
                          3-digit random tokenizer                                                                                    0.10
               0.00                                0.00                        0.00                                                   0.00                                   0.00
                    0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M 0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M 0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M                                0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M          0.1M 0.5M 0.9M 1.3M 1.7M 2.0M


 Figure 12: Accuracy of 0.9B models trained with 1- to 3- digit tokenizers and 2- to 3- digit random
 tokenizers on integer addition. Shadow shows the standard error. Dn means n digits. X-axis is the
 number of seen training samples.



Figure 12 shows the performance of 1- to 3-digit tokenizers alongside 2- to 3-digit random tokenizers,
where n-digit random tokenizer means the one with maximal length n. In terms of in-domain
generalization, the three-digit random tokenizer outperforms the three-digit standard tokenizer, while
the two-digit random tokenizer shows a slight decline compared to its standard counterpart. We
believe this is because the 0.9B model is capable of learning the two-digit tokenizer well, and the
added perturbation from random tokenization acts as a form of regularization, introducing noise
that slightly affects performance. The random tokenizers consistently outperform their standard
counterparts in OOD generalization, indicating the regularization benefits in that aspect. In the case
of the three-digit tokenizer, which is more challenging for a 0.9B model to learn, random tokenization
generates smaller tokens, making the learning process easier and leading to improved in-domain
performance. However, they still fall short of the performance achieved by the one-digit tokenizer.


                                                                                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4.3            PE S


                                   Exact Match                                          Digit Match                                                 Dlength
                1.00                                                 1.00                                                   2.5
                                                 rope


                                                                                                          log (dlength+1)
                0.80                             nope                0.80                                                   2.0
     Accuracy


                                                          Accuracy
                0.60                             alibi               0.60                                                   1.5
                0.40                                                 0.40                                                   1.0
                0.20                                                 0.20                                                   0.5
                0.00                                                 0.00                                                   0.0
                       5   7   9     11 13 15 17                            5   7   9      11 13 15 17                                  5   7   9    11 13 15 17
                                     Length                                                Length                                                    Length
                                   Exact Match                                          Digit Match                                 3
                                                                                                                                                    Dlength
                1.00                                                 1.00
                                                 rope


                                                                                                                  log (dlength+1)
                0.80                             nope                0.80
                                                                                                                                    2
     Accuracy


                                                          Accuracy

                0.60                             alibi               0.60
                0.40                                                 0.40                                                           1
                0.20                                                 0.20
                0.00                                                 0.00                                                           0
                       5   7   9     11 13 15 17                            5   7   9      11 13 15 17                                  5   7   9    11 13 15 17
                                     Length                                                Length                                                    Length
                                   Exact Match                                          Digit Match                                                 Dlength
                0.80                             rope                                                                               3
                                                                     0.80



                                                                                                                  log (dlength+1)
                0.60                             nope
                                                                     0.60                                                           2
     Accuracy


                                                          Accuracy


                                                 alibi
                0.40                                                 0.40
                                                                                                                                    1
                0.20                                                 0.20
                0.00                                                 0.00                                                           0
                       5   7   9     11 13 15 17                            5   7   9      11 13 15 17                                  5   7   9    11 13 15 17
                                     Length                                                Length                                                    Length
                               Exact Match                                              Digit Match                                                 Dlength
               1.00                                                 1.00
                                                 rope                                                                      2.0
                                                                    0.80
                                                                                                         log (dlength+1)


               0.80                              nope
                                                                                                                           1.5
    Accuracy


                                                         Accuracy


               0.60                              alibi              0.60
               0.40                                                 0.40                                                   1.0
               0.20                                                 0.20                                                   0.5
               0.00                                                 0.00                                                   0.0
                      5    7   9     11 13 15 17                           5    7   9     11 13 15 17                               5       7   9   11 13 15 17
                                     Length                                               Length                                                    Length

Figure 13: Exact match, digit match and dlength of 100M models trained with various PE, including
RoPE, NoPE and Alibi. From top to bottom, the tasks are integer addition, float addition, fraction
multiplication and scientific notation.


We show exact match, digit match and dlength of 100M models trained with various PE, including
RoPE, NoPE and Alibi in Figure 13. We find NoPE and Alibi achieve better length generalization
than RoPE, which is consistent with previous work like Zhou et al. (2024b).
To explain the mechanism of PEs, it is necessary to describe what the “generalization” is about. In
most tasks, there is an intrinsic “length-agnostic” calculating rule, independent of the length of input
numbers. For example, the addition rules: “align numbers by their least significant digits, add them
digit by digit and carry over if the sum exceeds 9” is length-agnostic because it applies universally,
regardless of the input length. However, during training on data with restricted length range (like 1 to
8), models may also learn length-related rules that fit the training data, such as combining normal
addition rules with constraints like “the output length must range from 1 to 8”. Because these two
rules are indistinguishable, prior knowledge should be added into the model as an inductive bias
to help the model learn the “length-agnostic” rules expected in most practical settings (Abbe et al.,
2024; Chen et al., 2024).


                                                                                         26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 12: RoPE performance with standard error from three repeated experiments. Dn means n
digits where D8 is the longest in-domain length and D9 is the shortest out-of-domain length.
                               Exact Match         Digit Match           Dlength
                              D8        D9        D8        D9         D8        D9
                 Int-add 1.00±0.00 0.00±0.00 1.00±0.00 0.45±0.02 0.00±0.00 1.07±0.02
                 Float-add 1.00±0.00 0.00±0.00 1.00±0.00 0.59±0.02 0.00±0.00 1.06±0.01
                 Frac-mul 0.70±0.01 0.01±0.00 0.85±0.01 0.22±0.02 0.18±0.02 1.45±0.08
                 Sci-add 1.00±0.00 0.23±0.08 1.00±0.00 0.92±0.01 0.00±0.00 0.66±0.11


According to our experiments, we find that (1) RoPE encourages the model to rely on the length
of the input. The first evidence is that RoPE causes the model’s predictive performance to plummet
dramatically just beyond the training boundary. We report the RoPE’s performance at the boundary
of training length in Table 12 where D8 (digit 8) is the longest length in the training range while
D9 (digit 9) is the shortest length out of the training range. In “int-add” task, the exact match drops
from nearly 100% to 0% when moving from 8 to 9 digits, while “dlength” rises from 0 to 1.07
(Table 12). This indicates that the model has a significant probability of generating shorter results,
avoiding the generation of more than 8-digit answers. At the same time, RoPE not only constrains
the model’s output length but also affects the digit pairing. The performance of 100% for inputs of
8 digits indicates that the model performs calculations for each position unless it can successfully
align the corresponding digits. However, when the model encounters 9-digit inputs, digit match drops
significantly to 50%, suggesting a considerable probability of failing to align the digits. Similar
results on the other three tasks suggest that it is a task-agnostic behavior. The only exception is the
digit match of scientific notation addition. We discuss the results later.
(2) On the other hand, length learning provided by RoPE Table 13: 8-digit digit-match accuracy
appears to be a shortcut. In cases where the model is with small model or small dataset.
extremely small or has been trained very little, we see
the advantages of this “shortcut”. In Table 13, we train a            1.3M Model 1M Samples
2-layer transformer (1.3M parameters) on integer addition
                                                              RoPE       0.091        0.97
using three different PEs on 1- to 8- digit integer addition
                                                              NoPE       0.061        0.78
or the 0.1B model with only 1M samples, we find RoPE          Alibi      0.056        0.23
shows the best in-domain performance. Experiments on
the other three tasks are shown in Table 14 and Table 15, where the RoPE always surpasses others.
As a possible explanation about why Alibi and NoPE achieve better length generalization, our
experiments suggest that for length generalization in number tasks, the required inductive bias is to
interpret the input as a sequence of digits while deliberately ignoring its overall length. RoPE, as a
positional encoding that enables the model to quickly learn position-related information, may lead
the model to adopt a length-dependent shortcut (Table 13), causing it to favor length-related rules. In
contrast, both Alibi and NoPE diminish this reliance on position and length, encouraging the model
to treat each unit’s operation as a step-by-step process, thereby achieving better length generalization.


Discuss about scientific addition The results in Table 12 reveal a clear trend where performance
drops from 8-digit to 9-digit numbers, with one exception: the digit match score in the scientific
notation addition task, which remains relatively high at 0.93 even for 9-digit numbers. We believe it
is mainly because of the alignment mechanism between two scientific notations which differs from
other representations. In other representations, numbers are aligned by position — integers from the
most-left digit and the floats by the decimal point. However, in scientific notation, alignment depends
on the difference in exponent values, which reduces RoPE’s reliance on position and mitigates length
overfitting. Despite this, the effect of RoPE limiting output length remains apparent, as evidenced by
the significant increase in the dlength score.


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4.4         DATA F ORMATS
Table 16: Exact match of 0.1B models trained on integer addition and float addition respectively with
various compositions of reverse formatting and zero padding.
                Integer Addition                                               Float Addition
                 rev                               rev total          rev each         rev dec             rev int
        rev                no      pad   rev total           rev each          rev dec           rev int             no     pad
                +pad                                + pad              + pad            + pad              + pad
  d9 0.97±.05 1.00±.00 0.98±.02 1.00±.01 0.11±.01 0.24±.00 0.12±.00 0.24±.00 0.12±.00 0.24±.00 1.00±.00 1.00±.00 0.99±.01 1.00±.00
 d10 0.69±.11 0.91±.05 0.16±.11 0.50±.34 0.07±.03 0.21±.01 0.10±.02 0.23±.00 0.07±.02 0.17±.04 0.97±.03 0.87±.16 0.17±.04 0.76±.19



We provide the experiments in Table 16 and the evaluation curves of compositions of reverse
formatting, zero padding and index hints in Figure 14, Figure 15, Figure 16, Figure 17 and Figure 18.
We experiment on 0.1B models trained on 1- to 8- digit training samples. Here we all use the exact
match metric.
Previous work (Zhou et al., 2024b) believes that reverse formatting can help the calculation of each
digit by aligning the calculation order to the right-to-left order that humans are accustomed to and
solve the carrying problem. That is, from left-to-right, we cannot determine the result of the current
digit unless the next digit results and whether there is a carrying have been known. However, a more
detailed analysis can explain why the order is not as important as previously believed:
Regarding addition, the cases where reverse formatting can make a difference through the effects
of assisting carry-over calculations are quite rare. Most of the time, knowing the result of the next
digit allows us to determine the answer for the current digit. When the next digit addition is not less
than 10 (without considering further carrying from the following digit), there must be a carrying from
that digit into the current one, no matter what the result of the later digits is. And when the next digit
addition is not more than 8, there will never be a carrying. The only exception is the next digit addition
is 9. In this situation, we must refer to the next two digits to determine the current digit results.
Therefore, we point out that, although in the worst-case scenario, performing non-reversed addition
requires O(n)-length looking forward for each digit (44445 + 55556 = 100001), and reversing could
solve this problem, such cases are extremely rare. In most instances, the task can be accomplished
with a very limited local view.
About the experiments of index hint, we show in Table 17. Our conclusion on index hints seems to
contradict the findings of Zhou et al. (2024b), where models with index hints appeared to achieve
better results. We believe this discrepancy may be related to model size and digit range. In their work,
a much smaller model (only 25M parameters) was used, but the training range covered 1-40 digits.
This reduced the model’s ability to learn the patterns independently without external hints, resulting
in a different learning outcome where the model began to rely on index hints. As a piece of evidence,
when Zhou et al. (2024b) train 1-10 digits, the performance without index hint is OK. (But they did
not provide the complete results of 1-10 digit training in their work.) The effectiveness of index hints
may involve complex interactions, which could be an interesting direction for future research.

A.4.5         NUPA FINETUNING WITH PE, TOKENIZER AND REPRESENTATION MODIFICATION
We show parts of results of our attempt to finetune a Llama-3.1-8B model with PE, tokenizer and
data format modification in Table 18. All the checkpoint we select by the lowest valid loss. No one
can outperform the naive finetuning or the original Llama.

A.5     RULE - FOLLOWING C HAIN - OF - THOUGHT

A.5.1         DATA F ORMAT OF RULE - FOLLOWING C OT
Rule-following CoT consists of a rule prompt and a response to follow the rule. To generate the CoT
samples for a task, first the computational rules are converted to Python code. We utilize a code
LLM to write the code in this experiment. Then, a data generation script which can generate the
rule-following intermediate steps for any given input is manually written. With the script, given a pair
of numbers and a task, both the rules (code prompt) and the response can be generated automatically.
In the finetuning stage, both the prompt and the response are provided to the model but only the loss
on the response part is calculated. During inference, the code prompt is still provided and the models
are expected to generate the rule-following steps as well as the final answer.


                                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Below is an example of a complete Rule-Following CoT data format, where the model is required to
solve integer addition task with a right-to-left recursion and three digit addition as the unit task.
Prompt:


  Follow the given rule to solve the question.
  Rule:

  def add(num1, num2):
      result = ''
      carry = 0
      # Main Loop
      while num1 or num2:
          digit1 = int(num1[-3:]) if num1 else 0
          digit2 = int(num2[-3:]) if num2 else 0
          total = digit1 + digit2 + carry
          result = str(total%1000) + result
          carry = total//1000
          num1 = num1[:-3] if num1 else num1
          num2 = num2[:-3] if num2 else num2
      if carry:
          result = str(carry) + result
      result = result.lstrip('0') or '0'
      return result

  Q: Return the answer as an integer without any delimiter, like 123. Add two numbers: 28 + 35


Response:


  num1 = "28"
  num2 = "35"
  result = ""
  carry = 0

  while num1 or num2:

  check the stop criterion
  enter the loop

  digit1 = int(num1[-3:]) if num1 else 0
  digit2 = int(num2[-3:]) if num2 else 0

  num1 = "28"
  num2 = "35"
  digit1 = 28
  digit2 = 35

  total = digit1 + digit2 + carry

  carry = 0
  total = 28 + 35 + 0 = 63

  result = str(total%1000) + result
  carry = total//1000


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  total % 1000 = 63%1000 = 63
  result = "063" + "" = "063"
  carry = 0//1000 = 0

  num1 = num1[:-3]
  num2 = num2[:-3]

  num1 = ""
  num2 = ""

  while num1 or num2

  check the stop criterion
  num1 = "" and num2 = ""
  end the loop

  if carry:
      result = str(carry) + result

  carry = 0
  pass

  result = result.lstrip("0") or "0"

  result = "63"

  return result

  return "63"
  So the answer is 63.


A.5.2   M AXIMUM D IGIT L ENGTHS WITHIN C ONTEXT W INDOW
The selective tasks used to train the RFFT are shown in Table 19 and we also report the maximal
length within 2k tokens context windows limitation.


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                             Exact Match


  1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GPT-4o
 0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GPT-4o-mini
 0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Llama-3.1-8B-ft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-8B
 0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-70B
 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mixtral-8x7B
 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Qwen2-72B
 0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Qwen2-7B

 0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Llama-2-7b-hf

 0.2
 0.1
  0
       S

            M

                   L

                        XL


                             S

                                  M

                                         L

                                              XL


                                                   S

                                                        M

                                                              L

                                                                    XL


                                                                         S

                                                                                M

                                                                                      L

                                                                                            XL


                                                                                                   S

                                                                                                       M

                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                   XL


                                                                                                                        S

                                                                                                                              M

                                                                                                                                    L

                                                                                                                                          XL


                                                                                                                                               S

                                                                                                                                                    M

                                                                                                                                                           L

                                                                                                                                                                 XL


                                                                                                                                                                      S

                                                                                                                                                                           M

                                                                                                                                                                                 L

                                                                                                                                                                                       XL


                                                                                                                                                                                            S

                                                                                                                                                                                                 M

                                                                                                                                                                                                       L

                                                                                                                                                                                                              XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   XL
               Add                    Add                  Add                   Add Easy                 Add                    Sub                    Sub                   Sub                   Sub                   Max
             Integer                  Float              Fraction                Fraction          ScientificNotation          Integer                  Float               Fraction         ScientificNotation         Integer


                                                                                                                               (a)
                                                                                                                             Exact Match


  1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GPT-4o
 0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GPT-4o-mini
 0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Llama-3.1-8B-ft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-8B
 0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-70B
 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mixtral-8x7B
 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Qwen2-72B
 0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Qwen2-7B

 0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Llama-2-7b-hf

 0.2
 0.1
  0
       S

            M

                   L

                        XL


                             S

                                  M

                                         L

                                              XL


                                                   S

                                                        M

                                                              L

                                                                    XL


                                                                         S

                                                                                M

                                                                                      L

                                                                                            XL


                                                                                                   S

                                                                                                       M

                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                   XL


                                                                                                                        S

                                                                                                                              M

                                                                                                                                    L

                                                                                                                                          XL


                                                                                                                                               S

                                                                                                                                                    M

                                                                                                                                                           L

                                                                                                                                                                 XL


                                                                                                                                                                      S

                                                                                                                                                                           M

                                                                                                                                                                                 L

                                                                                                                                                                                       XL


                                                                                                                                                                                            S

                                                                                                                                                                                                 M

                                                                                                                                                                                                       L

                                                                                                                                                                                                              XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   XL
                Max                  Max                  Max                    Max Hard              Max Hard              Max Hard              Multiply Hard          Multiply Hard         Multiply Hard        Multiply Hard
                Float              Fraction        ScientificNotation             Integer                Float           ScientificNotation          Integer                  Float               Fraction         ScientificNotation


                                                                                                                               (b)
                                                                                                                             Exact Match


 0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GPT-4o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GPT-4o-mini
 0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Llama-3.1-8B-ft
 0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Llama-3.1-8B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-70B
 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mixtral-8x7B
 0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Qwen2-72B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Qwen2-7B
 0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-2-7b-hf
 0.2

 0.1

  0
       S

            M

                   L

                        XL


                             S

                                  M

                                         L

                                              XL


                                                   S

                                                        M

                                                              L

                                                                    XL


                                                                         S

                                                                                M

                                                                                      L

                                                                                            XL


                                                                                                   S

                                                                                                       M

                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                   XL


                                                                                                                        S

                                                                                                                              M

                                                                                                                                    L

                                                                                                                                          XL


                                                                                                                                               S

                                                                                                                                                    M

                                                                                                                                                           L

                                                                                                                                                                 XL


                                                                                                                                                                      S

                                                                                                                                                                           M

                                                                                                                                                                                 L

                                                                                                                                                                                       XL


                                                                                                                                                                                            S

                                                                                                                                                                                                 M

                                                                                                                                                                                                       L

                                                                                                                                                                                                              XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   XL
           Multiply Easy         Multiply Easy         Multiply Easy           Multiply Easy           Digit Max              Digit Max              Digit Add             Digit Add              Get Digit            Get Digit
             Integer                 Float               Fraction            ScientificNotation         Integer                 Float                 Integer                Float                Integer               Float


                                                                                                                               (c)
                                                                                                                             Exact Match


  1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GPT-4o
 0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GPT-4o-mini
 0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Llama-3.1-8B-ft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-8B
 0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-70B
 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mixtral-8x7B
 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Qwen2-72B
 0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Qwen2-7B
 0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Llama-2-7b-hf

 0.2
 0.1
  0
       S

            M

                   L

                        XL


                             S

                                  M

                                         L

                                              XL


                                                   S

                                                        M

                                                              L

                                                                    XL


                                                                         S

                                                                                M

                                                                                      L

                                                                                            XL


                                                                                                   S

                                                                                                       M

                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                   XL


                                                                                                                        S

                                                                                                                              M

                                                                                                                                    L

                                                                                                                                          XL


                                                                                                                                               S

                                                                                                                                                    M

                                                                                                                                                           L

                                                                                                                                                                 XL


                                                                                                                                                                      S

                                                                                                                                                                           M

                                                                                                                                                                                 L

                                                                                                                                                                                       XL


                                                                                                                                                                                            S

                                                                                                                                                                                                 M

                                                                                                                                                                                                       L

                                                                                                                                                                                                              XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   XL


             Length                 Length               Truediv                 Truediv               Floordiv                  Mod                 Mod Easy               To Float             To Float              To Scient
             Integer                 Float               Integer                 Fraction              Integer                 Integer                Integer               Fraction         ScientificNotation         Integer


                                                                                                                               (d)
                                                                                                                        Exact Match

                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                               GPT-4o
                                                                0.9                                                                                                            GPT-4o-mini
                                                                0.8                                                                                                            Llama-3.1-8B-ft
                                                                0.7                                                                                                            Llama-3.1-8B
                                                                                                                                                                               Llama-3.1-70B
                                                                0.6
                                                                                                                                                                               Mixtral-8x7B
                                                                0.5                                                                                                            Qwen2-72B
                                                                0.4                                                                                                            Qwen2-7B
                                                                0.3                                                                                                            Llama-2-7b-hf

                                                                0.2
                                                                0.1
                                                                    0
                                                                         S


                                                                                M


                                                                                        L

                                                                                                  XL


                                                                                                        S


                                                                                                                M


                                                                                                                        L

                                                                                                                               XL


                                                                                                                                         S


                                                                                                                                               M


                                                                                                                                                        L

                                                                                                                                                                XL


                                                                                  To Scient                         Count                            Sig
                                                                                    Float                          Integer                         Integer


                                                                                                                              (e)
                                                       Figure 5: Exact match of models tested on NUPA Test.



                                                                                                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                  Digit Match

  1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GPT-4o

 0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GPT-4o-mini
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Llama-3.1-8B-ft
 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Llama-3.1-8B
 0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-3.1-70B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mixtral-8x7B
 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Qwen2-72B
 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Qwen2-7B
 0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-2-7b-hf

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

  0
       S

           M

                  L

                       XL


                            S

                                 M

                                        L

                                             XL


                                                    S

                                                           M

                                                                 L

                                                                       XL


                                                                              S

                                                                                   M

                                                                                        L

                                                                                               XL


                                                                                                        S

                                                                                                             M

                                                                                                                    L

                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                              S

                                                                                                                                   M

                                                                                                                                          L

                                                                                                                                                XL


                                                                                                                                                      S

                                                                                                                                                           M

                                                                                                                                                                  L

                                                                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                                                                              S

                                                                                                                                                                                     M

                                                                                                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                                                                                                   XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                          S

                                                                                                                                                                                                               M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 XL
             Add                     Add                      Add                   Add Easy                    Add                     Sub                    Sub                      Sub                       Sub                    Max
           Integer                   Float                  Fraction                Fraction             ScientificNotation           Integer                  Float                  Fraction             ScientificNotation          Integer


                                                                                                                                      (a)
                                                                                                                                  Digit Match

  1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GPT-4o

 0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GPT-4o-mini
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Llama-3.1-8B-ft
 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Llama-3.1-8B
 0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-3.1-70B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mixtral-8x7B
 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Qwen2-72B
 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Qwen2-7B
 0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-2-7b-hf

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

  0
       S

           M

                  L

                       XL


                            S

                                 M

                                        L

                                             XL


                                                    S

                                                           M

                                                                 L

                                                                       XL


                                                                              S

                                                                                   M

                                                                                        L

                                                                                               XL


                                                                                                        S

                                                                                                             M

                                                                                                                    L

                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                              S

                                                                                                                                   M

                                                                                                                                          L

                                                                                                                                                XL


                                                                                                                                                      S

                                                                                                                                                           M

                                                                                                                                                                  L

                                                                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                                                                              S

                                                                                                                                                                                     M

                                                                                                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                                                                                                   XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                          S

                                                                                                                                                                                                               M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 XL
               Max                 Max                         Max                  Max Hard                 Max Hard             Max Hard                Multiply Hard             Multiply Hard             Multiply Hard       Multiply Hard
               Float             Fraction               ScientificNotation           Integer                   Float          ScientificNotation            Integer                     Float                   Fraction        ScientificNotation


                                                                                                                                      (b)
                                                                                                                                  Digit Match

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GPT-4o
 0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GPT-4o-mini
 0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-3.1-8B-ft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Llama-3.1-8B
 0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Llama-3.1-70B
 0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mixtral-8x7B
 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Qwen2-72B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Qwen2-7B
 0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-2-7b-hf
 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

  0
       S


           M


                       L

                            XL


                                 S


                                         M


                                                  L

                                                          XL


                                                                  S


                                                                        M


                                                                                  L

                                                                                        XL


                                                                                               S


                                                                                                         M


                                                                                                                    L

                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                              S


                                                                                                                                      M


                                                                                                                                                L

                                                                                                                                                     XL


                                                                                                                                                            S


                                                                                                                                                                    M


                                                                                                                                                                             L

                                                                                                                                                                                    XL


                                                                                                                                                                                             S


                                                                                                                                                                                                      M


                                                                                                                                                                                                              L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 XL
           Multiply Easy                Multiply Easy                   Multiply Easy                 Multiply Easy                    Digit Max                       Digit Max                        Digit Add                   Digit Add
             Integer                        Float                         Fraction                  ScientificNotation                  Integer                          Float                           Integer                      Float


                                                                                                                                      (c)
                                                                                                                                  Digit Match

  1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GPT-4o

 0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GPT-4o-mini
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Llama-3.1-8B-ft
 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Llama-3.1-8B
 0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-3.1-70B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mixtral-8x7B
 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Qwen2-72B
 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Qwen2-7B
 0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-2-7b-hf

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

  0
       S


           M


                       L

                            XL


                                 S


                                         M


                                                  L

                                                          XL


                                                                  S


                                                                        M


                                                                                  L

                                                                                        XL


                                                                                               S


                                                                                                         M


                                                                                                                    L

                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                              S


                                                                                                                                      M


                                                                                                                                                L

                                                                                                                                                     XL


                                                                                                                                                            S


                                                                                                                                                                    M


                                                                                                                                                                             L

                                                                                                                                                                                    XL


                                                                                                                                                                                             S


                                                                                                                                                                                                      M


                                                                                                                                                                                                              L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 XL


                Truediv                      Truediv                         Floordiv                         Mod                      Mod Easy                        To Float                        To Float                     To Scient
                Integer                      Fraction                        Integer                        Integer                     Integer                        Fraction                    ScientificNotation                Integer


                                                                                                                                      (d)
                                                                                                                                  Digit Match

                                                                                    1                                                                                            GPT-4o
                                                                                  0.9                                                                                            GPT-4o-mini
                                                                                                                                                                                 Llama-3.1-8B-ft
                                                                                  0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                 Llama-3.1-8B
                                                                                  0.7                                                                                            Llama-3.1-70B

                                                                                  0.6                                                                                            Mixtral-8x7B
                                                                                                                                                                                 Qwen2-72B
                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                 Qwen2-7B
                                                                                  0.4                                                                                            Llama-2-7b-hf

                                                                                  0.3

                                                                                  0.2

                                                                                  0.1

                                                                                    0
                                                                                        S


                                                                                                    M


                                                                                                               L



                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                                  S


                                                                                                                                           M


                                                                                                                                                      L



                                                                                                                                                               XL


                                                                                                        To Scient                                 Sig
                                                                                                          Float                                 Integer



                                                                                                                                   (e)
                                                           Figure 6: Digit match of models tested on NUPA Test.


                                                                                                                                      32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                  Dlength

                    6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GPT-4o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GPT-4o-mini
                    5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Llama-3.1-8B-ft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-8B
log (dlength + 1)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-70B
                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mixtral-8x7B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Qwen2-72B
                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Qwen2-7B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-2-7b-hf
                    2


                    1


                    0
                        S

                            M

                                   L

                                        XL


                                             S

                                                  M

                                                         L

                                                              XL


                                                                     S

                                                                            M

                                                                                  L

                                                                                        XL


                                                                                               S

                                                                                                                    M

                                                                                                                        L

                                                                                                                               XL


                                                                                                                                     S

                                                                                                                                             M

                                                                                                                                                    L

                                                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                                                              S

                                                                                                                                                                  M

                                                                                                                                                                          L

                                                                                                                                                                                XL


                                                                                                                                                                                          S

                                                                                                                                                                                               M

                                                                                                                                                                                                      L

                                                                                                                                                                                                            XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   XL
                              Add                     Add                      Add                                  Add Easy                    Add                     Sub                        Sub                     Sub                      Sub                    Max
                            Integer                   Float                  Fraction                               Fraction             ScientificNotation           Integer                      Float                 Fraction            ScientificNotation          Integer


                                                                                                                                                                      (a)
                                                                                                                                                                  Dlength

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GPT-4o
                    6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GPT-4o-mini
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-8B-ft
                    5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Llama-3.1-8B
log (dlength + 1)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-70B
                    4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mixtral-8x7B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Qwen2-72B
                    3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Qwen2-7B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-2-7b-hf

                    2


                    1


                    0
                        S

                            M

                                   L

                                        XL


                                             S

                                                  M

                                                         L

                                                              XL


                                                                     S

                                                                            M

                                                                                  L

                                                                                        XL


                                                                                               S

                                                                                                                    M

                                                                                                                        L

                                                                                                                               XL


                                                                                                                                     S

                                                                                                                                             M

                                                                                                                                                    L

                                                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                                                              S

                                                                                                                                                                  M

                                                                                                                                                                          L

                                                                                                                                                                                XL


                                                                                                                                                                                          S

                                                                                                                                                                                               M

                                                                                                                                                                                                      L

                                                                                                                                                                                                            XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   XL
                                Max                 Max                         Max                                 Max Hard                 Max Hard             Max Hard                    Multiply Hard            Multiply Hard            Multiply Hard       Multiply Hard
                                Float             Fraction               ScientificNotation                          Integer                   Float          ScientificNotation                Integer                    Float                  Fraction        ScientificNotation


                                                                                                                                                                  (b)
                                                                                                                                                                  Dlength

                    7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GPT-4o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GPT-4o-mini
                    6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Llama-3.1-8B-ft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-8B
log (dlength + 1)


                    5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Llama-3.1-70B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mixtral-8x7B
                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Qwen2-72B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Qwen2-7B
                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-2-7b-hf

                    2


                    1


                    0
                        S


                            M


                                        L

                                             XL


                                                  S


                                                          M


                                                                   L

                                                                           XL


                                                                                   S


                                                                                         M


                                                                                                                L

                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                               S


                                                                                                                                         M


                                                                                                                                                    L

                                                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                                                              S


                                                                                                                                                                      M


                                                                                                                                                                                L

                                                                                                                                                                                     XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                S


                                                                                                                                                                                                       M


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   XL
                            Multiply Easy                Multiply Easy                   Multiply Easy                                Multiply Easy                    Digit Max                           Digit Max                      Digit Add                   Digit Add
                              Integer                        Float                         Fraction                                 ScientificNotation                  Integer                              Float                         Integer                      Float


                                                                                                                                                                      (c)
                                                                                                                                                                  Dlength

                    6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GPT-4o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GPT-4o-mini
                    5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Llama-3.1-8B-ft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-8B
log (dlength + 1)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-3.1-70B
                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mixtral-8x7B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Qwen2-72B
                    3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Qwen2-7B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Llama-2-7b-hf
                    2


                    1


                    0
                        S


                            M


                                        L

                                             XL


                                                  S


                                                          M


                                                                   L

                                                                           XL


                                                                                   S


                                                                                         M


                                                                                                                L

                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                               S


                                                                                                                                         M


                                                                                                                                                    L

                                                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                                                              S


                                                                                                                                                                      M


                                                                                                                                                                                L

                                                                                                                                                                                     XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                S


                                                                                                                                                                                                       M


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      XL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   XL


                                 Truediv                      Truediv                         Floordiv                                       Mod                       Mod Easy                            To Float                      To Float                     To Scient
                                 Integer                      Fraction                        Integer                                      Integer                      Integer                            Fraction                  ScientificNotation                Integer


                                                                                                                                                                  (d)
                                                                                                                                                                  Dlength

                                                                                                                    7                                                                                             GPT-4o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GPT-4o-mini
                                                                                                                    6                                                                                             Llama-3.1-8B-ft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-3.1-8B
                                                                                                log (dlength + 1)


                                                                                                                    5                                                                                             Llama-3.1-70B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mixtral-8x7B
                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Qwen2-72B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Qwen2-7B
                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Llama-2-7b-hf

                                                                                                                    2


                                                                                                                    1


                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                        S



                                                                                                                                    M


                                                                                                                                               L



                                                                                                                                                        XL


                                                                                                                                                                  S



                                                                                                                                                                            M


                                                                                                                                                                                      L



                                                                                                                                                                                                 XL


                                                                                                                                        To Scient                                 Sig
                                                                                                                                          Float                                 Integer



                                                                                                                                                                  (e)

Figure 7: Dlength of models tested on NUPA Test. Note that we use log2 (dlength + 1) as the ylabel
in the figure.


                                                                                                                                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Well-learned digits / performance-preserving digits of models tested on NUPA Test according
to exact match.
                      Add           Add           Add         Add Easy        Add           Sub           Sub           Sub
                      Int           Float         Frac          Frac          Sci           Int           Float         Frac
 GPT-4o-mini          5 / 20        4 / 11        0/1           0/2            0/0         6 / 20        5 / 15         0/1
    GPT-4o            5 / 20        4 / 11        0/1           0/1           0/0          6 / 20        4 / 15         0/1
  Qwen2-72B           6 / 20        0 / 15        0/1           0/1           0 / 11       6 / 20        0 / 15         0/1
  Qwen2-7B            4 / 14        0 / 15        0/1           0/0            0/7         4 / 14        0 / 13         0/1
Llama-3.1-8B-ft       4 / 12        5 / 17        0/1           0/1            0/4         4 / 12        4 / 17         0/2
Llama-3.1-70B         4 / 15        0 / 11        0/1           0/1            0/0         6 / 11        4 / 11         0/1
 Llama-3.1-8B          4/9          3 / 11        0/1           0/0           0/0          3 / 10        3 / 10         0/1
 Mixtral-8x7B         5 / 10        4 / 11        0/1           0/1            0/6         4 / 15        3 / 11         0/1
 Llama-2-7b-hf        0/6           0/7           0/0           0/0            0/0          0/6           0/5           0/1
                      Sub           Max           Max           Max           Max        Max Hard      Max Hard      Max Hard
                      Sci           Int           Float         Frac          Sci          Int          Float          Sci
 GPT-4o-mini          5 / 20        4 / 11        0/1           0/2            0/0         6 / 20        5 / 15         0/1
    GPT-4o            5 / 20        4 / 11        0/1           0/1           0/0          6 / 20        4 / 15         0/1
  Qwen2-72B           6 / 20        0 / 15        0/1           0/1           0 / 11       6 / 20        0 / 15         0/1
  Qwen2-7B            4 / 14        0 / 15        0/1           0/0            0/7         4 / 14        0 / 13         0/1
Llama-3.1-8B-ft       4 / 12        5 / 17        0/1           0/1            0/4         4 / 12        4 / 17         0/2
Llama-3.1-70B         4 / 15        0 / 11        0/1           0/1            0/0         6 / 11        4 / 11         0/1
 Llama-3.1-8B          4/9          3 / 11        0/1           0/0           0/0          3 / 10        3 / 10         0/1
 Mixtral-8x7B         5 / 10        4 / 11        0/1           0/1            0/6         4 / 15        3 / 11         0/1
 Llama-2-7b-hf        0/6           0/7           0/0           0/0            0/0          0/6           0/5           0/1
                  Multiply Hard Multiply Hard Multiply Hard Multiply Hard Multiply Easy Multiply Easy Multiply Easy Multiply Easy
                       Int          Float         Frac           Sci           Int          Float         Frac           Sci
 GPT-4o-mini          5 / 20        4 / 11        0/1           0/2            0/0         6 / 20        5 / 15         0/1
    GPT-4o            5 / 20        4 / 11        0/1           0/1           0/0          6 / 20        4 / 15         0/1
  Qwen2-72B           6 / 20        0 / 15        0/1           0/1           0 / 11       6 / 20        0 / 15         0/1
  Qwen2-7B            4 / 14        0 / 15        0/1           0/0            0/7         4 / 14        0 / 13         0/1
Llama-3.1-8B-ft       4 / 12        5 / 17        0/1           0/1            0/4         4 / 12        4 / 17         0/2
Llama-3.1-70B         4 / 15        0 / 11        0/1           0/1            0/0         6 / 11        4 / 11         0/1
 Llama-3.1-8B          4/9          3 / 11        0/1           0/0           0/0          3 / 10        3 / 10         0/1
 Mixtral-8x7B         5 / 10        4 / 11        0/1           0/1            0/6         4 / 15        3 / 11         0/1
 Llama-2-7b-hf        0/6           0/7           0/0           0/0            0/0          0/6           0/5           0/1
                   Digit Max     Digit Max      Digit Add     Digit Add     Get Digit     Get Digit      Length       Length
                      Int          Float           Int          Float          Int         Float           Int         Float
 GPT-4o-mini          5 / 20        4 / 11        0/1           0/2            0/0         6 / 20        5 / 15         0/1
    GPT-4o            5 / 20        4 / 11        0/1           0/1           0/0          6 / 20        4 / 15         0/1
  Qwen2-72B           6 / 20        0 / 15        0/1           0/1           0 / 11       6 / 20        0 / 15         0/1
  Qwen2-7B            4 / 14        0 / 15        0/1           0/0            0/7         4 / 14        0 / 13         0/1
Llama-3.1-8B-ft       4 / 12        5 / 17        0/1           0/1            0/4         4 / 12        4 / 17         0/2
Llama-3.1-70B         4 / 15        0 / 11        0/1           0/1            0/0         6 / 11        4 / 11         0/1
 Llama-3.1-8B          4/9          3 / 11        0/1           0/0           0/0          3 / 10        3 / 10         0/1
 Mixtral-8x7B         5 / 10        4 / 11        0/1           0/1            0/6         4 / 15        3 / 11         0/1
 Llama-2-7b-hf        0/6           0/7           0/0           0/0            0/0          0/6           0/5           0/1
                     Truediv       Truediv      Floordiv        Mod        Mod Easy       To Float      To Float     To Scient
                       Int          Frac           Int          Int          Int           Frac           Sci           Int
 GPT-4o-mini          5 / 20        4 / 11        0/1           0/2            0/0         6 / 20        5 / 15         0/1
    GPT-4o            5 / 20        4 / 11        0/1           0/1           0/0          6 / 20        4 / 15         0/1
  Qwen2-72B           6 / 20        0 / 15        0/1           0/1           0 / 11       6 / 20        0 / 15         0/1
  Qwen2-7B            4 / 14        0 / 15        0/1           0/0            0/7         4 / 14        0 / 13         0/1
Llama-3.1-8B-ft       4 / 12        5 / 17        0/1           0/1            0/4         4 / 12        4 / 17         0/2
Llama-3.1-70B         4 / 15        0 / 11        0/1           0/1            0/0         6 / 11        4 / 11         0/1
 Llama-3.1-8B          4/9          3 / 11        0/1           0/0           0/0          3 / 10        3 / 10         0/1
 Mixtral-8x7B         5 / 10        4 / 11        0/1           0/1            0/6         4 / 15        3 / 11         0/1
 Llama-2-7b-hf        0/6           0/7           0/0           0/0            0/0          0/6           0/5           0/1
                    To Scient      Count           Sig
                      Float         Int            Int
 GPT-4o-mini          5 / 20        4 / 11        0/1
    GPT-4o            5 / 20        4 / 11        0/1
  Qwen2-72B           6 / 20        0 / 15        0/1
  Qwen2-7B            4 / 14        0 / 15        0/1
Llama-3.1-8B-ft       4 / 12        5 / 17        0/1
Llama-3.1-70B         4 / 15        0 / 11        0/1
 Llama-3.1-8B          4/9          3 / 11        0/1
 Mixtral-8x7B         5 / 10        4 / 11        0/1
 Llama-2-7b-hf        0/6           0/7           0/0


                                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Well-learned digits / performance-preserving digits of models tested on NUPA Test according
to digit match.
                      Add           Add           Add         Add Easy        Add           Sub           Sub           Sub
                      Int           Float         Frac          Frac          Sci           Int           Float         Frac
 GPT-4o-mini         9 / 20         6 / 20        0/2           0/2           0 / 14       11 / 20        9 / 20        0/1
    GPT-4o           10 / 20        6 / 20        0/1           0/2           0 / 14       11 / 20       10 / 20        0/1
  Qwen2-72B           7 / 16        7 / 20        0/0           0/0           0 / 20        6 / 15        0 / 16        0/0
  Qwen2-7B            4 / 12        3 / 20        0/0           0/0            0/0          6 / 14        6 / 20        0/0
Llama-3.1-8B-ft       6 / 16        9 / 20        0/1           0/0            0/7          6 / 19       12 / 20        0/1
Llama-3.1-70B         6 / 15        7 / 20        0/1           0/1            0/4          6 / 17        7 / 20        0/1
 Llama-3.1-8B         4/9           6 / 18        0/0           0/0            0/0          6 / 11        6 / 17        0/0
 Mixtral-8x7B         6 / 12        5 / 18        0/1           0/1            0/6          5 / 15        5 / 18        0/0
 Llama-2-7b-hf        3/6           0/8           0/0           0/0            0/0           3/5           0/9          0/0
                      Sub           Max           Max           Max           Max        Max Hard      Max Hard      Max Hard
                      Sci           Int           Float         Frac          Sci          Int          Float          Sci
 GPT-4o-mini          0/3         100 / 100     10 / 100        0/7          19 / 98      100 / 100      8 / 100      18 / 100
    GPT-4o            0/0         100 / 100     10 / 100        0/7          19 / 98      100 / 100     8 / 100      16 / 100
  Qwen2-72B           0/0          21 / 100     30 / 100        0/4         100 / 100      82 / 100     32 / 100     100 / 100
  Qwen2-7B            0/0           11 / 86      10 / 98         0/0          0 / 82       13 / 100      7 / 100       6 / 69
Llama-3.1-8B-ft       0/0          83 / 100     75 / 100        0 / 20      100 / 100     100 / 100     79 / 100     100 / 100
Llama-3.1-70B         0/0            0 / 86       0 / 98         0/4           0/0           0/0         0 / 100      0 / 100
 Llama-3.1-8B         0/0           0 / 67       0 / 93         0/0           0 / 54       0 / 100       0 / 96       0 / 100
 Mixtral-8x7B         0/0            7 / 21       3 / 19         0/0          0 / 62       20 / 100       4 / 25      0 / 100
 Llama-2-7b-hf        0/0          0 / 100       0 / 22         0/0           0 / 17       99 / 100       0 / 38      0 / 100
                  Multiply Hard Multiply Hard Multiply Hard Multiply Hard Multiply Easy Multiply Easy Multiply Easy Multiply Easy
                       Int          Float         Frac           Sci           Int          Float         Frac           Sci
 GPT-4o-mini          0/5           0/0           1/2           0/4           0/6           0/0           1/2           0/4
    GPT-4o            0/5           0/0           1/2           0/4           0/6           0/0           1/3           0/4
  Qwen2-72B           0/5           0/0           0/0           0/0           0/6           0/0           0/0           0/0
  Qwen2-7B            0/3           0/0           0/0           0/0           0/4           0/0           0/0           0/0
Llama-3.1-8B-ft       0/4           0/0           0/3           0/4           0/6           0/3           1/3           0/5
Llama-3.1-70B         0/5           0/3           0/2           0/3           0/6           0/3           0/2           0/3
 Llama-3.1-8B         0/4           0/0           0/0           0/0           0/5           0/0           0/1           0/0
 Mixtral-8x7B         0/4           0/0           0/1           0/0           0/5           0/0           0/2           0/0
 Llama-2-7b-hf        0/0           0/0           0/0           0/0           0/0           0/0           0/0           0/0
                   Digit Max     Digit Max      Digit Add     Digit Add      Truediv      Truediv       Floordiv        Mod
                      Int          Float           Int          Float          Int         Frac            Int          Int
 GPT-4o-mini         0 / 100      0 / 100         0/0           0/0            0/5          1/2          5 / 15         0/3
    GPT-4o           0 / 100      0 / 100         0/0           0/0           0/6           1/2          5 / 15         0/3
  Qwen2-72B          0 / 100      0 / 100         0/0           0/0           0/0           0/1           3/8           0/3
  Qwen2-7B           0 / 100       0 / 33          0/5           0/8           0/0          0/1           3/6           0/3
Llama-3.1-8B-ft      0 / 100      13 / 100        0 / 20        5 / 73        3 / 20        0/1          6 / 18         0/3
Llama-3.1-70B        0 / 100       0 / 100         0/0           0/0           0/0          0/1          4 / 12         0/0
 Llama-3.1-8B         0 / 92        0/0           0/0           0/0           0/0           0/0           3/7           0/0
 Mixtral-8x7B        0 / 100       0 / 97          0/5           0/5           0/0          0/1           3/7           0/3
 Llama-2-7b-hf       0 / 100       0 / 42         0/0           0/0            0/0          0/0           0/3           0/0
                   Mod Easy       To Float      To Float      To Scient     To Scient       Sig
                     Int           Frac           Sci            Int          Float         Int
 GPT-4o-mini          0/3           0/8           0/9          23 / 67        8 / 24       31 / 100
    GPT-4o            0/3           0/8           0/9          23 / 71       8 / 28       31 / 100
  Qwen2-72B           0/3           6/9          16 / 28      100 / 100     96 / 100      100 / 100
  Qwen2-7B            0/3           4/8           6 / 22      100 / 100      0 / 100       19 / 100
Llama-3.1-8B-ft       0/3           3/8          10 / 36       95 / 100      25 / 83       19 / 100
Llama-3.1-70B         0/0           4/9           0 / 12        0 / 100       0 / 21        0 / 21
 Llama-3.1-8B         0/0           3/6          0 / 12          0/0          0/0           0/0
 Mixtral-8x7B         0/3           4/9          14 / 36      100 / 100     68 / 100       17 / 100
 Llama-2-7b-hf        0/0           0/5           0/0           0 / 34        0 / 22         0/0


                                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Well-learned digits / performance-preserving digits of models tested on NUPA Test according
to dlength.
                      Add           Add           Add         Add Easy           Add        Sub              Sub        Sub
                      Int           Float         Frac          Frac             Sci        Int              Float      Frac
 GPT-4o-mini         20 / 20        4/8           0/2           1/2              0/0       20 / 20         5/9          0/1
    GPT-4o           20 / 20        4/7           0/2           1/2              0/0       20 / 20       5 / 10         0/1
  Qwen2-72B          20 / 20       7 / 13         0/0           0/0              0/0       20 / 20        0/0           0/0
  Qwen2-7B           11 / 12        0 / 13        0/0           0/0              0/0       10 / 12        0 / 12        0/0
Llama-3.1-8B-ft      19 / 20       11 / 20        0/7           0/5              0/7       20 / 20       13 / 20        0/5
Llama-3.1-70B        20 / 20        6 / 13        0/1           0/1              0/0       20 / 20        4 / 13        0/1
 Llama-3.1-8B        11 / 20       4 / 11         0/1           0/0              0/0       10 / 20       6 / 10         0/1
 Mixtral-8x7B        10 / 14        4 / 12        0/1           0/1              0/0       16 / 20        5 / 13        0/0
 Llama-2-7b-hf       5 / 12        0 / 10         0/0           0/0              0/0        4 / 20        0 / 11        0/1
                      Sub           Max           Max           Max              Max      Max Hard      Max Hard     Max Hard
                      Sci           Int           Float         Frac             Sci        Int          Float         Sci
 GPT-4o-mini          0/0          39 / 98        6/9           0/4           13 / 17     100 / 100        6/8          6 / 16
    GPT-4o            0/0          31 / 72        6/9           0/2          12 / 17      100 / 100       6/8          8 / 16
  Qwen2-72B           0/0          18 / 32       13 / 30        0/0          43 / 86       68 / 85       16 / 26       35 / 63
  Qwen2-7B            0/0          11 / 23        0 / 17        0/0           0 / 14       86 / 100       0 / 20        0 / 11
Llama-3.1-8B-ft       0/0          47 / 83       35 / 54        0/5          97 / 100     100 / 100      25 / 52       35 / 69
Llama-3.1-70B         0/0            0/5          0 / 13        0/0            0/5           0/8          0 / 13         0/4
 Llama-3.1-8B         0/0           0/0           0/7           0/0            0/0          0 / 18        0/6           0/0
 Mixtral-8x7B         0/0           7 / 10         3/9          0/0            0/5          20 / 28       3 / 11         0/6
 Llama-2-7b-hf        0/0          0 / 10         0/0           0/0            0/0        100 / 100        0/0          0 / 11
                  Multiply Hard Multiply Hard Multiply Hard Multiply Hard Multiply Easy Multiply Easy Multiply Easy Multiply Easy
                       Int          Float         Frac           Sci           Int          Float         Frac           Sci
 GPT-4o-mini         7 / 11         0/0           1/2           0/0           9 / 20        0/0            1/2          0/0
    GPT-4o           7 / 11         0/0           1/2           0/0          16 / 20       0/0            1/2          0/0
  Qwen2-72B           0/6           0/0           0/0           0/0           5/7          0/0            0/0          0/0
  Qwen2-7B            0/0           0/0            0/0          0/0           0/5           0/0            0/0          0/0
Llama-3.1-8B-ft      11 / 18        3/9           0 / 11        0/7          16 / 19       8 / 17         1 / 15       0 / 20
Llama-3.1-70B         5/9           0/3            0/1          0/0           7 / 16        0/3            0/1          0/0
 Llama-3.1-8B         0/4           0/0           0/0           0/0           0/8          0/0            0/1          0/0
 Mixtral-8x7B         4/6           0/0            0/2          0/0           4/8           0/0            0/2          0/0
 Llama-2-7b-hf        0/0           0/0           0/0           0/0            0/5          0/0            0/0          0/0
                   Digit Max     Digit Max      Digit Add     Digit Add      Truediv      Truediv        Floordiv       Mod
                      Int          Float           Int          Float          Int         Frac             Int         Int
 GPT-4o-mini         5 / 16         0/7           0/8           0/0               0/5       1/2           8 / 14       3 / 15
    GPT-4o           10 / 16        3/7           0/8           0/0              0/5        1/2           8 / 14       3 / 15
  Qwen2-72B           7 / 16        0/9           0/0           0/0              0/0        0/1            5/7          0/5
  Qwen2-7B            6 / 11        0/4           0 / 20        0/9               0/0       0/1            4/6          0/5
Llama-3.1-8B-ft      23 / 61       19 / 29       26 / 61       29 / 45           3 / 20     0/3           9 / 18       0 / 15
Llama-3.1-70B         6 / 16        0/7           0 / 11        0/0               0/0       0/1           3 / 10        0/4
 Llama-3.1-8B         0/6           0/0          0 / 10         0/7              0/0        0/0            4/8          0/5
 Mixtral-8x7B         0 / 12        0/4            0/8          0/7               0/0       0/1            4/7          0/5
 Llama-2-7b-hf        0/7           0/3           0/9           0/7               0/0       0/1            0/3          0/6
                   Mod Easy       To Float      To Float      To Scient     To Scient       Sig
                     Int           Frac           Sci            Int          Float         Int
 GPT-4o-mini          3 / 20        0/4           0 / 15       9 / 21         5/8          0 / 23
    GPT-4o            3 / 20        0/4           0 / 15       9 / 21         3/8          0 / 23
  Qwen2-72B           0 / 10        3/8          12 / 46       0 / 44         0/0          6 / 19
  Qwen2-7B             0/7          3/7          76 / 93        0/0           0/0           0/5
Llama-3.1-8B-ft       0 / 17        3/9          14 / 78       27 / 33       16 / 38        0/0
Llama-3.1-70B          0/5          3/7           0 / 15         0/0          0/0           0/0
 Llama-3.1-8B          0/6          3/6           0 / 12        0/0           0/0           0/0
 Mixtral-8x7B          0/6          3/6          15 / 16        0 / 18        0/0           0/0
 Llama-2-7b-hf        0/6           0/4          93 / 98        0/0           0/0           0/0


   Table 14: 8-digit digit match accuracy with small model (1.3M) with RoPE, NoPE and Alibi.
                       Int-add Float-add Fraction-multiplication Scientific-add
                   RoPE        0.091           0.88                       0.23                        0.75
                   NoPE        0.061           0.39                       0.17                        0.52
                   Alibi       0.056           0.31                       0.18                        0.50



                                                               36
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Table 15: 8-digit digit match accuracy with small dataset (1M samples) with RoPE, NoPE and Alibi.
                         Int-add Float-add Fraction-multiplication Scientific-add
                            RoPE           0.97               0.99                            0.33                              0.99
                            NoPE           0.78               0.98                            0.29                              0.96
                            Alibi          0.23               0.80                            0.17                              0.79


Table 17: Exact match of 0.1B models trained on integer addition, multiply and maximum respectively
with various compositions of reverse formatting and index hints.
                                 Integer Addition                       Integer Multiply                                Integer Max
                                    rev                                     reverse                                         reverse
                           rev              no      idx          rev                     no       idx        reverse only                  no      idx
                                   + idx                                     + idx                                           + idx
                    d9    1.00     0.93    0.98     0.41         0.43        0.00      0.13       0.00           1.00           0.99       1.00 0.99
                   d10    0.80     0.06    0.32     0.01         0.13        0.02      0.04       0.02           1.00           0.97       1.00 0.98


Table 18: Finetuning with PE, data format, and tokenizer modification will degrade the performance.
The first two lines are a naive finetuned Llama and the original Llama without finetuning, which are
the baseline. “1d” means using the one-digit tokenizer for numbers otherwise the original tokenizer.
“rev” means reverse representation, where the integer parts are reversed. All the checkpoint we select
by the lowest valid loss. The accuracy reported is the average “exact match” in each range. Metric
“wld” is used to denote well-learned digit; “ppd” is used to denote performance-preserving digit.
                                                                 Integer Addition                                                Float Addition
                                             S            M             L       XL        wld        ppd          S         M          L        XL       wld       ppd
     FT                                     0.95      0.65         0.12         0.01          4         12       0.96    0.71       0.27        0.08      5        17
     w/o FT                                 0.95      0.38         0.06         0.02          4          9       0.90    0.47       0.10        0.02      3        11
     NoPE                                   0.67      0.04         0.00         0.00          3          5       0.37    0.06       0.00        0.00      0         0
     NoPE + rev + 1d                        0.89      0.35         0.06         0.02          3          9       0.81    0.38       0.09        0.01      0        11
     NoPE + rev + pad + 1d                  0.87      0.34         0.05         0.02          0          9       0.74    0.38       0.06        0.01      0         9
     RoPE + 1d                              0.93      0.59         0.05         0.00          4          9       0.33    0.30       0.06        0.01      0         9
     RoPE + rev + 1d                        0.40      0.20         0.04         0.00          0          7       0.35    0.30       0.09        0.02      0        11

                                                    Fraction Multiplication (easy)                                      Scientific Notation Addition
                                             S            M             L       XL        wld        ppd          S         M          L        XL       wld       ppd
     FT                                     0.43      0.00         0.00         0.00          1          3       0.09    0.08       0.02        0.00      0        4
     w/o FT                                 0.28      0.00         0.00         0.00          0          3       0.02    0.02       0.01        0.00      0        0
     NoPE                                   0.14      0.00         0.00         0.00          0          3       0.00    0.00       0.00        0.00      0        0
     NoPE +rev + 1d                         0.25      0.00         0.00         0.00          0          3       0.01    0.02       0.01        0.00      0        0
     NoPE + rev + pad + 1d                  0.27      0.00         0.00         0.00          0          3       0.01    0.02       0.01        0.00      0        0
     RoPE + 1d                              0.09      0.00         0.00         0.00          0          1       0.08    0.03       0.02        0.00      0        3
     RoPE + rev + 1d                        0.06      0.00         0.00         0.00          0          1       0.08    0.02       0.01        0.00      0        4

                         Exact Match D8                            Exact Match D9                                 Exact Match D10
           1.0                                      1.0
                                                                                                    0.8
           0.8                                      0.8
                                                                                                    0.6
Accuracy


           0.6                                      0.6

           0.4                                      0.4                                             0.4                                            reverse only
                                                                                                                                                   reverse + pad
                                                                                                    0.2                                            no
           0.2                                      0.2                                                                                            pad only
           0.0                                      0.0                                             0.0
                 0.1M   10.9M 21.6M 32.4M 43.1M           0.1M    10.9M 21.6M 32.4M 43.1M                 0.1M   10.9M 21.6M 32.4M 43.1M



 Figure 14: Exact match of 0.1B models trained on 1- to 8- digit integer addition with different
 compositions of reverse formatting and zero padding on 8- to 10- digit tests. X-axis is the number of
 seen training samples.


                                                                                    37
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Exact Match D8                           Exact Match D9                             Exact Match D10
           1.0                                      1.0                                       1.0                                         reverse total
                                                                                                                                          reverse total + pad
           0.8                                      0.8                                       0.8                                         reverse each
                                                                                                                                          reverse each + pad
Accuracy
           0.6                                      0.6                                       0.6                                         reverse dec
                                                                                                                                          reverse dec + pad
           0.4                                      0.4                                       0.4                                         reverse int
                                                                                                                                          reverse int + pad
                                                                                                                                          pad only
           0.2                                      0.2                                       0.2                                         no
           0.0                                      0.0                                       0.0
                 1.0M       26.6M           52.2M         1.0M       26.6M            52.2M         1.0M        26.6M            52.2M



 Figure 15: Exact match of 0.1B models trained on 1- to 8- digit float addition with different
 compositions of reverse formatting and zero padding on 8- to 10- digit tests. X-axis is the number of
 seen training samples.

                         Exact Match D8                            Exact Match D9                             Exact Match D10
           1.0                                       1.0
                                                                                                0.8
           0.8                                       0.8
                                                                                                0.6
Accuracy


           0.6                                       0.6

           0.4                                       0.4                                        0.4                                          reverse only
                                                                                                                                             reverse + index
                                                                                                0.2                                          no
           0.2                                       0.2                                                                                     index only
           0.0                                       0.0                                        0.0
                 0.1M   10.3M     20.6M     30.8M          0.1M   10.3M     20.6M     30.8M           0.1M   10.3M      20.6M     30.8M



 Figure 16: Exact match of 0.1B models trained on 1- to 8- digit integer addition with different
 compositions of reverse formatting and index hints on 8- to 10- digit tests. X-axis is the number of
 seen training samples.

                         Exact Match D8                            Exact Match D9                             Exact Match D10
           0.5                                      0.40
                                                                                              0.10
                                                    0.35
           0.4                                      0.30                                      0.08
Accuracy


           0.3                                      0.25
                                                                                              0.06
                                                    0.20
                                                                                                                                             reverse only
           0.2                                      0.15                                      0.04                                           reverse + index
                                                    0.10                                                                                     no
           0.1                                                                                0.02                                           index only
                                                    0.05
           0.0                                      0.00                                      0.00
                 0.1M   10.3M     20.6M     30.8M          0.1M   10.3M     20.6M     30.8M           0.1M   10.3M      20.6M     30.8M



 Figure 17: Exact match of 0.1B models trained on 1- to 8- digit integer multiplication with different
 compositions of reverse formatting and index hints on 8- to 10- digit tests. X-axis is the number of
 seen training samples.

                         Exact Match D8                            Exact Match D9                             Exact Match D10
           1.0                                       1.0                                        1.0

           0.8                                       0.8                                        0.8
Accuracy


           0.6                                       0.6                                        0.6

           0.4                                       0.4                                        0.4                                          reverse only
                                                                                                                                             reverse + index
                                                                                                                                             no
           0.2                                       0.2                                        0.2                                          index only
           0.0                                       0.0                                        0.0
                 0.1M      7.8M           15.5M            0.1M      7.8M           15.5M             0.1M      7.8M            15.5M



 Figure 18: Exact match of 0.1B models trained on 1- to 8- digit integer maximum with different
 compositions of reverse formatting and index hints on 8- to 10- digit tests. X-axis is the number of
 seen training samples.


                                                                                     38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Table 19: Maximum length of each task that 2k context window can afford with RF-CoT
              Add   Sub   Multiply   Floordiv       Mod   Max   DigitMax   GetDigit   Length
 Integer      20    20       12         20           6    100     17         100       34
 Float        6     5        4           -           -     50      -         100        -
 Fraction     3     2        3           -           -     20      -          -         -
 Scientific   3     3        3           -           -    100      -          -         -


                                               39
