Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Adam Optimization with Adaptive Batch Selection
    Gyu Yeol Kim                                        Min-hwan Oh
    Seoul National University                           Seoul National University
    Seoul, South Korea                                  Seoul, South Korea
    gyuyeolkim@snu.ac.kr                                minoh@snu.ac.kr



                                              Abstract

           Adam is a widely used optimizer in neural network training due to its adaptive
           learning rate. However, because different data samples influence model updates to
           varying degrees, treating them equally can lead to inefficient convergence. To ad-
           dress this, a prior work proposed adapting the sampling distribution using a bandit
           framework to select samples adaptively. While promising, the bandit-based variant
           of Adam suffers from limited theoretical guarantees. In this paper, we introduce
           Adam with Combinatorial Bandit Sampling (AdamCB), which integrates combina-
           torial bandit techniques into Adam to resolve these issues. AdamCB is able to fully
           utilize feedback from multiple samples at once, enhancing both theoretical guar-
           antees and practical performance. Our regret analysis shows that AdamCB achieves
           faster convergence than Adam-based methods including the previous bandit-based
           variant. Numerical experiments demonstrate that AdamCB consistently outperforms
           existing methods.


1     Introduction

Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) is one of the most widely used optimizers for training neural networks,
primarily due to its ability to adapt learning rates. The standard version of Adam and its numerous
variants treat each training sample equally by employing uniform sampling over the dataset. In
practice, however, different data samples can influence model updates to varying degrees. As a
result, simply performing full dataset sweeps or sampling data with equal weighting may lead to
inefficient convergence and, consequently, unnecessary computational overhead when aiming to
satisfy a given convergence criterion.
To address these challenges, Liu et al. (2020) introduced a dynamic approach called AdamBS, which
adapts the sampling distribution during training using a multi-armed bandit (MAB) framework. In
this method, each training sample is treated as an arm in the MAB, allowing more important samples
to be selected with higher probability and having a greater influence on model updates. This approach
was intended to improve both the adaptability and efficiency of the optimization process, presenting
a promising direction for further advancements.
However, despite its potential benefits, critical issues remain: Specifically, the convergence issue
previously identified in the original analysis of Adam (initially reported by Reddi et al. 2018 and later
resolved by Zhang et al. 2022) also affects its bandit-based variant, AdamBS, as newly discovered in
our work. Consequently, the existing theoretical guarantees regarding the efficiency and effectiveness
of AdamBS are invalid (see Section 2.5.3). As a result, to the best of our knowledge, there is no existing
Adam-based method that can adaptively sample while providing rigorous performance guarantees.
This raises a critical question: is it possible to design an algorithm that adaptively adjusts the sampling
distribution while ensuring both provable guarantees and practical performance improvements?
In this paper, we propose a new optimization method, Adam with Combinatorial Bandit Sampling
(AdamCB), which addresses the limitation in both the analysis and implementation of AdamBS by
incorporating a combinatorial bandit approach into the sample selection process. In this approach,
batch selection is formulated as a combinatorial action, where multiple arms (samples) are selected
simultaneously. This combinatorial bandit framework can take advantage of feedback from multiple
samples at once, significantly enhancing the adaptivity of the optimizer. For the first time, we provide
provable performance guarantees for adaptive batch selection in Adam-based methods, leading to

                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


faster convergence and demonstrating both theoretical and practical improvements over existing
approaches. Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

       • We propose Adam with Combinatorial Bandit Sampling (AdamCB), a novel optimization
         algorithm that integrates the Adam method with a combinatorial bandit approach for sample
         selection. To the best of our knowledge, AdamCB is not only the first algorithm to successfully
         combine combinatorial bandit techniques with the Adam framework, but also the first to
         correctly adapt any bandit techniques to Adam, significantly enhancing its adaptability.
       • We provide a rigorous regret analysis of the proposed AdamCB algorithm, demonstrating
         that it achieves a sharper regret bound compared to both the original Adam (which uses
         uniform sampling) and its bandit-based variant, AdamBS (Liu et al., 2020). Additionally, we
         correct the theoretical errors in the analysis of AdamBS and present a revised regret bound
         (see Table 1 for comparisons).
       • We perform empirical evaluations across multiple datasets and models, showing that AdamCB
         consistently outperforms existing Adam-based optimization methods in terms of both conver-
         gence rate and practical performance. Our results establish AdamCB as the first Adam-based
         algorithm to offer both provable convergence guarantees and practical efficiency for bandit-
         based Adam optimization methods.

2     Preliminaries
2.1   Notations

We denote by [n] the set {1, 2, . . . n} for a positive integer n. For a vector x ∈ Rd , we denote by
∥x∥ the vector’s Euclidean norm. For two positive sequences {an }∞                  ∞
                                                                       n=1 and {bn }n=1 , an = O(bn )
implies that there exists an absolute constant C > 0 such that an ≤ Cbn holds for all n ≥ 1.
Similarly, an = o(bn ) indicates that limn→∞ abnn = 0.

2.2   Expected Risk and Empirical Risk

Expected Risk. In many machine learning problems, the primary goal is to develop a model with
robust generalization performance. By generalization, we mean that while models are trained on a
finite sample of data points, we aim for them to perform well on the entire population of data. To
achieve this, we focus on minimizing a quantity known as the expected risk. The expected risk is the
average loss across the entire population data distribution, reflecting the model’s anticipated error if
it had access to the complete set of possible data samples. Formally, the expected risk is defined as:
                                                     Z
                            E(x,y)∼P [ℓ(θ; x, y)] := ℓ(θ; x, y)dP (x, y)                            (1)

where θ ∈ Rd is the model parameter, ℓ(θ; x, y) is the loss function that measures the error of the
model on a single data sample (x, y), and P is the true distribution of the data. The gold standard
goal is to find the θ that minimizes the expected risk in Eq.(1), ensuring that the model generalizes
well to all data drawn from P .

Empirical Risk. In practice, however, the true distribution P is typically unknown. Instead, we
only work with a finite dataset D consisting of n samples, which is denoted as D := {(xi , yi )}ni=1 .
To approximate the expected risk, we use the empirical distribution P̂ derived from the dataset D.
For this empirical distribution P̂ to be a reliable approximation, we assume that the dataset D is
representative of the true distribution P . This requires that each sample in the dataset D is equally
likely and independently drawn from the true distribution P (i.e., the samples (xi , yi ) are i.i.d.
according to P ). The empirical distribution P̂ can be expressed as:
                                                  n
                                              1X
                               P̂ (x, y; D) =       δ(x = xi , y = yi )                             (2)
                                              n i=1
where δ is the Dirac-delta function. With the empirical distribution at hand, the empirical risk is the
average loss over the given finite dataset D. The empirical risk serves as an estimate of the expected


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


risk and is formally defined as:
                                              Z                                    n
                                                                               1X
                 E(x,y)∼P̂ [ℓ(θ; x, y)] :=         ℓ(θ; x, y)dP̂ (x, y; D) =         ℓ(θ; xi , yi ).              (3)
                                                                               n i=1

However, if the dataset is non-uniformly distributed, some samples may be over-represented or under-
represented, leading to a biased estimate of the expected risk. To address this issue, one can use
importance sampling (Katharopoulos & Fleuret, 2018), which adjusts the sample weights to ensure
the empirical risk remains an unbiased estimate of the expected risk.

2.3   Objective Function and Mini-Batches

Objective Function. In the context of optimizing machine learning models, the objective function
                                                                                      n
f (θ; D) is often the empirical risk shown in Eq.(3).
                                                Pn Given a dataset D = {(xi , yi )}i=1 , the objective
                                              1
function f (θ; D) is defined as, f (θ; D) := n i=1 ℓ(θ; xi , yi ). As studied in the relevant literature
of Adam optimization (Duchi et al., 2011; Tieleman & Hinton, 2012; Kingma & Ba, 2015; Dozat,
2016; Reddi et al., 2018), we focus on the problem setting where f is convex (i.e., ℓ is convex). Then,
the goal of the optimization problem is to find a parameter θ∗ ∈ Rd that minimizes the objective
function f (θ; D). This problem is known as empirical risk minimization:
                                             θ∗ ∈ arg min f (θ; D) .
                                                        θ∈Rd
                                                                                                           Pn
The gradient of the objective function f with respect to θ is denoted by g := ∇θ f (θ; D) = n1                i=1 gi ,
where gi := ∇θ ℓ(θ; xi , yi ) is the gradient of the loss based on the i-th data sample in D.

Mini-Batches. When the full dataset D = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 is very large (i.e., large n), computing the
gradient over the entire dataset for each optimization iteration becomes computationally expensive.
To address this, mini-batches—smaller subsets of the full dataset—are commonly used to reduce
computational overhead per iteration. Consider the sequence of mini-batches D1 , D2 , . . . , DT ⊆ D
used for training, with corresponding objective functions ft (θ) := f (θ, Dt ) for each t ∈ {1, . . . , T }.
Let K be the size of the mini-batch Dt for all t, then Dt := {(xJt1 , yJt1 ), (xJt2 , yJt2 ), . . . , (xJtK , yJtK )},
where Jt := {Jt1 , Jt2 , . . . , JtK } ⊆ [n] is the set of indices of the samples in the mini-batch Dt . The
objective function ft (θ) for the mini-batch Dt is defined as the expected risk over this mini-batch:
                                                        Z
                                 ft (θ) = f (θ; Dt ) := ℓ(θ; x, y)dP̂ (x, y; Dt )                                  (4)

where P̂ (x, y; Dt ) is the empirical distribution derived from the mini-batch Dt . The gradient of the
objective function ft with respect to θ is denoted as gt := ∇θ ft .
Note that the sequence of mini-batches {Dt }Tt=1 can be selected adaptively. Adaptive selection
involves choosing mini-batches based on results observed during previous optimization steps, poten-
tially adjusting the importance assigned to specific samples. The empirical distribution P̂ (x, y; Dt )
is significantly influenced by the method used to select the mini-batch Dt from the full dataset D.

2.4   Regret Minimization

Cumulative Regret. An online optimization method can be analyzed within the framework of
regret minimization. Consider an online optimization algorithm π that generates a sequence of
model parameters θ1 , . . . , θT over T iterations. The performance of π can be compared to the
optimal parameter θ∗ ∈ arg minθ∈Rd f (θ; D), which minimizes the objective function over the full
dataset D. The cumulative regret after T iterations is defined as:
                                        " T                                 #
                                          X
                           Rπ (T ) := E        f (θt ; D) − T · min f (θ; D)                  (5)
                                                                      θ∈Rd
                                                  t=1

where the expectation is taken with respect to any stochasticity in data sampling and parameter
estimation. For the optimization algorithm π to converge to optimality, we require the cumulative
regret Rπ (T ) to grow slower than the number of iterations T , specifically Rπ (T ) = o(T ).


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Online Regret. An alternative notion of regret is the online regret, defined over a sequence of
mini-batch datasets {Dt }Tt=1 , or equivalently, over the sequence of functions {ft }Tt=1 . Specifically,
the online regret of the optimization algorithm π after T iterations is given by:
                                             " T                  T
                                                                           #
                                              X                   X
                              π
                           Ronline (T ) := E       ft (θt ) − min    ft (θ)
                                                             θ∈Rd
                                               t=1                  t=1

where the expectation is again taken over any stochasticity in the optimization process. It is important
to note that the primary focus should not solely be on minimizing the online regret. An algorithm
might select Dt ⊂ D in a way that allows π to perform well on {Dt }Tt=1 , but it may perform poorly
on the full dataset D. Therefore, our ultimate goal remains minimizing the cumulative regret Rπ (T ).
Later, in the proof of Theorem 1, we demonstrate how minimizing the cumulative regret Rπ (T ) in
Eq.(5) relates to minimizing the online regret Rπonline (T ) with respect to the sequence {ft }Tt=1 .

2.5     Related Work: Adam and Technical Issues in Convergence Guarantees

2.5.1    Adam Optimizer
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) is a widely used first-order gradient-based optimization method that
computes adaptive learning rates for each parameter by using both the first and second moment
estimates of the gradients. In each iteration t, Adam maintains the accumulated gradients mt ←
β1,t mt−1 + (1 − β1,t )gt and the accumulated squared gradients vt ← β2 vt−1 + (1 − β2 )gt2 , where
gt is the gradient at iteration t and gt2 represents the element-wise square of gradient gt . The hyper-
parameters β1 , β2 ∈ [0, 1) control the decay rates of mt and vt , respectively. Since these moment
estimates are initially biased towards zero, the estimates are corrected as m̂t ← mt /(1 − β1t ) and
v̂t ← vt /(1 − β2t ). The Adam algorithm then updates the parameters using θt ← θt−1 − αt √m̂         t
                                                                                                   v̂t +ϵ
                                                                                                          ,
where ϵ is a small positive constant added to prevent division by zero. The key characteristic of
Adam lies in its use of exponential moving average for both the gradient estimates (first-order) and the
element-wise squares of gradients (second-order). This approach has shown empirical effectiveness
for optimizing deep neural networks and has led to many follow-up works, such as Reddi et al. (2018),
Loshchilov & Hutter (2019), Chen et al. (2020), Alacaoglu et al. (2020), and Chen et al. (2023).

2.5.2    Convergence of Adam
After Adam was first introduced, there was considerable debate regarding its convergence properties.
In particular, Reddi et al. (2018) provided a counterexample demonstrating that Adam might fail
to converge under certain conditions (see Section3 of Reddi et al. 2018). In response, numerous
variants of adaptive gradient methods have been proposed, such as AMSGrad (Reddi et al., 2018),
AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019), and AdaBelief (Zhuang et al., 2020), to address this issue and
ensure convergence.
However, recent studies (Zhang et al., 2022; Défossez et al., 2022) indicate that the standard Adam
algorithm itself can achieve convergence with appropriate hyperparameter choices, thereby resolving
its earlier theoretical concerns. These recent works provide alternative convergence proofs for
the original Adam algorithm without requiring modifications to its update rules, contingent upon
hyperparameter conditions being satisfied.

2.5.3    Technical Issues in Adam with Bandit Sampling (Liu et al., 2020)
The work most closely related to ours is by Liu et al. (2020), who proposed AdamBS, an extension of the
original Adam algorithm and proof framework incorporating a bandit sampling approach. However,
the initial convergence issue present in the original proof of Adam, discussed in Section 2.5.2, also
affects AdamBS, thus invalidating the convergence guarantee provided by Liu et al. (2020). Moreover,
even if the alternative convergence proofs of Adam are adapted to the AdamBS framework, several
other critical shortcomings persist. We summarize these remaining issues as follows:

         • AdamBS unfortunately fails to provide guarantees on convergence despite its claims,
           both on the regret bound and on the effectiveness of the adaptive sample selection via the
           bandit approach. Specifically, the claimed regret bound in Theorem 1 of Liu et al. (2020) is


                                                     4
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               incorrect. In particular, Eq.(7) on Page 3 of the supplemental material of Liu et al. (2020)
               contains an error in the formula expansion.1 This technical error is critical to their claims
               regarding the convergence rate of AdamBS and its dependence on the mini-batch size K
             • Their problem setting is also limited and impractical, even if the analysis were corrected.
               The analysis assumes that feature vectors follow a doubly heavy-tailed distribution, a strong
               and restrictive condition that may not hold in practical scenarios. Importantly, no analysis is
               provided for bounded or sub-Gaussian (light-tailed) distributions, which are more commonly
               encountered in real-world applications.
             • Despite their claim regarding mini-batch selection of size K, their algorithm design allows
               the same sample to be selected multiple times within a single mini-batch. This occurs
               because the bandit algorithm they employ is based on single-action selection rather than a
               combinatorial bandit approach. As a result, their method may repeatedly sample the same
               data points within a mini-batch. Moreover, due to this limitation, their method fails to
               achieve performance gains with increasing mini-batch size K, contradicting their claim.
             • Numerical evaluations (in Section 5) demonstrate poor performance of AdamBS. Our
               numerical experiments across various models and datasets reveal that AdamBS exhibits poor
               and inconsistent performance. Additionally, an independent evaluation by a separate group
               has also reported inconsistent results for AdamBS (Bansal et al., 2022).


    3     Proposed Algorithm: AdamCB

    3.1    AdamCB Algorithm


    Algorithm 1: Adam with Combinatorial Bandit Sampling (AdamCB)
  Input: learning rate {αt }Tt=1 , decay rates {β1,t }Tt=1 , β2 , batch size K, exploration parameter
           γ ∈ [0, 1)
  Initialize: model parameters θ0 , first moment estimate m0 ← 0, second moment estimate
                v0 ← 0, v̂0 ← 0, sample weights wi,0 ← 1 for all i ∈ [n]
1 for t = 1 to T do
2     Jt , pt , Snull,t ← Batch-Selection(wt−1 , K, γ) (Algorithm 2)
3     Compute unbiased gradient estimate gt with respect to Jt using Eq.(7)
4     mt ← β1,t mt−1 + (1 − β1,t )gt
5     vt ← β2 vt−1 + (1 −nβ2 )gt2
                                  (1−β1,t )2
                                                  o
6         v̂1 ← v1 , v̂t ← max   (1−β1,t−1 )2 v̂t−1 , vt   if t ≥ 2
7         θt+1 ← θt − αt √m  t
                          v̂t +ϵ
8         wt ← Weight-Update(wt−1 , pt , Jt , {gj,t }j∈Jt , Snull,t , γ) (Algorithm 3)


    We present our proposed algorithm, Adam with Combinatorial Bandit Sampling (AdamCB), which
    is described in Algorithm 1. The algorithm begins by initializing the sample weights w0 :=
    {w1,0 , w2,0 , . . . , wn,0 } uniformly, assigning an equal weight of 1 to each of n training samples. At
    each iteration t ∈ [T ], the current sample weights wt−1 = {w1,t−1 , w2,t−1 , . . . , wn,t−1 } are used to
    determine the sample selection probabilities pt := {p1,t , p2,t , . . . , pn,t }, where these probabilities
    are controlled with the exploration parameter γ (Line 2). A subset of samples, denoted by Dt ⊆ D,
    is chosen based on these probabilities. The set of indices for samples chosen in the mini-batch Dt is
    denoted by Jt := {Jt1 , Jt2 , . . . , JtK } ⊆ [n]. Using this mini-batch Dt , an unbiased gradient estimate
    gt is computed (Line 3). The algorithm then updates moments estimates mt , vt , and v̂t following
    the Adam-based update rules (Lines 4–6). The model parameters θt are subsequently updated based
    on these moment estimates (Line 7). Finally, the weights wt−1 are adjusted to reflect the importance
    of each sample, improving the batch selection process in future iterations (Line 8).
       1
         Liu et al. (2020) apply Jensen’s inequality to handle the expectation of the squared norm of the sum of
    gradient estimates. However, the convexity assumption required for Jensen’s inequality does not hold in this
    context, rendering this step in their proof invalid.


                                                            5
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     The following sections describe the detailed process for deriving the sample probabilities pt and
     selecting the mini-batch Dt = {(xj , yj )}j∈Jt from the sample weights wt−1 utilizing our proposed
     combinatorial bandit sampling.

     3.2   Batch Selection: Combinatorial Bandit Sampling

     In our approach, we incorporate a bandit framework where each sample is treated as an arm. Since
     multiple samples must be selected for a mini-batch, we extend the selection process to handle
     multiple arms. There are two primary methods for sampling multiple arms: with replacement or
     without replacement. The previous method, AdamBS (Liu et al., 2020), samples multiple arms with
     replacement. In contrast, our proposed method, AdamCB, employs a combinatorial bandit algorithm
     to sample multiple arms without replacement, achieved by Batch-Selection (Algorithm 2).

   Algorithm 2: Batch-Selection
   Input: Sample weights wt−1 , batch size K, exploration parameter γ ∈ [0, 1)
 1 Set C ← (1/K − γ/n)/(1 − γ)
                               Pn
 2 if maxi∈[n] wi,t−1 ≥ C
                                  i=1 wi,t−1 then
 3     Let w̄t−1 P  be a sorted list of {wi,t−1 }ni=1 in descending order
                      n
 4     Set S ← i=1 w̄i,t−1
 5     for i = 1 to n do
 6          Compute τ ← C · S/(1 − i · C)
 7          if w̄i,t−1 < τ then break, else update S ← S − w̄i,t−1
 8     Set Snull,t ← {i : wi,t−1 ≥ τ } and wi,t−1 = τ for i ∈ Snull,t
 9 else
10     Set Snull,t ← ∅

                                 wi,t−1       γ
11 Set pi,t ← K (1 − γ) Pn
                                  j=1wj,t−1 + n for all i ∈ [n]
12 Set Jt ← DepRound(K, (p1,t , p2,t , . . . , pn,t )) (Algorithm 6)
13 return Jt , pt , Snull,t


     WeightPAdjustment (Lines 2–10). Unlike single-arm selection bandit approach like AdamBS,
               n
     where i=1 pi,t = 1, because only one sample is selected at a time, AdamCB must select K samples
     simultaneously for a mini-batch. Therefore, it is natural to scale the sum of the probabilities to K,
     reflecting the expected number of samples selected in each round.2 Allowing the sum of probabilities
     to equal K can lead to individual probabilities pi,t exceeding 1, especially when certain samples
     are assigned significantly higher weights due to their importance (or gradient magnitude). To
     ensure valid probabilities and prevent any sample from being overrepresented, AdamCB introduces
     a threshold τ . If a weight wi,t−1 exceeds τ , the index i is added to a null set Snull,t , effectively
     removing it from active consideration for selection. The probabilities of the remaining samples are
     adjusted to redistribute the excess weight while ensuring the sum of probabilities remains K.
     Probability Computation (Line 11). After adjusting the weights, the probabilities pt for selecting
     each sample are computed using the adjusted weights wt−1 and the exploration parameter γ. This
     computation balances the need to exploit samples with higher weights (more likely to provide useful
     gradients) and explore other samples.P The inclusion of K in the scaling ensures that the sum of
                                            n
     probabilities matches the batch size: i=1 pi,t = K.
     Mini-batch Selection (Line 12). The final selection of K distinct samples for the mini-batch is
     performed using DepRound (Algorithm 6), originally proposed by Gandhi et al. (2006) and later
     adapted by Uchiya et al. (2010). DepRound efficiently selects K distinct samples from a set of
     n samples, ensuring that each sample i is selected with probability pi,t . The algorithm has a
     computational complexity of O(n), which is significantly more efficient than a naive     approach
                                                                                        n

     requiring consideration of all possible combinations with a complexity of at least K   .
         2
           If the sum of probabilities were constrained to P
                                                           1, the algorithm would need to perform additional rescaling
     or sampling adjustments. Instead, directly setting n     i=1 pi,t = K aligns the probability distribution with the
     batch-level selection requirements.


                                                             6
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    3.3    Computing Unbiased Gradient Estimates

    Given the mini-batch data Dt = {(xj , yj )}j∈Jt from Algorithm 2, and since pt is a probability over
    the full dataset D, and Dt is sampled according to pt , we employ an importance sampling technique
    to compute the empirical distribution P̂ for Dt :
                                                    1 X δ(x = xj , y = yj )
                                  P̂ (x, y; Dt ) :=                                                  (6)
                                                    K           npj,t
                                                          j∈Jt

    where δ is the Dirac-delta function. This formulation ensures that the empirical distribution P̂ for
    the mini-batch Dt closely approximates the original empirical distribution P̂ (x, y; D) defined over
    the full dataset D, as expressed in Eq.(2). According to the empirical distribution P̂ (x, y; Dt ) in
    Eq.(6), the online objective function ft corresponding to the mini-batch Dt (as defined in Eq.(4))
    can be computed as
                                         Z
                                                                      1 X ℓ(θ; xj , yj )
                    ft (θ) = f (θ; Dt ) = ℓ(θ; x, y)dP̂ (x, y; Dt ) =                    .
                                                                      K        npj,t
                                                                              j∈Jt

    This implies that the gradient gt = ∇θ ft (θ) obtained from the mini-batch Dt at iteration t is
    computed as follows:
                                         1 X ∇θ ℓ(θ; xj , yj )    1 X gj,t
                        gt = ∇θ ft (θ) =                       =                                (7)
                                         K           npj,t       K       npj,t
                                                 j∈Jt                          j∈Jt

    Here, we denote the gradients for each individual sample in the mini-batch Dt as {gj,t }j∈Jt , where
    Jt is the set of indices for Dt . In stochastic optimization methods like SGD and Adam, it is crucial to
    use an unbiased gradient estimate when updating the moment vectors. We can easily show that gt is
    an unbiased estimate of the true gradient g over the entire dataset by taking the expectation over pt ,
    i.e, Ept [gt ] = g. The unbiased gradient estimate gt in Eq.(7) is then used to update the first moment
    estimate mt and the second moment estimate vt in each iteration of the algorithm.

    3.4    Update of Sample Weights

    The final step in each iteration of Algorithm 1 involves updating the sample weights wt . Treating
    the optimization problem as an adversarial semi-bandit, our partial feedback consists only of the
    gradients {gj,t }j∈Jt . The loss ℓi,t occurred when the i-th arm is pulled is computed based on the
    norm of the gradient ∥gi,t ∥. Specifically, the loss ℓi,t is always non-negative and inversely related
    to ∥gi,t ∥. This implies that samples with smaller gradient norms are assigned lower weights, while
    samples with larger gradient norms are more likely to be selected in future iterations.

  Algorithm 3: Weight-Update
  Input: wt−1 , pt , Jt , {gj,t }j∈Jt , Snull,t , γ ∈ [0, 1)
1 for j = 1 to n do
                               p2        ∥g ∥2

                                                       L2
2     Compute loss ℓj,t = Lmin    2    − (pj,t
                                            j,t )
                                                  2 + p 2    if j ∈ Jt ; otherwise ℓj,t = 0
                                                    min
3         if j ∈
               / Snull,t then
4              wj,t ← wj,t−1 exp (−Kγℓj,t /n)
5   return wt



    4     Regret Analysis
    In this section, we present a regret analysis for our proposed algorithm, AdamCB. We begin by
    introducing the standard assumptions commonly used in the analysis of optimization algorithms.
    Assumption 1 (Bounded gradient). There exists L > 0 such that ∥gi,t ∥ ≤ L for all i ∈ [n] and
    t ∈ [T ].
    Assumption 2 (Bounded parameter). There exists D > 0 such that ∥θs − θt ∥ ≤ D for any s, t ∈ [T ].


                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Discussion of Assumptions. Both Assumptions 1 and 2 are the standard assumptions in the relevant
literature that studies the regret bounds of Adam-based optimization (Kingma & Ba, 2015; Reddi
et al., 2018; Luo et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020). A closely related work (Liu et al.,
2020) relies on the additional stronger assumption of a doubly heavy-tailed feature distribution. In
contrast, the regret bound for AdamCB is derived using only these two standard assumptions.

4.1       Regret Bound of AdamCB

Theorem 1 (Regret bound of AdamCB). Suppose Assumptions 1-2 hold, and we run AdamCB for a
total T iterations with αt = √αt and with β1,t := β1 λt−1 , λ ∈ (0, 1). Then, the cumulative regret of
AdamCB (Algorithm 1) with batch size K is upper-bounded by
                                              √               1/4 !
                                     √          d T        n
                                 O d T + 3/4           ln            .
                                             n      K K

Discussion of Theorem 1. Theorem 1 establishes that the cumulative regret bound of AdamCB
is sub-linear in T , i.e., Rπ (T ) = o(T ). Hence,
                                                √ AdamCB is guaranteed to converge to the optimal
solution. The first term in the regret bound, d T , which is commonly shared by the results in all
Adam-based
 √           methods (Kingma & Ba, 2015; Reddi et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020). The second term,
       3/4                        1/4
( d/n )·((T /K) ln (n/K)) , illustrates the impact of the number of samples n as well as the
batch size K on regret. As the number of samples n increases, this term decreases, suggesting
that having more data generally helps in reducing regret (hence converging faster to optimality).
Similarly, increasing the batch size K also decreases this term, reflecting that larger mini-batches
can reduce the variance in gradient estimates, thus improving the performance.

4.2       Proof Sketch of Theorem 1
In this section, we present the proof sketch of the regret bound in Theorem 1. The proof start by
decomposing the cumulative regret Rπ (T ) into three parts: the cumulative online regret Rπonline (T )
and auxiliary terms (A) and (B), as shown below:
                                     " T                          #          "      T
                                                                                                                          #
      π
                                      X                                             X
 R        (T ) = Rπonline (T ) + E         (f (θt ; D) − f (θt ; Dt )) + E min            f (θ; Dt ) − T · min f (θ; D)       (8)
                                                                             θ∈Rd                        θ∈Rd
                                     t=1                                            t=1
                                |                 {z              }      |                       {z                       }
                                                  (A)                                            (B)


We now prove the following two key lemmas to bound the online regret Rπonline (T ).
Lemma 1. Suppose Assumptions 1-2 hold. AdamCB (Algorithm 1) with a mini-batch of size K, which
is formed dynamically by distribution pt , achieves the following upper-bound for the cumulative online
regret Rπonline (T ) over T iterations,
                                                 v
                                           √                T
                                      √
                                                 u
                                                                        ∥gj,t ∥2
                                                                    X
                      π
                                                 u 1 X
                   Ronline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + dρ2   t             Ep                  + ρ3
                                                     n2 K t=1 t         (pj,t )2
                                                                                    j∈Jt

where ρ1 , ρ2 , and ρ3 are constants (See Appendix B.2).

Lemma 1 provides an upper bound for the cumulative online regret over T iterations. This lemma
shows that pt affects the upper bound of Rπonline (T ). Hence, we wish to choose pt that could lead
to minimizing the upper bound. The following key lemma shows that it can be achieved by a
combinatorial semi-bandit approach, adapted from EXP3 (Auer et al., 2002).
                                                                q
Lemma 2. Suppose Assumptions 1-2 hold. If we set γ = min 1, n(e−1)T   ln (n/K)
                                                                            K    , the batch selection
(Algorithm 2) and the weight update rule (Algorithm 3) following AdamCB (Algorithm 1) implies
                                                              
           T        X ∥gj,t ∥2             T        X ∥gj,t ∥2          r
          X
                                   − min
                                          X                                       n
              Ept                            Ept
                                                                 = O    KnT  ln
          t=1
                         (pj,t )2      pt
                                          t=1
                                                        (pj,t )2                  K
                            j∈Jt                                  j∈Jt



                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Table 1: Comparison of Regret Bounds

                                Optimizer                               Regret Bound
                                                                      √     √ √
             AdamX (Tran et al., 2019) (variant of Adam† )                    d
                                                                   O d T + n√1/2  T
                                                                      √                   1
             AdamBS (Liu et al., 2020) (corrected‡ )                          d
                                                                   O d T + n√3/4 (T ln n) 4
                                                                      √       d   T     n 14

             AdamCB (Ours)                                         O d T + n3/4   K ln K
†
  While the convergence of Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) has been correctly established by Zhang et al. (2022),
the results in Zhang et al. (2022) do not provide regret guarantees. For fair comparisons of regret, we use a
slight modification of Adam, AdamX (Tran et al., 2019), for which correct regret analysis is feasible.
‡
  Similarly, for AdamBS(Liu et al., 2020), since the existing proof of regret guarantee contains technical errors,
we present a corrected proof, resulting in a new regret bound (Theorem 3).



Lemma 2 bounds the difference between the expected cumulative loss of the chosen mini-batch
and the optimal mini-batch, showing sub-linear growth in T with dependence on the batch size K.
Combining Lemma 1 and Lemma 2, we can bound the cumulative online regret Rπonline (T ), which also
grows sub-linearly in T . Proofs of Lemma 1 and Lemma 2 are in Appendix B.2 and Appendix B.3,
respectively. The discrepancy terms (A) and (B) in Eq.(8) capture the difference between the full
dataset D and the mini-batches {Dt }Tt=1 , and are also bounded sub-linearly in T (See Lemma 11 in
Appendix B.4). Since the cumulative regret Rπ (T ) is decomposed into the online regret Rπonline (T )
with additional sub-linear terms, we obtain the cumulative regret bound for AdamCB.

4.3   Comparisons with Adam and AdamBS
Our main goal is to demonstrate that the convergence rate of AdamCB (Algorithm 1) is provably more
efficient than those of the existing Adam-based methods including ones that employ uniform sampling
and AdamBS (Liu et al., 2020) that utilizes (non-combinatorial) bandit sampling. Since the claimed
regret bounds in the original Adam and AdamBS are invalid, we provide new regret bounds for both
a variant of Adam, called AdamX (Tran et al., 2019) and AdamBS in Theorems 2 and 3, respectively,
which may be of independent interest.
For comparison purposes, we additionally introduce the following assumption:
Assumption 3 (Bounded variance of gradient). There exists σ > 0 such that Var(∥gi,t ∥) ≤ σ 2 for
all i ∈ [n] and t ∈ [T ]

Assumption 3 is commonly used in the previous literature (Reddi et al., 2016; Nguyen et al., 2018;
Zou et al., 2019; Patel et al., 2022). It is important to note that Assumption 3 is not required for the
analysis of our algorithm in Theorem 1. Rather, we employ the assumption to fairly compare with
corrected results for the existing Adam-based methods (Tran et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020).

               √ 1, 2, and√3, the regret bound for the Adam variant (AdamX) using uniform sampling
Under Assumptions
is given by O(d T +n−1/2 dT ) (Theorem 2 in Appendix C), while the     √regret bound√for a corrected
                                                                               −3/4

version of AdamBS using (non-combinatorial) bandit sampling is O d T + n              d(T ln n)1/4
(Theorem 3 in Appendix D) when Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. The comparisons of regret bounds are
outlined in Table 1.

Faster Convergence of AdamCB. The second term in the regret bound of AdamX exhibits a depen-
dence on n−1/2 , which is the rate of regret decrease as the dataset size increases. However, this
reduction in regret occurs at a slower rate compared to bandit-based sampling methods. Both AdamBS
(corrected) and AdamCB achieve an improved n−3/4 dependency, resulting in a faster convergence.
When comparing the two bandit-based sampling methods, AdamCB surpasses AdamBS (corrected) in
terms of convergence, particularly by the factor of the batch size K. That is, as far as regret per-
formance is concerned, AdamBS does not benefit from multiple samples in batch while our AdamCB
enjoys faster convergence. Hence, AdamCB is not only the first algorithm with correct performance
guarantees for AdamX with adaptive batch selection, but to our best knowledge, also the method with
the fastest convergence guarantees in terms of regret performance.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              Adam          AdamX                 AdamBS               AdamCB (ours)
                                  (a) MNIST                              (b) Fashion MNIST             2.4
                                                                                                                     (c) CIFAR-10
                                                          2.25
                    2.0                                   2.00                                         2.2
                                                          1.75
                    1.5                                                                                2.0
       Train Loss                                         1.50
                    1.0                                   1.25                                         1.8
                                                          1.00
                                                                                                       1.6
                    0.5                                   0.75
                                                          0.50                                         1.4
                    0.0
                          0   2    4     6      8    10          0   2       4      6        8   10          0   2     4     6      8   10
                                   Epochs                                     Epochs                                   Epochs
                                                          2.25                                         2.2
                    2.0                                   2.00
                                                          1.75                                         2.0
                    1.5
       Test Loss


                                                          1.50
                                                                                                       1.8
                    1.0                                   1.25
                                                          1.00                                         1.6
                    0.5                                   0.75
                                                          0.50                                         1.4
                    0.0
                          0   2    4     6      8    10          0   2       4      6        8   10          0   2     4     6      8   10
                                   Epochs                                     Epochs                                   Epochs

                          Figure 1: Performances with MLP model on MNIST, Fashion MNIST, and CIFAR10

                                              Adam          AdamX                 AdamBS               AdamCB (ours)
                                  (a) MNIST                              (b) Fashion MNIST            2.50
                                                                                                                     (c) CIFAR-10
                                                          2.25
                                                                                                      2.25
                    2.0                                   2.00
                                                                                                      2.00
                                                          1.75
                    1.5                                                                               1.75
       Train Loss


                                                          1.50
                                                                                                      1.50
                    1.0                                   1.25
                                                                                                      1.25
                                                          1.00
                                                          0.75                                        1.00
                    0.5
                                                          0.50                                        0.75
                    0.0                                                                               0.50
                          0   2    4     6      8    10          0   2       4      6        8   10          0   2     4     6      8   10
                                   Epochs                                     Epochs                                   Epochs
                                                                                                      2.50
                                                          2.25
                                                                                                      2.25
                    2.0                                   2.00
                                                                                                      2.00
                                                          1.75
                    1.5                                                                               1.75
       Test Loss


                                                          1.50
                                                                                                      1.50
                    1.0                                   1.25
                                                                                                      1.25
                                                          1.00
                                                          0.75                                        1.00
                    0.5
                                                          0.50                                        0.75
                    0.0                                                                               0.50
                          0   2    4     6      8    10          0   2       4      6        8   10          0   2     4     6      8   10
                                   Epochs                                     Epochs                                   Epochs

                          Figure 2: Performances with CNN model on MNIST, Fashion MNIST, and CIFAR10


5   Numerical Experiments
Experimental Setup. To evaluate our proposed algorithm, AdamCB, we conduct experiments using
deep neural networks, including multilayer perceptrons (MLP) and convolutional neural networks
(CNN), on three benchmark datasets: MNIST, Fashion MNIST, and CIFAR10. Comparisons are
made with Adam, AdamX and AdamBS, with all experiments implemented in PyTorch. Performance
is assessed by plotting training and test losses over epochs, with training loss calculated on the full
dataset and test loss calculated on the held-out validation data set. Results represent the average
of five runs with different random seeds, including standard deviations. All methods use the same
hyperparameters: β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, γ = 0.4, K = 128, and α = 0.001. Additional
experimental details are provided in Appendix F.

Results. Figures 1 and 2 show that AdamCB consistently outperforms Adam, AdamX and AdamBS,
demonstrating faster reductions in both training and test losses across all datasets. These results
suggest that combinatorial bandit sampling is more effective than uniform sampling for performance
optimization. Attempts to replicate the results of AdamBS from Liu et al. (2020) revealed inconsistent
outcomes, with significant fluctuations in losses, indicating potential instability and divergence.
In contrast, AdamCB exhibits consistent convergence across all datasets, highlighting its superior
performance and practical efficiency compared to Adam, AdamX and AdamBS. Additional experimental
results in Appendix F further reinforce the superior performance of AdamCB.


                                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Reproducibility Statement
For each theoretical result, we present the complete set of assumptions in the main paper and the
detailed proofs of the main results are provided in the appendix, along with experimental details and
additional experiments in Appendix F to reproduce the main experimental results.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Se Young Chun and Byung Hyun Lee for bringing the previous work
(Liu et al., 2020) to our attention. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation
of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. RS-2022-NR071853 and
RS-2023-00222663) and by AI-Bio Research Grant through Seoul National University.

References
Ahmet Alacaoglu, Yura Malitsky, Panayotis Mertikopoulos, and Volkan Cevher. A new regret
  analysis for adam-type algorithms. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 202–
  210. PMLR, 2020.
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Yoav Freund, and Robert E Schapire. The nonstochastic multiarmed
  bandit problem. SIAM journal on computing, 32(1):48–77, 2002.
Aman Bansal, Shubham Anand Jain, and Bharat Khandelwal. Bag of tricks for faster & stable image
 classification. CS231n Course Project Report, 2022. URL https://cs231n.stanford.edu/
 reports/2022/pdfs/122.pdf.
Jinghui Chen, Dongruo Zhou, Yiqi Tang, Ziyan Yang, Yuan Cao, and Quanquan Gu. Closing the
   generalization gap of adaptive gradient methods in training deep neural networks. In Proceedings
   of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
Yineng Chen, Zuchao Li, Lefei Zhang, Bo Du, and Hai Zhao. Bidirectional looking with a novel
  double exponential moving average to adaptive and non-adaptive momentum optimizers. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4764–4803. PMLR, 2023.
Alexandre Défossez, Léon Bottou, Francis Bach, and Nicolas Usunier. A simple convergence proof
  of adam and adagrad. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZPQhzTSWA7.
Timothy Dozat. Incorporating nesterov momentum into adam. International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2016.
John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and
  stochastic optimization. Journal of machine learning research, 12(7), 2011.
Rajiv Gandhi, Samir Khuller, Srinivasan Parthasarathy, and Aravind Srinivasan. Dependent rounding
  and its applications to approximation algorithms. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 53(3):324–360,
  2006.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Angelos Katharopoulos and François Fleuret. Not all samples are created equal: Deep learning with
  importance sampling. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2525–2534. PMLR,
  2018.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In 3rd International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015,
  Conference Track Proceedings, 2015.
Rui Liu, Tianyi Wu, and Barzan Mozafari. Adam with bandit sampling for deep learning. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:5393–5404, 2020.

                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie.
  A convnet for the 2020s. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 11976–11986, 2022.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2019.
Liangchen Luo, Yuanhao Xiong, and Yan Liu. Adaptive gradient methods with dynamic bound
  of learning rate. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=Bkg3g2R9FX.
Lam Nguyen, Phuong Ha Nguyen, Marten Dijk, Peter Richtárik, Katya Scheinberg, and Martin
  Takác. Sgd and hogwild! convergence without the bounded gradients assumption. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3750–3758. PMLR, 2018.
Vivak Patel, Shushu Zhang, and Bowen Tian. Global convergence and stability of stochastic gradient
  descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:36014–36025, 2022.
Sashank J Reddi, Ahmed Hefny, Suvrit Sra, Barnabas Poczos, and Alex Smola. Stochastic variance
  reduction for nonconvex optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  314–323. PMLR, 2016.
Sashank J Reddi, Satyen Kale, and Sanjiv Kumar. On the convergence of adam and beyond. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Tijmen Tieleman and Geoffrey Hinton. Rmsprop: Divide the gradient by a running average of its
   recent magnitude. coursera: Neural networks for machine learning. COURSERA Neural Networks
   Mach. Learn, 17, 2012.
Phuong Thi Tran et al. On the convergence proof of amsgrad and a new version. IEEE Access, 7:
  61706–61716, 2019.
Taishi Uchiya, Atsuyoshi Nakamura, and Mineichi Kudo. Algorithms for adversarial bandit problems
  with multiple plays. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 375–389.
  Springer, 2010.
Yushun Zhang, Congliang Chen, Naichen Shi, Ruoyu Sun, and Zhi-Quan Luo. Adam can converge
  without any modification on update rules. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  28386–28399, 2022.
Juntang Zhuang, Tommy Tang, Yifan Ding, Sekhar C Tatikonda, Nicha Dvornek, Xenophon Pa-
  pademetris, and James Duncan. Adabelief optimizer: Adapting stepsizes by the belief in observed
  gradients. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:18795–18806, 2020.
Fangyu Zou, Li Shen, Zequn Jie, Weizhong Zhang, and Wei Liu. A sufficient condition for conver-
  gences of adam and rmsprop. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 11127–11135, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
A     Auxiliary Lemmas
Definition 1. A function f : Rd → R is convex if for all u, v ∈ Rd , and all λ ∈ [0, 1],
                            λf (u) + (1 − λ)f (v) ≥ f (λu + (1 − λ)v)
Lemma 3. If a function f : Rd → R is convex, then for all u, v ∈ Rd ,
                                 f (v) ≥ f (u) + ∇f (u)⊤ (v − u)
          ⊤
where (−) denotes the transpose of (−).
Lemma 4 (Cauchy-Schwarz inequality). For all n ≥ 1, ai , bi ∈ R, (1 ≤ i ≤ n),
                                  n
                                           !2     n
                                                        ! n        !
                                 X               X           X
                                                      2          2
                                     ai bi    ≤      ai         bi
                                  i=1              i=1         i=1
Lemma 5 (Taylor series). For α ∈ R, and 0 ≤ α ≤ 1,
                    X           1                X             1
                         αt =            and       tαt−1 =
                              1−α                          (1 − α)2
                       t≥1                               t≥1
Lemma 6 (Upper bound for the harmonic series). For N ∈ N,
                     N                                N
                    X    1                           X    1  √
                            ≤ ln N + 1      and          √ ≤2 N
                    n=1
                         n                           n=1
                                                           n
Lemma 7. For all n ∈ N, and ai , bi ∈ R such that ai ≥ 0 and bi > 0 for all i ∈ [n],
                                      Pn            n
                                             a         ai
                                      Pni=1 i ≤
                                                   X
                                         j=1 bj        b
                                                   i=1 i


B     Proof for AdamCB Regret Bound
In this section, we provide proofs of key lemmas, Lemma 1 and Lemma 2. They are needed to prove
Theorem 1, which shows the regret bound for AdamCB. In the last of this section, we present the
proof for Theorem 1.

B.1   Auxiliary Lemmas for Lemma 1

We first present auxiliary lemmas and proofs for Lemma 1. Our proofs basically follow arguments
as in Tran et al. (2019). For the sake of completeness, all lemmas from Tran et al. (2019) are restated
with our problem setting.
Lemma 8. For all t ≥ 1, we have
                                         (1 − β1,t )2

                            v̂t = max                 vs for all 1 ≤ s ≤ t ,                        (9)
                                         (1 − β1,s )2
where v̂t is in AdamCB (Algorithm 1).

Proof.n Prove by inductiono on t. Recall that by the update rule on v̂t , we have v̂1 ← v1 , v̂t ←
        (1−β1,t )2
max (1−β1,t−1    )2 v̂t−1 , vt if t ≥ 2. Thus,

                                             (1 − β1,2 )2

                                 v̂2 = max                v̂  ,
                                                             1 2v
                                             (1 − β1,1 )2
                                             (1 − β1,2 )2

                                     = max                v   ,
                                                             1 2v
                                             (1 − β1,1 )2
                                             (1 − β1,2 )2

                                     = max                vs , 1 ≤ s ≤ 2
                                             (1 − β1,s )2


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which we proved for the case when t = 2 in Eq.(9). Now, assume that
                                   (1 − β1,t−1 )2

                     v̂t−1 = max                  vs for all 1 ≤ s ≤ t − 1 ,
                                    (1 − β1,s )2
and Eq.(9) holds for all 1 ≤ j ≤ t − 1. By the update rule on v̂t ,
                (1 − β1,t )2

  v̂t = max                   v̂t−1 , vt
               (1 − β1,t−1 )2
                (1 − β1,t )2              (1 − β1,t−1 )2

      = max                      max                     vs for all 1 ≤ s ≤ t − 1        , vt
               (1 − β1,t−1 )2              (1 − β1,s )2
                         (1 − β1,t )2 (1 − β1,t−1 )2                                    (1 − β1,t )2

      = max max                                        vs for all 1 ≤ s ≤ t − 1 ,                     vt
                       (1 − β1,t−1 )2 (1 − β1,s )2                                     (1 − β1,t−1 )2
                       (1 − β1,t )2                                  (1 − β1,t )2

      = max max                     v s for all 1 ≤ s ≤  t − 1    ,                v t
                       (1 − β1,s )2                                 (1 − β1,t−1 )2
               (1 − β1,t )2

      = max                 vs for all 1 ≤ s ≤ t
               (1 − β1,s )2


which ends the proof.

Lemma 9. For all t ≥ 1, we have
                                                p              L
                                                 v̂t ≤
                                                           γ(1 − β1 )
where v̂t is in AdamCB (Algorithm 1).

Proof. By Lemma 8,
                                         (1 − β1,t )2

                              v̂t = max               vs for all 1 ≤ s ≤ t
                                         (1 − β1,s )2
                                                       1,t     (1−β     )2
Therefore, there is some 1 ≤ s ≤ t such that v̂t = (1−β1,s )2 vs . Recall that by the update rule on vt ,
                                  2
we have vt ← β2 vt−1 + (1 − β2 )gt . This implies
                                                                t
                                                                X
                                            vt = (1 − β2 )            β2t−k gk2
                                                                k=1

Hence,
                                   s
                       p               (1 − β1,t )2
                           v̂t =                    vs
                                       (1 − β1,s )2
                                                                 v
                                                                 u s s−k
                                                                 uX
                                   p                1 − β1,t
                             =         1 − β2                    t   β   g2  2    k
                                                    1 − β1,s
                                                                  k=1
                                                                 v
                                                                 u s s−k
                                                                 uX
                                   p                1 − β1,t
                             ≤         1 − β2                    t   β   ( max ∥gr ∥)2
                                                                             2
                                                    1 − β1,s                      1≤r≤s
                                                                  k=1

Recall the unbiased gradient estimate gt in Eq.(7),
                                               1 X gj,t
                                        gt =
                                              K     npj,t
                                                           j∈Jt

By the triangle inequality property of norms and the fact that pi,t ≥ γ/n and ∥gi,t ∥ ≤ L for all
i ∈ [n] and t ∈ [T ] from Assumption 1, the unbiased gradient estimate is bounded by L/γ, i.e,


                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


∥gt ∥ ≤ L/γ. Therefore,
                                                                             v
                                                                             u s s−k
                                                                             uX
                          p              p                   1 − β1,t
                              v̂t ≤ (L/γ) 1 − β2                             t   β     2
                                                             1 − β1,s
                                                                                 k=1

                                         p          1 − β1,t       1
                                 ≤ (L/γ) 1 − β2                √
                                                    1 − β1,s     1 − β2

                                           1 − β1,t
                                 = (L/γ)
                                           1 − β1,s
                                       L
                                 ≤
                                   γ(1 − β1 )


which ends the proof.



Lemma 10. For the parameter settings and conditions assumed in Lemma 1, we have

                           T                   √
                          X   m2t,u              ln T + 1
                              p       ≤          √               ∥g1:T,u ∥
                          t=1
                               tv̂t,u   (1 − β1 ) 1 − β2 (1 − η)


Proof. Recall that by the update rule on mt , vt , we have mt ← β1,t mt−1 + (1 − β1,t )gt and
vt ← β2 vt−1 + (1 − β2 )gt2 . This implies

                        t                   t
                                                         !                                 t
                        X                   Y                                              X
               mt =         (1 − β1,k )           β1,r       gk ,     vt = (1 − β2 )             β2t−k gk2
                        k=1               r=k+1                                            k=1


Since for all t ≥ 1, v̂t,u ≥ vt,u by Lemma 8, we have

         m2       m2
         p t,u ≤ √ t,u
          tv̂t,u  tvt,u
                 hP                          Q                              i2
                    t                           t
                          k=1 (1 − β1,k )       r=k+1 β1,r           gk,u
                  =        q             Pt
                              (1 − β2 )t k=1 β2t−k gk,u 2
                     P                      Q                  P     Q
                        t               2      t                t      t           2
                        k=1 (1 − β1,k )        r=k+1 β1,r       k=1    r=k+1 β1,r gk,u
                  ≤                        q            Pt
                                             (1 − β2 )t k=1 β2t−k gk,u
                                                                   2
                     P                P
                        t      t−k        t      t−k 2
                        k=1 β1            k=1 β1    gk,u
                  ≤    q             Pt
                          (1 − β2 )t k=1 β2t−k gk,u 2

                                            Pt      t−k 2
                             1               k=1 β1    gk,u
                  ≤          √          q P
                    (1 − β1 ) 1 − β2 t t β t−k g 2
                                                  k=1        2       k,u


where the second inequality is by Lemma 4, the third inequality is from the fact that β1,k ≤ 1
and β1,k ≤ β1 for all 1 ≤ k ≤ T , and the fourth inequality is obtained by applying Lemma 5 to


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Pt     t−k
  k=1 β1   . Therefore,
                                                     Pt     t−k 2
                          m2               1           k=1 β1   gk,u
                          p t,u ≤          √      √  q
                           tv̂t,u (1 − β1 ) 1 − β2 t  P t
                                                            β t−k g 2         k=1      2     k,u
                                                                         t
                                                       1                 X     β1t−k gk,u
                                                                                      2
                                        ≤              √      √     q
                                              (1 − β1 ) 1 − β2 t k=1 β t−k g 2
                                                                                 2         k,u
                                                                         t
                                                       1                 X     β1t−k
                                        =              √      √     q      |gk,u |
                                              (1 − β1 ) 1 − β2 t k=1 β t−k
                                                                                 2
                                                                         t
                                                       1                 X
                                        =              √      √      η t−k |gk,u |
                                              (1 − β1 ) 1 − β2 t k=1


where the second inequality is by Lemma 7 and we define η := √ββ1 . Therefore,
                                                                                     2

                        T                            T     t
                           m2              1            1 X t−k
                           p t,u =
                       X                            X
                                            √          √      η |gk,u |                                     (10)
                       t=1
                            tv̂t,u (1 − β1 ) 1 − β2 t=1 t k=1
                               PT       1
                                              Pt         t−k
It is sufficient to consider      t=1
                                        √
                                          t      k=1 η         |gk,u |. Firstly, this can be expanded as:
              T       t
             X   1 X t−k
                 √       η |gk,u | = η 0 |g1,u |
             t=1
                   t k=1
                                      1
                                   + √ η 1 |g1,u + η 0 |g2,u |]

                                        2
                                      1   2
                                   + √ η |g1,u + η 1 |g2,u | + η 0 |g3,u |]

                                        3
                                   + ···
                                       1
                                   + √ η T −1 |g1,u + η T −2 |g2,u | + · · · + η 0 |gT,u |]

                                        T
Changing the role of |g1,u | as the common factor, we obtain,
            T        t
           X    1 X t−k                           0    1 1      1 2           1 T −1
               √        η |gk,u | = |g1,u | η + √ η + √ η + · · · + √ η
           t=1
                 t k=1                                  2        3             T

                                                  1 0      1 1           1 T −2
                                     + |g2,u | √ η + √ η + · · · + √ η
                                                   2        3             T

                                                  1 0      1 1           1 T −3
                                     + |g3,u |   √   η +  √   η + ··· + √   η
                                                   3        4             T
                                     + ···
                                                1
                                     + |gT,u | √ η 0
                                                 T
In other words,
                                T       t               T           T
                               X   1 X t−k             X           X    1
                                   √       η |gk,u | =     |gt,u |     √ η k−t
                               t=1
                                     t k=1             t=1         k=t
                                                                         k
Moreover, since
             T           T            T         T −t
            X    1 k−t X 1 k−t   1 X k−t    1 X k       1    1
                √ η   ≤     √ η =√       η =√        η ≤√
            k=t
                  k     k=t
                             t     t k=t      t k=0       t 1−η


                                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the last inequality is by Lemma 5, we obtain
               T       t               T                             T
              X   1 X t−k             X           1    1        1 X 1
                  √       η |gk,u | ≤     |gt,u | √         =          √ |gt,u |
              t=1
                    t k=1             t=1
                                                    t 1−η     1 − η t=1 t
Furthermore, since
                        v
         T
                        u T            !2 v
                                          u T u T
                                                 v
        X   1           u X   1           uX    1u X        √
            √ |gt,u | = t     √ |gt,u |  ≤t            2 ≤ ( 1 + ln T )∥g
                                                      gt,u               1:T,u ∥
                                                 t
        t=1
             t            t=1
                               t            t=1
                                                t t=1

where the first inequality is by Lemma 4 and the last inequality is by Lemma 6, we obtain
                              T      t                √
                             X    1 X t−k               1 + ln T
                                 √     η |gk,u | ≤                ∥g1:T,u ∥
                             t=1
                                   t                     1−η
                                     k=1

Hence, by Eq.(10),
                           T                   √
                          X   m2t,u              1 + ln T
                              p       ≤          √               ∥g1:T,u ∥
                          t=1
                               tv̂t,u   (1 − β1 ) 1 − β2 (1 − η)
which ends the proof.



B.2   Proof for Lemma 1

Lemma 1. Suppose Assumptions 1-2 hold. AdamCB (Algorithm 1) with a mini-batch of size K,
which is formed dynamically by distribution pt , achieves the following upper-bound for the cumulative
online regret Rπonline (T ) over T iterations,
                                                 v
                                            √              T
                                      √
                                                 u
                                                                        ∥gj,t ∥2
                                                                   X
                                                 u 1 X
                 Rπonline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + dρ2 t 2             Ept                  + ρ3
                                                   n K t=1              (pj,t )2
                                                                          j∈Jt

where ρ1 , ρ2 , and ρ3 are defined as follows:
                                              √
                 D2 L                       α 1 + ln T                                     dβ1 D2 L
    ρ1 =                   , ρ2 =              √               ,           ρ3 =
           2αγ(1 − β1 )2             (1 − β1 )2 1 − β2 (1 − η)                       2αγ(1 − β1 )2 (1 − λ)2
Note that d is the dimension of parameter space and the inputs of Algorithm 1 follows these
conditions: (a) αt = √αt , (b) β1 , β2 ∈ [0, 1), β1,t := β1 λt−1 for all t ∈ [T ], λ ∈ (0, 1), (c)
        √
η = β1 / β2 ≤ 1, and (d) γ ∈ [0, 1).


Proof. Recall Lemma 3.
Since ft : Rd → R is convex, we have, ft (θ∗ ) − ft (θt ) ≥ gtT (θ∗ − θt ). This means that
                                                                 d
                                                                 X
                        ft (θt ) − ft (θ∗ ) ≤ gtT (θt − θ∗ ) =                       ∗
                                                                       gt,u (θt,u − θ,u )
                                                                 u=1

From the parameter update rule presented in Algorithm 1,
                                             p
                         θt+1 = θt − αt mt / v̂t

                                            β1,t         (1 − β1,t )
                               = θt − αt √ mt−1 +           √        gt
                                              v̂t             v̂t
                                                                                       ∗
We focus on the u-th dimension of the parameter vector θt ∈ Rd . Substract the scalar θ,u and square
both sides of the above update rule, we have,
                                                                                 !                                  !2
           ∗ 2             ∗ 2              β1,t           (1 − β1,t )                        ∗            mt,u
(θt+1,u − θ,u ) = (θt,u − θ,u ) − 2αt      p       mt−1,u + p          gt,u          (θt,u − θ,u ) + αt2   p
                                             v̂t,u             v̂t,u                                        v̂t,u


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We can rearrange the above equation
                                              p
                              ∗                v̂t,u             ∗ 2               ∗ 2

                gt,u (θt,u − θ,u )=                     (θt,u − θ,u ) − (θt+1,u − θ,u )
                                        2αt (1 − β1,t )
                                            αt      m2         β1,t
                                    +               p t,u −                             ∗
                                                                        mt−1,u (θt,u − θ,u )           (11)
                                        2(1 − β1,t ) v̂t,u  (1 − β1,t )
Note that,
                                  " T                 T
                                                                 #     " T                      #
                                   X                  X                 X
                                                                                            ∗
             Rπonline (T ) = E
                            ft (θt ) − min      ft (θ) = E        [ft (θt ) − ft (θ )]
                                       θ∈Rd
                        t=1                 t=1               t=1
                      PT
where θ∗ ∈ arg minθ∈Rd t=1 ft (θ) is defined as the optimal parameter that minimizes the cumu-
lative loss over given T iterations. Hence,
                       " T                    #       " T             #    " T d                   #
                        X                 ∗
                                                       X T          ∗
                                                                            XX                 ∗
   Rπonline (T ) = E         [ft (θt ) − ft (θ )] ≤ E     gt (θt − θ ) = E       gt,u (θt,u − θ,u )    (12)
                       t=1                           t=1                     t=1 u=1
Combining Eq.(11) with Eq.(12), we obtain
                   " d T        p                                              #
    π
                    XX             v̂t,u              ∗ 2               ∗ 2

  Ronline (T ) ≤ E                           (θt,u − θ,u ) − (θt+1,u − θ,u )
                    u=1 t=1
                            2αt (1 − β1,t )
                   " d T                        #     " d T                                     #
                    XX          αt       m2t,u          XX         β1,t              ∗
               +E                        p        +E                        mt−1,u (θ,u − θt,u )
                    u=1 t=1
                            2(1 − β1,t ) v̂t,u          u=1 t=2
                                                                (1 − β1,t )
On the other hand, for all t ≥ 2, we have
                            ∗            (v̂t−1,u )1/4 ∗            √        mt−1,u
                mt−1,u (θ,u   − θt,u ) = √             (θ,u − θt,u ) αt−1
                                               αt−1                       (v̂t−1,u )1/4
                                                                           m2t−1,u
                                         p
                                            v̂t−1,u ∗
                                       ≤            (θ,u − θt,u )2 + αt−1 p
                                           2αt−1                         2 v̂t−1,u
where the inequality is from the fact that pq ≤ p2 /2 + q 2 /2 for any p, q ∈ R. Hence,
                             " d T         p                                                 #
             π
                              XX              v̂t,u                 ∗ 2               ∗ 2

            Ronline (T ) ≤ E                               (θt,u − θ,u ) − (θt+1,u − θ,u )
                              u=1 t=1
                                       2αt (1 − β1,t )
                             " d T                            #
                              XX            αt       m2t,u
                         +E                         p
                              u=1 t=1
                                       2(1 − β1,t ) v̂t,u
                             " d T                               #
                              X X β1,t αt−1 m2t−1,u
                         +E                         p
                              u=1 t=2
                                       2(1 − β1,t ) v̂t−1,u
                             " d T           p                             #
                              X X β1,t v̂t−1,u
                                                              ∗
                         +E                                 (θ,u − θt,u )2
                              u=1 t=2
                                       2α t−1 (1  − β 1,t )
Since β1,t ≤ β1 (1 ≤ t ≤ T ), we obtain
            d X T       p                              d X T       p
           X        β1,t v̂t−1,u        ∗          2
                                                      X        β1,t v̂t−1,u      ∗
                                      (θ,u − θt,u ) ≤                          (θ,u − θt,u )2
           u=1 t=2
                   2αt−1 (1 − β 1,t )                 u=1 t=2
                                                              2αt−1 (1 − β 1 )
Moreover, we have
                  d XT                          d T −1
                         β1,t αt−1 m2t−1,u               β1,t+1 αt   m2
                                                                     p t,u
                X                              X   X
                                    p        =
                u=1 t=2
                        2(1 − β1,t ) v̂t−1,u   u=1 t=1
                                                       2(1 − β1,t+1 ) v̂t,u
                                                            d X
                                                              T
                                                                         αt       m2
                                                                                  p t,u
                                                            X
                                                       ≤
                                                            u=1 t=1
                                                                    2(1 − β1,t+1 ) v̂t,u
                                                            d X
                                                              T
                                                                        αt    m2
                                                                              p t,u
                                                            X
                                                       ≤
                                                            u=1 t=1
                                                                    2(1 − β1 ) v̂t,u


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the last inequality is from the assumption that β1,t ≤ β1 < 1(1 ≤ t ≤ T ). Therefore,

       d X
         T                         d X T                          d X T
                   αt      m2              β1,t αt−1 m2t−1,u               αt m2t,u
                           p t,u +
       X                           X                             X
                                                      p        ≤               p
       u=1 t=1
               2(1 − β1,t ) v̂t,u u=1 t=2 2(1 − β1,t ) v̂t−1,u   u=1 t=1
                                                                         1 − β1 v̂t,u

and we obtain the bound for Rπonline (T ) as:
                                 " d T        p                                                           #
                                  XX          v̂t,u                 ∗ 2               ∗ 2
             Rπonline (T ) ≤ E

                                                           (θt,u − θ,u ) − (θt+1,u − θ,u )                         (13)
                              u=1 t=1
                                      2α t (1 −   β 1,t )
                             " d T                       #
                              X X αt m2t,u
                          +E                    p                                                                  (14)
                              u=1 t=1
                                      1 − β1 v̂t,u
                             " d T          p                            #
                              X X β1,t v̂t−1,u
                                                             ∗         2
                          +E                              (θ − θt,u )                                              (15)
                              u=1 t=2
                                      2αt−1 (1 − β1 ) ,u

Now, we start to bound each term: (13), (14), and (15).


Bound for the term (13).         Let us rewrite the term (13) as
       " d T          p                                                  #
        XX             v̂t,u                  ∗ 2                 ∗ 2

    E                                (θt,u − θ,u ) − (θt+1,u − θ,u )
      u=1 t=1
               2αt (1 − β1,t )
       " d         p                              #      " d T         p                              #
         X            v̂1,u                  ∗ 2
                                                          XX               v̂ t,u                ∗ 2
    =E                             (θ1,u − θ,u ) +E                                     (θt,u − θ,u )
         u=1
              2α 1 (1  −   β 1,1 )                        u=1 t=2
                                                                  2α t (1  −    β 1,t )
       " d T              p                               #     " d            p                            #
        XX                    v̂t−1,u                ∗ 2
                                                                  X               v̂T,u                 ∗ 2
    −E                                      (θt,u − θ,u ) − E                                 (θT,u − θ,u )
        u=1 t=2
                  2αt−1 (1 − β1,t−1 )                             u=1
                                                                       2αT (1 − β1,T )

                                            √
Omitting the last term and replacing αt = α/ t(1 ≤ t ≤ T ), we obtain
                     " d T      p                                                #
                      XX           v̂t,u               ∗ 2                ∗ 2

                 E                           (θt,u − θ,u ) − (θt+1,u − θ,u )
                   u=1 t=1
                            2αt (1 − β1,t )
                      " d     p                          #
                       X         v̂1,u              ∗ 2
                 ≤E                       (θ1,u − θ,u )
                       u=1
                           2α(1 − β1,1 )
                         " d T                       p            p                 !#
                    1     XX
                                            ∗ 2         tv̂ t,u     (t − 1)v̂ t−1,u
                 +     E          (θt,u − θ,u )                 −
                   2α     u=1 t=2
                                                   (1 − β1,t )     (1 − β1,t−1 )

                                                                             (1−β1,t )2
                                                                        n                                 o
Recall that by the update rule on v̂t , we have v̂t,u ← max                 (1−β1,t−1 )2 v̂t−1,u , vt,u    . Therefore,
         (1−β1,t)2
v̂t,u ≥ (1−β1,t−1 )2 v̂t−1,u , and hence

                                                    q
                                                            (1−β
                                                               1,t )2
                                                        t (1−β1,t−1 )2 v̂t−1,u
                p            p                                                        p
                 tv̂t,u        (t − 1)v̂t−1,u                                           (t − 1)v̂t−1,u
                         −                    ≥                                   −
             (1 − β1,t )      (1 − β1,t−1 )                 (1 − β1,t )                (1 − β1,t−1 )
                                                   p              p
                                                      tv̂t−1,u      (t − 1)v̂t−1,u
                                                =               −
                                                  (1 − β1,t−1 )    (1 − β1,t−1 )
                                                >0


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                     √             √
                                                        tv̂t,u        (t−1)v̂t−1,u
Now by the positivity of the essential formula (1−β1,t ) − (1−β1,t−1 ) , we obtain
             " d T           p                                                        #
              XX                 v̂t,u                 ∗ 2                     ∗ 2

           E                                  (θt,u − θ,u ) − (θt+1,u − θ,u      )
              u=1 t=1
                        2α t (1  −   β 1,t )
                    d    p                      " d T           p              p                  !#
              D2 X           v̂1,u        D2      XX               tv̂t,u          (t − 1)v̂t−1,u
           ≤                          +       E                            −
              2α u=1 (1 − β1 )            2α      u=1 t=2
                                                               (1 − β1,t )       (1 − β1,t−1 )
                    d
                                                              √
                         p
              D2 X          T v̂T,u              dD2 L
           ≤                             ≤                  2
                                                                T
              2α u=1 (1 − β1,T )             2αγ(1 − β1 )
where the last inequality is by Lemma 9.

Bound for the term (14).
         " d T                  #            " d T              #
           X X αt m2t,u                α      X X m2t,u
       E                 p        =        E          p
           u=1 t=1
                   1 − β1 v̂t,u     1 − β1    u=1 t=1
                                                         tv̂t,u
                                             " d          √                            #
                                       α      X              ln T + 1
                                  ≤        E                √                 ∥g1:T,u ∥
                                    1 − β1    u=1
                                                  (1 − β1 ) 1 − β2 (1 − η)
                                             √                    d
                                           α ln T + 1           X
                                  =           √                     E [∥g1:T,u ∥]
                                    (1 − β1 )2 1 − β2 (1 − η) u=1
where the last inequality is by Lemma 10.
                                                                                           √
Bound for the term (15). By Assumption 2 that ∥θm − θn ∥ ≤ D for any m, n ∈ [T ], αt = α/ t,
and β1,t = β1 λt−1 ≤ β1 ≤ 1, we obtain
      " d T         p                       #               " d T                        #
        X X β1,t v̂t−1,u                         D2          XX          q
                                 ∗        2
    E                          (θ − θt,u ) ≤              E          β1,t (t − 1)v̂t−1,u
        u=1 t=2
                2αt−1 (1 − β1 ) ,u            2α(1 − β1 )    u=1 t=2
Therefore, from Lemma 9, we obtain
          " d T         p                       #                 " T               #
            X X β1,t v̂t−1,u
                                     ∗        2      dD2 L         X       p
        E                          (θ − θt,u ) ≤                E      β1,t (t − 1)
            u=1 t=2
                    2αt−1 (1 − β1 ) ,u            2αγ(1 − β1 )2    t=2
Note that
  T                  T                      T                  T
 X        p          X
                            t−1
                                p           X   p        t−1
                                                               X                                          β1
      β1,t (t − 1) =   β1 λ       (t − 1) ≤   β1 (t − 1)λ    ≤   β1 tλt−1 ≤
  t=2                        t=2                      t=2                         t=2
                                                                                                       (1 − λ)2
where the first inequality is from the fact that β1 ≤ 1, and the last inequality is from Lemma 5. Thus,
the bound for the term (15) is
                   " d T          p                          #
                    X X β1,t v̂t−1,u
                                                 ∗         2             dβ1 D2 L
                 E                            (θ,u − θt,u ) ≤
                    u=1 t=2
                              2αt−1 (1 − β1 )                    2αγ(1 − β1 )2 (1 − λ)2

We bounded for terms (13), (14), and (15).
                                                         √                 d
                                dD2 L      √          α ln T + 1          X
           Rπonline (T ) ≤                   T+           √                   E [∥g1:T,u ∥]
                             2αγ(1 − β1 )2      (1 − β1 )2 1 − β2 (1 − η) u=1
                                   dβ1 D2 L
                        +
                             2αγ(1 − β1 )2 (1 − λ)2
Hence,
                                                          d
                                                  √       X
                              Rπonline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + ρ2   E [∥g1:T,u ∥] + ρ3                               (16)
                                                            u=1


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where ρ1 , ρ2 , and ρ3 are defined as the following:
                                               √
                    D2 L                     α 1 + ln T                      dβ1 D2 L
      ρ1 =                  2
                              , ρ2 =              √            , ρ3 =
               2αγ(1 − β1 )                     2
                                     (1 − β1 ) 1 − β2 (1 − η)          2αγ(1 − β1 )2 (1 − λ)2
                    Pd
Now, we consider u=1 E [∥g1:T,u ∥], which is in the right-hand side of Eq.(16).
                                    v              v          " T       #      v
    d                       d        u T             u d
                                                                             √ uX
                                                                                 u T
   X                       X    1 t u  X
                                              2
                                                     u  X   1     X
                                                                       2
       E [∥g1:T,u ∥] = d          E         gt,u ≤ d
                                                    t        E       gt,u = dt         E [∥gt ∥2 ]
   u=1                     u=1
                                d       t=1             u=1
                                                            d     t=1               t=1

where the first inequality is due to the concavity of square root. Recall that the unbiased gradient
                  1
                    P        gj,t
estimate is gt = K    j∈Jt npj,t . Hence,
                                            d
                                    √       X
                Rπonline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + ρ2   Ept [∥g1:T,u ∥] + ρ3
                                                  u=1
                                              v
                                              u T
                                     √      √ uX
                               ≤ ρ1 d T + ρ2 dt   Ept [∥gt ∥2 ] + ρ3
                                                               t=1
                                              v                                                
                                              u
                                              u T                                           2
                                     √      √ uX       1 X gj,t
                               ≤ ρ1 d T + ρ2 du                                                  + ρ3
                                                                                                
                                                  Ept 
                                              t         K   np t=1                    j,t
                                                                            j∈Jt


The last inequality uses Jensen’s inequality to the convex function ∥ · ∥2 . Therefore,
                                               v                                 
                                               u                                2
                                           √             T
                                   √
                                               u
                                               u     1  X           X    gj,t 
               Rπonline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + ρ2 du                                      + ρ3
                                                                 
                                               t n2 K 2     Ept 
                                                        t=1
                                                                         p  j,t
                                                                               j∈Jt
                                            v                       
                                            u
                                         √ u       T
                                  √         u 1 X         X ∥gj,t ∥2
                            ≤ ρ1 d T + ρ2 d t 2      Ep              + ρ3
                                              n K t=1 t     (pj,t )2
                                                                            j∈Jt

where the last inequality is by Lemma 4. This completes the proof of Lemma 1.


B.3   Proof for Lemma 2
                                                          q
                                                            n ln (n/K)
Lemma 2. Suppose Assumptions 1-2 hold. If we set γ = min 1, (e−1)T K , the batch selection
(Algorithm 2) and the weight update rule (Algorithm 3) following AdamCB (Algorithm 1) implies
                                                              
           T        X ∥gj,t ∥2             T        X ∥gj,t ∥2         r
          X                               X                                       n
              Ept                 − min     Ept                =O    KnT ln
          t=1
                         (pj,t )2      pt
                                          t=1
                                                        (pj,t )2                 K
                     j∈Jt                                          j∈Jt


                       p2min              ∥2
                                                      2

                                     ∥g           L
Proof. We set ℓj,t =     L2        − (pj,t
                                       j,t )
                                             2 + p2           in Algorithm 3. Since ∥gi,t ∥ ≤ L and pi,t ≥ pmin
                                                 min
for all i ∈ [n]
             Pnand t ∈ [T ] by Assumption 1, we have ℓi,t ∈ [0, 1].
Let Wt := i=1 wt . Then, for any t ∈ [T ],
                     Wt          X           wi,t      X wi,t
                           =                       +
                    Wt−1                    Wt−1               Wt−1
                              i∈[n]\Snull,t          i∈Snull,t

                                 X          wi,t−1            Kγ         X wi,t−1
                           =                       exp −         ℓ̂i,t +
                                            Wt−1               n           Wt−1
                               i∈[n]\Snull,t                                   i∈Snull,t



                                                              21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The last equality is by the weight update rule in Algorithm 3. From the probability computation in
Algorithm 2, we have

                                                  wi,t−1       γ     Kγ
                           pi,t = K (1 − γ) Pn               +     ≥
                                                 j=1 w j,t−1   n      n
Thus, we obtain the following bound,
                                                    Kγ         Kγℓi,t
                                           0≤          ℓ̂i,t =        ≤ ℓi,t ≤ 1
                                                    n          npi,t

By the fact that e−x ≤ 1 − x + (e − 2)x2 for all x ∈ [0, 1], and considering Kγ              n ℓ̂i,t as x, we have

           Wt          X          wi,t−1        Kγ                     Kγ  2                 X wi,t−1
                  ≤                         1−      ℓ̂i,t + (e − 2)         ℓ̂i,t        +
          Wt−1                    Wt−1           n                       n                           Wt−1
                    i∈[n]\Snull,t                                                          i∈Snull,t

                            X          wi,t−1     Kγ                      Kγ  2
                  =1+                          −       ℓ̂i,t + (e − 2)         ℓ̂i,t
                                       Wt−1        n                       n
                         i∈[n]\Snull,t
                                       pi,t   γ
                                        K − n

                            X                       Kγ                      Kγ  2
                  =1+                            −         ℓ̂i,t + (e − 2)         ℓ̂i,t
                                        1−γ           n                       n
                               i∈[n]\Snull,t

                                   γ               X                          K(e − 2)γ 2             X
                    ≤1−                                        pi,t ℓ̂i,t +                                       pi,t (ℓ̂i,t )2
                                n(1 − γ)                                      n2 (1 − γ)
                                               i∈[n]\Snull,t                                      i∈[n]\Snull,t
                                                                                         2
                                   γ               X                 K(e − 2)γ X
                    ≤1−                                        ℓi,t + 2          ℓ̂i,t
                                n(1 − γ)                              n (1 − γ)
                                               i∈Jt \Snull,t                                 i∈[n]

The last inequality uses the fact that pi,t ℓ̂i,t = ℓi,t ≤ 1 for i ∈ Jt and pi,t ℓ̂i,t = 0 for i ∈
                                                                                                 / Jt . Taking
logarithms and using the fact that ln(1 + x) ≤ x for all x > −1 gives
                              Wt        γ                        X                   K(e − 2)γ 2 X
                        ln        ≤−                                       ℓi,t +                  ℓ̂i,t
                             Wt−1    n(1 − γ)                                        n2 (1 − γ)
                                                           i∈Jt \Snull,t                                 i∈[n]

By summing over t, we obtain
                                        T                                                                T
                        WT       γ     X                        X                   K(e − 2)γ 2 X X
                   ln      ≤−                                             ℓi,t +                    ℓ̂i,t
                        W1    n(1 − γ) t=1                                          n2 (1 − γ) t=1
                                                          i∈Jt \Snull,t                                      i∈[n]
                                                                                                             PT
On the other hand, for the sequence {Jt∗ }Tt=1 of batches with the optimal t=1
                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                           j∈Jt ℓj,t among
all subsets Jt containing K elements,
                                 P                P
                        WT         j∈Jt∗ wj,T        j∈Jt∗ ln wj,T       K
                     ln     ≥ ln               ≥                   + ln
                        W1            W1                 K                n
                                                    γ X X                      K
                                               =−                   ℓ̂j,t + ln
                                                    n      ∗
                                                                               n
                                                                              j∈Jt t:j ∈S
                                                                                       / null,t

The first line above uses the fact that
                                    X
                                                     wj,T ≥ K(Πj∈Jt∗ wj,T )1/K
                                           j∈Jt∗
                                           P
and the second line uses wj,T = exp −(Kγ/n) t:j ∈S
                                                / null,t ℓ̂j,t .
From combining results,
                                                         T                                                      T
         X        X                    n K         1    X                     X                      (e − 2)Kγ X X
                             ℓ̂j,t +     ln   ≤                                          ℓi,t +                    ℓ̂i,t
                                       γ    n   (1 − γ) t=1                                           n(1 − γ) t=1
        j∈Jt∗ t:j ∈S
                  / null,t                                               i∈Jt \Snull,t                                     i∈[n]



                                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



        P            P                       1
                                                     PT       P
Since      j∈Jt∗         t:j∈Snull,t ℓj,t ≤ 1−γ         t=1     i∈Snull,t ℓi,t trivially holds, we have

                                                                              T X                   T
X         X                    X        X                   n K         1    X           (e − 2)Kγ X X
                     ℓ̂j,t +                       ℓj,t +     ln   ≤              ℓi,t +               ℓ̂i,t
                                                            γ    n   (1 − γ) t=1          n(1 − γ) t=1
j∈Jt∗ t:j ∈S
          / null,t             j∈Jt∗ t:j∈Snull,t                                      i∈Jt                       i∈[n]
                           PT          P                                     PT       P
Let LMIN-K (T ) :=               t=1     j∈Jt∗ ℓj,t and LEXP3-K (T ) :=         t=1     j∈Jt ℓj,t . Taking the expectation
of both sides and using the properties of ℓ̂i,t , we obtain,
                                                                                     T
                                       n K         1                      (e − 2)Kγ X X
                LMIN-K (T ) +            ln   ≤         E[LEXP3-K (T )] +               ℓi,t
                                       γ    n   (1 − γ)                    n(1 − γ) t=1
                                                                                                      i∈[n]

This is because the expectation of ℓ̂j,t is ℓj,t from the fact that DepRound selects i-th sample with
                        PT Pn
probability pi,t . Since t=1 i=1 ℓi,t ≤ nLMIN-K   K
                                                    (T )
                                                         , we have the following statement,
                                                                                               n    n
                           LMIN-K (T ) − E[LEXP3-K (T )] ≤ (e − 1)γLMIN-K (T ) +                 ln
                                                                                               γ K
Using
      the
       q
            fact that  LMIN-K (T ) ≤ T K and choosing the input parameter as γ                                           =
          n ln (n/K)
min 1, (e−1)T K , we obtain the following,

                                                               √
                                                      r               r
                                                              n               n
               LMIN-K (T ) − E[LEXP3-K (T )] ≤ 2 e − 1 KnT ln   ≤ 2.63 KnT ln
                                                              K               K
Therefore, considering the scaling factor, we have:
    T                              T
                 ∥gj,t ∥2                         ∥gj,t ∥2      L2
   X        X                     X          X
       Ept                  − min     E p                    =       (LMIN-K (T ) − E[LEXP3-K (T )])
   t=1
                 (pj,t )2      pt
                                  t=1
                                          t
                                                  (pj,t )2     p2min
            j∈Jt                             j∈Jt

                                                               2.63L2
                                                                       r
                                                                                   n
                                                             ≤ 2         KnT ln
                                                                pmin               K
                                                                  r
                                                                               n
                                                             =O       KnT ln
                                                                              K
This completes the proof of Lemma 2.


                                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.4   Proof for Theorem 1 (Regret Bound of AdamCB)

In this section, we present the full proof of Theorem 1. Recall that the online regret only focuses on
the minimization over the sequence of mini-batch datasets {Dt }Tt=1 . Thus, the online regret of the
algorithm at the end of T iterations is defined as
                                          " T                     T
                                                                              #
                                           X                      X
                          π
                        Ronline (T ) := E      f (θt ; Dt ) − min   f (θ; Dt )
                                                                             θ∈Rd
                                                      t=1                           t=1

However, our ultimate goal is to find the optimal selection of the parameter under the full dataset.
Consider an online optimization algorithm π that computes the sequence of model parameters
θ1 , . . . , θT . Then, we can compare the performance of π with the optimal selection of the parameter
minθ∈Rd f (θ; D) under the full dataset. The cumulative regret after T iterations is
                                           " T                               #
                                            X
                                π
                              R (T ) := E       f (θt ; D) − T · min f (θ; D)
                                                                                 θ∈Rd
                                                  t=1

where the expectation is taken with respect to any stochasticity in data sampling and parameter
estimation. Before we prove Theorem 1, we first prove the following lemma.
Lemma 11. The cumulative regret Rπ (T ) can be decomposed into sub-parts which includes the
cumulative online regret Rπonline (T ) and additional terms that are sub-linear in T :
                                                                √
                                    Rπ (T ) = Rπonline (T ) + O( T )

Proof. First, rewrite Rπ (T ) by expanding the terms inside the expectations. We add and subtract
        PT
the sum t=1 f (θt ; Dt ) inside the expectation:
                      " T                                #
                       X
         Rπ (T ) = E        f (θt ; D) − T · min f (θ; D)
                                                       θ∈Rd
                         t=1
                        " T                      T                       T
                                                                                                                    #
                         X                       X                       X
                 =E             f (θt ; D) −           f (θt ; Dt ) +            f (θt ; Dt ) − T · min f (θ; D)
                                                                                                  θ∈Rd
                         t=1                     t=1                     t=1
                                            PT
We also add and subtract the term minθ∈Rd t=1 f (θ; Dt ) inside the expectation. Then, we have
the following,
                  " T               T                T
                                                                                      #
                   X                X                X
         π
       R (T ) = E      f (θt ; D) −   f (θt ; Dt ) +   f (θt ; Dt ) − T · min f (θ; D)
                                                                                              θ∈Rd
                       t=1                  t=1                        t=1
                   " T                      T
                                                                   #         " T                        T
                                                                                                                        #
                    X                       X                                 X                         X
              =E             f (θt ; D) −         f (θt ; Dt ) + E                 f (θt ; Dt ) − min         f (θ; Dt )
                                                                                                θ∈Rd
                       t=1                  t=1                              t=1                        t=1
                   "         T
                                                                             #
                             X
              + E min               f (θ; Dt ) − T · min f (θ; D)
                    θ∈Rd                                    θ∈Rd
                              t=1

Since the second term of the right-hand side in above equation is equal the online cumulative regret
Rπonline (T ), we can rewrite Rπ (T ) as:
                         Rπ (T ) = Rπonline (T )
                                    " T                   T
                                                                         #
                                      X                   X
                                 +E          f (θt ; D) −   f (θt ; Dt )                                                    (17)
                                                t=1                    t=1
                                            "          T
                                                                                                #
                                                       X
                                      + E min                f (θ; Dt ) − T · min f (θ; D)                                  (18)
                                                θ∈Rd                               θ∈Rd
                                                       t=1

Now, let us consider each term in detail.


                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bound for the term (17).        Recall the expression of f (θ; D) and ft ; = f (θ; Dt ):
                                     n
                             1X                                              1 X ℓ(θ; xj , yj )
                  f (θ; D) =       ℓ(θ; xi , yi ),            f (θ; Dt ) =
                             n i=1                                           K      npj,t
                                                                                   j∈Jt

where Jt is the set of indices in the subset dataset (mini-batch) at iteration t, Dt ⊆ D. For any
θ ∈ Rd , we have
                                                   

                                1  X ℓ(θ; xj , yj )     1 X         ℓ(θ; xj , yj )
            E[f (θ; Dt )] = E                       =         E
                                K         npj,t         K               npj,t
                                         j∈Jt                             j∈Jt
                                    n                                        n
                                1 X X ℓ(θ; xi , yi )                     1X
                          =                                    pi,t =          ℓ(θ; xi , yi ) = f (θ; D).
                               K                     npi,t               n i=1
                                    j∈Jt i=1

Note that, by linearity of expectation, we can interchange the expectation and the summation. Since
E[f (θ; Dt )] = f (θ; D), we have for the term (17) as:
                                        " T                T
                                                                         #
                                          X                X
                              (17) = E        f (θt ; D) −   f (θt ; Dt )
                                                 t=1                t=1
                                         " T                            #
                                          X
                                      =E     [f (θt ; D) − f (θt ; Dt )]
                                                 t=1
                                           T
                                           X
                                      =          E[f (θt ; D) − f (θt ; Dt )] = 0
                                           t=1

Bound for the term (18). Let θ∗ be the parameter that minimizes the cumulative loss over the full
dataset D, i.e, θ∗ ∈ arg minθ∈Rd f (θ; D). Since θ∗ is optimal for the full dataset, we have:
                                           min f (θ; D) = f (θ∗ ; D)
                                           θ∈Rd

Similarly, denote the optimal parameter for the cumulative regret for mini-batch datasets by θt∗ :=
             PT
arg minθ∈Rd t=1 f (θ; Dt ). Given these notations, we can write the term (18) as:
                "      T
                                                       #    " T                               #
                      X                                       X
                                                                      ∗                  ∗
     (18) = E min         f (θ; Dt ) − T · min f (θ; D) = E       f (θt ; Dt ) − T · f (θ ; D)
                 θ∈Rd                             θ∈Rd
                        t=1                                                      t=1
                                         PT            ∗
We can add and subtract the term t=1 f (θ ; Dt ) inside the expectation.
              " T                                #    " T                 T
                                                                                        #
               X                                       X                  X
            E      f (θt∗ ; Dt ) − T · f (θ∗ ; D) = E     f (θt∗ ; Dt ) −   f (θ∗ ; Dt )
                 t=1                                               t=1                    t=1
                                                                  " T                                #
                                                                   X
                                                                             ∗                  ∗
                                                             +E          f (θ ; Dt ) − T · f (θ ; D)
                                                                  t=1

Note that E[f (θ∗ ; Dt )] = f (θ∗ ; D) holds as we have shown when bounding the term (17). By the
linearity of expectation, we have
                          " T              #    T
                           X                   X
                                     ∗
                        E       f (θ ; Dt ) =      E[f (θ∗ ; Dt )] = T · f (θ∗ ; D)
                              t=1                      t=1
          hP                                     i
            T       ∗                 ∗
Since E     t=1 f (θ ; Dt ) − T · f (θ ; D)  = 0 holds, the term (18) reduces to
                                         " T                               #
                                          X
                                                   ∗              ∗
                                (18) = E      (f (θt ; Dt ) − f (θ ; Dt ))
                                                 t=1
                                            " T                      #
                                             X
                                                      ∗          ∗
                                         =E     (ft (θt ) − ft (θ ))
                                                 t=1



                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By the convexity of ft , we have:
                                       ft (θt∗ ) − ft (θ∗ ) ≤ gtT (θt∗ − θ∗ )
Therefore,                     " T                         #        " T                       #
                                X                                    X
                           E         (ft (θt∗ ) − ft (θ∗ )) ≤ E               gtT (θt∗ − θ∗ )
                               t=1                                      t=1
Using bounded gradients assumption (Assumption 1), i.e, ∥gt ∥ ≤ L/γ (Proof in Lemma 9), and
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality (Lemma 4), we have
                 " T             #    T                              T
                  X                  X                               X
                       T ∗     ∗
        (18) ≤ E     gt (θt − θ ) ≤      E[∥gt ∥∥θt∗ − θ∗ ∥] ≤ (L/γ)   E[∥θt∗ − θ∗ ∥]
                     t=1                        t=1                                         t=1
                                                       √
Recall the parameter update rule, θt+1 ← θt − αt mt /( v̂t + ϵ). Then
                                                              p
                          ∗
                        ∥θt+1  − θ∗ ∥ ≤ ∥θt∗ − θ∗ ∥ + αt mt /( v̂t + ϵ)                           (19)
Now, we claim that ∥mt ∥ is bounded. The update rule for the first moment estimate:
                                 mt ← β1,t mt−1 + (1 − β1,t )gt
Then, the expression for mt is:
                                     t                t
                                                                !
                                    X                Y
                               mt =    (1 − β1,k )         β1,r gk
                                          k=1                     r=k+1
                    t−1
where β1,t = β1 λ         with β1 < 1 and λ < 1. Note that ∥gk ∥ is bounded by L/γ for all k. This
implies that:
                                       t
                                       X                      t
                                                              Y
                            ∥mt ∥ ≤          |1 − β1,k |            β1,r ∥gk ∥
                                       k=1                 r=k+1
                                                t
                                                X                            t
                                                                             Y
                                                                  k−1
                                     ≤ (L/γ)          |1 − β1 λ         |           β1 λr−1
                                                k=1                         r=k+1
                                                t
                                                X               t(t−1)−k(k−1)
                                     ≤ (L/γ)          β1t−k λ         2

                                                k=1
                                                Xt
                                     ≤ (L/γ)          β1t−k
                                                k=1
                                        L
                                 ≤
                                    γ(1 − β1 )
The last inequality is due to Lemma 5. Therefore, the step size in Eq.(19) is bounded by:
                              α ∥m ∥           αt L            αL
                              √t t ≤                  =√
                                v̂t + ϵ   ϵγ(1 − β1 )      tϵγ(1 − β1 )
                              √
We use the fact that αt = α/ t. By summing over T iterations, we obtain
                        T                                T               √
                       X
                                ∗     ∗          αL     X    1      2αL T
                           E[∥θt − θ ∥] ≤                   √ ≤
                       t=1
                                            ϵγ(1 − β1 ) t=1 t      ϵγ(1 − β1 )
The last inequality is by Lemma 6. Finally, we get
                                        T                                 √
                                        X                            2αL2 T          √
                     (18) ≤ (L/γ)             E[∥θt∗ − θ∗ ∥] ≤        2
                                                                                 = O( T )
                                        t=1
                                                                    ϵγ (1 − β1 )
In summary, the cumulative regret Rπ (T ) is decomposed by the following:
                              Rπ (T ) = Rπonline (T ) + (17) + (18)
                              √
where (17) = 0 and (18) = O( T ). Thus, this completes the proof of Lemma 11, saying
                                                             √
                                Rπ (T ) = Rπonline (T ) + O( T )



                                                           26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, we prove the main Theorem 1.

Proof. From Lemma 11, we have shown that the cumulative regret Rπ (T ) can be decomposed into
the online regret Rπonline (T ) with the additional sub-linear terms. Hence, we are left to bound the
cumulative online regret Rπonline (T ). Recall the first key lemma (Lemma 1):
                                                  v
                                           √                 T
                                     √
                                                  u
                                                                       ∥gj,t ∥2
                                                                     X
                  π
                                                  u 1 X
                Ronline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + dρ2 t 2                 Ept               + ρ3
                                                      n K t=1          (pj,t )2
                                                                      j∈Jt

Recall also the second key lemma (Lemma 2):
                                                                    
            T        X ∥gj,t ∥2              T            X ∥gj,t ∥2         r
           X                                X                                         n
               Ept                 − min        Ept                  =O    KnT ln
           t=1
                          (pj,t )2      pt
                                            t=1
                                                              (pj,t )2                K
                     j∈Jt                                j∈Jt

                                                   ∥gj,t ∥2
                             PT         hP                  i
Let we denote M := minpt t=1 Ept            j∈Jt (pj,t )2 . Then by Lemma 2, we have
                                                  
                           T         X ∥gj,t ∥2
                                                                 r
                          X                                                 n
                              Ept  
                                                 2
                                                     = M + C KnT ln
                          t=1
                                          (pj,t )                           K
                                    j∈Jt

where C > 0 is a constant. By plugging above equation to Lemma 1, we obtain
                                       √ s
                               √
                                                      r
              π                          d                      n
            Ronline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + ρ2 √      M + C KnT ln         + ρ3
                                      n K                      K
                                       √                √ s r
                               √         d √              d                n
                         ≤ ρ1 d T + ρ2 √      M + ρ2 √       C KnT ln        + ρ3
                                      n K             n K                 K
                                      √             √             1/4
                               √    ρ2 d √       ρ4 d nT       n
                         = ρ1 d T + √      M+               ln        + ρ3
                                    n K            n      K    K
                     √         √    √                                             √
We use the fact that a + b ≤ a + b in the second inequality and we define ρ4 := ρ2 C.
Now, we should consider M . Using the tower property, we can express M as,
                                                             
                                   X T        X ∥gj,t ∥2
                        M = min         Ept                2
                                                              
                               pt
                                   t=1
                                                   (p j,t )
                                             j∈Jt
                                                                           
                                   X T               X ∥gj,t ∥2
                            = min       Ept Ept                    2
                                                                        | pt 
                               pt
                                   t=1
                                                            (p j,t )
                                                    j∈Jt
                                                                         
                                   X T         n
                                             X X ∥gi,t ∥2
                            = min       Ept                          p 
                                                                    2 i,t
                               pt
                                   t=1        i=1 j∈Jt
                                                            (p i,t )
                                                  " n                 #
                                     T                               2
                                   X          X X          ∥g  i,t ∥
                            = min       Ept                             
                               pt
                                   t=1               i=1
                                                              pi,t
                                             j∈Jt
                                        T
                                               " n               #
                                       X         X ∥gi,t ∥2
                            = K min        Ept
                                  pt
                                       t=1       i=1
                                                        pi,t
For this minimization problem, it can be shown that for every iteration t, the optimal distribution
p∗t is proportional to the gradient norm of individual example.  Formallyi speaking, for any t, the
                                                                ∥gi,t ∥2
                                                        hP
                   ∗
                                              PT           n                              ∥g ∥
optimal solution pt to the problem arg minpt t=1 Ept       i=1 pi,t       is (pj,t )∗ = Pn j,t
                                                                                            ∥gi,t ∥ for
                                                                                          i=1
all j ∈ [n]. By plugging this solution,
                                              T n
                                                                 !2
                                              X X
                                     M =K                  ∥gi,t ∥
                                              t=1    i=1


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By plugging M to the online regret bound expression,
                                √              √                 1/4
      π
                       √          d √            d nT         n
    Ronline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + ρ2 √       M + ρ4              ln        + ρ3
                              n K               n     K       K
                                √ u                                 √
                                     v                      !2
                                            T    n                                  1/4
                       √          d u     X     X                     d nT       n
                 = ρ1 d T + ρ2 √     t K            ∥gi,t ∥ + ρ4              ln        + ρ3
                              n K          t=1  i=1
                                                                     n    K      K
                                                                   √
                                  v                      !2
                                         T     n                                  1/4
                                  u
                       √    √ u      1 X X                          d nT       n
                 = ρ1 d T + dρ2   t               ∥gi,t ∥    + ρ 4         ln         + ρ3
                                     n2 t=1 i=1                    n   K       K

By Assumption 1, ∥gi,t ∥ ≤ L for i ∈ [n] √ and t ∈ [T ]. Then, the second term in the right-hand side
of above
    √    inequality is bounded    by Lρ2  dT , which diminishes by the first term that have order of
O(d T ). Hence, the online regret Rπonline (T ) after T iterations is,
                                                       √                  1/4
                         π
                                           √              d nT         n
                        Ronline (T ) ≤ O(d T ) + O                ln
                                                         n     K       K
Finally, by Lemma 11, we can bound the cumulative regret using the bound of the online regret as
                                                       √                 1/4
          π        π
                                  √          √            d nT        n              √
        R (T ) = Ronline (T ) + O( T ) ≤ O(d T ) + O               ln          + O( T )
                                                         n     K      K
                                √              14 !
                       √         d T       n
               = O d T + 3/4            ln
                               n     K     K

This completes the proof of Theorem 1.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    Proof for Convergence Rate when using Uniform Sampling
To compare the convergence rate between using uniform sampling and bandit sampling, we will
now prove the following Theorem 2. It is important to note that Theorem 2 includes an additional
condition—Assumption 3—which was not present in Theorem 1. This assumption plays a key role
in distinguishing the results between these two theorems.
Theorem 2. Suppose Assumptions 1,2, and 3 hold. The convergence rate for AdamX (variant of
Adam) using uniform sampling is given by:
                                                    √     !
                                             √        d√
                                       O d T + 1/2 T
                                                    n

Proof. We start the proof from the first key lemma (Lemma 1):
Lemma 1. Suppose Assumptions 1-2 hold. AdamCB (Algorithm 1) with a mini-batch of size K,
which is formed dynamically by distribution pt , achieves the following upper-bound for the cumulative
online regret Rπonline (T ) over T iterations,
                                                 v
                                            √              T
                                      √
                                                 u
                                                                        ∥gj,t ∥2
                                                                   X
                    π
                                                 u 1 X
                 Ronline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + dρ2 t 2              Ept                  + ρ3          (20)
                                                   n K t=1              (pj,t )2
                                                                  j∈Jt

where ρ1 , ρ2 , and ρ3 are defined as follows:
                                              √
                 D2 L                       α 1 + ln T                      dβ1 D2 L
    ρ1 =                   ,   ρ2 =            √               , ρ3 =
           2αγ(1 − β1 )2             (1 − β1 )2 1 − β2 (1 − η)        2αγ(1 − β1 )2 (1 − λ)2
Note that d is the dimension of parameter space and the inputs of Algorithm 1 follows these
conditions: (a) αt = √αt , (b) β1 , β2 ∈ [0, 1), β1,t := β1 λt−1 for all t ∈ [T ], λ ∈ (0, 1), (c)
        √
η = β1 / β2 ≤ 1, and (d) γ ∈ [0, 1).

Consider the second term in the right-hand side of Eq.(20),
                                                                                    
                  T         X ∥gj,t ∥2              T              X ∥gj,t ∥2
              1 X                              1    X
                      Ep                 =           Ep Ept                    | pt 
            n2 K t=1 t           (pj,t )2     n2 K t=1 t                (pj,t )2
                           j∈Jt                                    j∈Jt
                                                                                     
                                                    T         n                 2
                                               1    X        X     X    ∥gi,t ∥
                                            = 2        Ep                       pi,t 
                                              n K t=1 t i=1             (pi,t )2
                                                                  j∈Jt
                                                                " n              #
                                                    T                          2
                                               1    X         X    X    ∥gi,t ∥ 
                                            = 2        Ep 
                                              n K t=1 t                  pi,t
                                                             j∈Jt i=1
                                                  T
                                                         " n          #
                                              1 X         X ∥gi,t ∥2
                                            = 2      Ep
                                              n t=1 t i=1 pi,t
                                                          Pn ∥g ∥2
The tower property is used in the first equality. Since i=1 pi,t   i,t
                                                                        is independent to j ∈ Jt , the
mini-batch size K is multiplied in the last equality. Therefore, we can express the cumulative online
regret Rπonline (T ) as:
                                                 v              " n           #
                                            √ u1 X       T
                                        √
                                                 u
                                                                  X ∥gi,t ∥2
                       π
                     Ronline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + dρ2 t          Ep                  + ρ3
                                                     n2 t=1 t i=1 pi,t
In the case when we select samples uniformly, we can set the probability distribution pt to satisfy
pi,t = 1/n for all t ∈ [T ] and i ∈ [n]. By plugging it, we obtain
                                                    v
                                                    u T " n                #
                                         √     √    u1 X X
                     Rπonline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + dρ2 t                ∥gi,t ∥2 + ρ3
                                                        n t=1 i=1


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, recall Assumption 3:
Assumption 3. There exists σ > 0 such that Var(∥gi,t ∥) ≤ σ 2 for all i ∈ [n] and t ∈ [T ]
                            " n           #   n               2
                          1 X           2     1X                   σ2
                                 ∥gi,t ∥ ≤            ∥gi,t ∥ +
                          n i=1               n i=1                n

Therefore, the online regret bound Rπonline (T ) for uniform sampling is,
                                               v                                
                                                    u      T    n
                                                                          !2
                                  √           √    u   1 X X                 2
                                                                             σ 
               Rπonline (T ) = O(d T ) + O  dt 2                  ∥gi,t ∥ +    T
                                                       n t=1 i=1             n

                         √          √ √
Applying the fact that       a+b≤ a + b, we obtain,
                                      v                        
                                         u      T   n
                                                             !2        r !
           π
                            √         √
                                      t1u    X     X               √   T
          Ronline (T ) = O(d T ) + O  d              ∥gi,t ∥  + O   d
                                                                
                                           n2 t=1 i=1                   n


By Assumption 1, ∥gi,t ∥ ≤ L for i ∈ [n]
                                     √ and t ∈ [T ]. Then, the second term in the right-hand side
    √ inequality is bounded by O( dT ), which diminishes by the first term that have order of
of above
O(d T ). Hence, the online regret Rπonline (T ) after T iterations is given by

                                                             √            !
                                                √                d√
                               Rπonline (T ) = O(d T ) + O            T
                                                             n1/2

Finally, by Lemma 11, we can bound the cumulative regret using the online regret, which completes
the regret analysis for uniform sampling.
                                                                √       !
                                         √         √              d √            √
             Rπ (T ) = Rπonline (T ) + O( T ) = O(d T ) + O           T + O( T )
                                                               n1/2
                                       √      !
                              √          d√
                      = O d T + 1/2 T
                                      n


                                                 30
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    D    Correction of AdamBS (Liu et al., 2020)
    This section introduces the corrected analysis for AdamBS (Liu et al., 2020). We use Algorithm 4
    and Algorithm 5 for modified AdamBS.

    Algorithm 4: (Corrected) Adam with Bandit Sampling (AdamBS)
  Input: learning rate {αt }Tt=1 , decay rates {β1,t }Tt=1 , β2 , batch size K, exploration parameter
          γ ∈ [0, 1)
  Initialize: model parameters θ0 ; first moment estimate m0 ← 0; second moment estimate
              v0 ← 0, v̂0 ← 0; sample weights w0i ← 1 for all i ∈ [n]
1 for t = 1 to T do
2     Compute sample distribution pt for all j ∈ [n]
3
                                                               wj,t−1      γ
                                              pj,t = (1 − γ) Pn          +
                                                              i=1 wi,t−1   n
        Select a mini-batch Dt := {(xj , yj )}j∈Jt by sampling with replacement from pt
4       Compute unbiased gradient estimate gt with respect to the mini-batch Dt using Eq.(7)
5       mt ← β1,t mt−1 + (1 − β1,t )gt
6       vt ← β2 vt−1 + (1 −nβ2 )gt2
                                    (1−β1,t )2
                                                   o
7       v̂1 ← v1 , v̂t ← max                       if t ≥ 2
                                   (1−β1,t−1 )2 v̂t−1 , vt
                            √
8       θt+1 ← θt − αt mt /( v̂t + ϵ)
9       wt ← Weight-Update(wt−1 , pt , Jt , {gj,t }j∈Jt , γ) (Algorithm 5)



  Algorithm 5: (Corrected) Weight-Update for AdamBS
  Input: wt−1 , pt , Jt , {gj,t }j∈Jt , and γ ∈ [0, 1)
1 for j = 1 to n do
                              p2         ∥g ∥2

                                                      L2
2     Compute loss ℓj,t = Lmin   2    − (pj,t
                                           j,t )
                                                 2 + p 2   if j ∈ Jt , otherwise, ℓj,t = 0
                                                              min
                                                                           PK        k
                                                                    ℓj,t    k=1 I(j=Jt )
3       Compute unbiased gradient estimate ℓ̂j,t =                          Kpj,t

4       Update sample weights wj,t ← wj,t−1 exp −γ ℓ̂j,t /n
5   return wt

    At iteration t ∈ [T ], AdamBS chooses a mini-batch Dt = {(xj , yj )}j∈Jt of size K according to
    probability distribution pt with replacement. We denote Jt as the set of indices for the mini-batch
    Dt . Then, the algorithm receives the loss, regarding losses from all chosen samples in the mini-batch
                       1
                         P
    D as one loss, is K    j∈Jt ℓj,t , denote as ℓj,t ∈ [0, 1]. The unbiased estimate of the loss ℓ̂j,t is,
                                                      PK
                                                  ℓj,t k=1 I(j = Jtk )
                                          ℓ̂j,t =
                                                          Kpj,t
    We have a following key lemma concerning the rate of convergence of AdamBS.
    Lemma 12 (Corrected
                 q version    of Lemma 1 in Liu et al. (2020)). Suppose Assumptions 1-2 hold. If we
                     n ln n
    set γ = min 1, (e−1)T    , the weight update rule (Algorithm 5) following AdamBS (Algorithm 4)
    implies                                                                                    
                 T
                 X             X ∥gj,t ∥2                     T
                                                              X                X ∥gj,t ∥2                √
                       Ept                      − min             Ept                           = O(K nT ln n)
                 t=1
                                   (pj,t   )2        pt
                                                              t=1
                                                                                     (pj,t   )2
                           j∈Jt                                             j∈Jt


                           p2min                ∥2
                                                          2

                                         ∥g           L
    Proof. We set ℓj,t =     L2        − (pj,t
                                           j,t )
                                                 2 + p2             in Algorithm 5. Since, ∥gi,t ∥2 ≤ L and pi,t ≥ pmin
                                                      min
    for all t ∈ [T ], i ∈ [n] by Assumption 1, we have ℓi,t ∈ [0, 1].


                                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We use the following simple facts, which are immediately derived from the definitions,
    n
    X                  1 X
        pi,t ℓ̂i,t =          ℓj,t := ℓJt t                                                                     (21)
    i=1
                       K j∈Jt
     n                    n                                         n                                n
                                    ℓi,t K             k                   PK
                                                                                I(i = Jtk )
                                        P
                                            k=1 I(i = Jt )
    X                    X                                         X                                X
        pi,t (ℓ̂i,t )2 =     pi,t                          ℓ̂i,t =     ℓi,t k=1             ℓ̂i,t ≤     ℓ̂i,t   (22)
    i=1                  i=1
                                             Kpi,t                 i=1
                                                                                K                   i=1
            Pn
Let Wt :=       i=1 wt . Then, for any t ∈ [T ],
                                                 n
                                          Wt    X   wi,t
                                              =
                                         Wt−1   i=1
                                                    Wt−1
                                                     n
                                                     X wi,t−1      γ
                                                =             exp − ℓ̂i,t
                                                     i=1
                                                         Wt−1      n

The last equality is by the weight update rule in Algorithm 5. From the probability computation in
Algorithm 4, we have
                                                  wi,t−1      γ    γ
                               pi,t = (1 − γ) Pn             + ≥
                                                 j=1 w j,t−1  n    n
Thus, we obtain the following bound,
                                                            PK                  !
                                                                        k
                                γ        γ           ℓi,t    k=1 I(i = Jt )
                             0 ≤ ℓ̂i,t =                                            ≤ ℓi,t ≤ 1
                                n        n                    Kpi,t

By the fact that e−x ≤ 1 − x + (e − 2)x2 for all x ∈ [0, 1], and considering nγ ℓ̂i,t as x, we have
                            n
                    Wt     X   wi,t−1       γ                 γ  2
                         ≤             1 − ℓ̂i,t + (e − 2) ℓ̂i,t
                   Wt−1    i=1
                               Wt−1         n                 n
                            n
                           X pi,t − γ/n
                                                γ                 γ  2
                         =                 1 − ℓ̂i,t + (e − 2) ℓ̂i,t
                           i=1
                                 1−γ            n                 n
                                                 n                                     n
                                          γ/n X                 (e − 2)(γ/n)2 X
                              ≤1−                  pi,t ℓ̂i,t +                   pi,t (ℓ̂i,t )2
                                         1 − γ i=1                  1−γ       i=1
                                                                            n
                                         γ/n Jt (e − 2)(γ/n)2 X
                              ≤1−            ℓ +                  ℓ̂i,t
                                         1−γ t      1−γ       i=1

The last inequality uses Eq.(21) and Eq.(22). Taking logarithms and using the fact that ln (1 + x) ≤ x
for all x > −1 gives
                                                                                       n
                                    Wt     γ/n Jt (e − 2)(γ/n)2 X
                              ln        ≤−     ℓ +                  ℓ̂i,t
                                   Wt−1    1−γ t      1−γ       i=1

By summing over t, we obtain
                                          T                 T   n
                             WT     γ/n X Jt (e − 2)(γ/n)2 X X
                        ln      ≤−           ℓt +                  ℓ̂i,t
                             W1    1 − γ t=1      1−γ      t=1 i=1

On the other hand, for any action j,
                                                            T
                                         WT      wj,T    γX
                                    ln      ≥ ln      =−       ℓ̂j,t − ln n
                                         W1      W1      n t=1

From combining results,
                       T                        T                                   T   n
                       X                        X               n ln n           γ XX
                             ℓJt t ≥ (1 − γ)          ℓ̂j,t −          − (e − 2)           ℓ̂i,t
                       t=1                      t=1
                                                                  γ              n t=1 i=1


                                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We next take the expectation of both sides with respect to probability distribution pt and since
Ept [ℓ̂j,t ] = ℓj,t , we have
                           T                         T                                  n   T
                           X                         X              n ln n           γ XX
                   Ept [         ℓJt t ] ≥ (1 − γ)         ℓj,t −          − (e − 2)           ℓi,t
                           t=1                       t=1
                                                                      γ              n i=1 t=1

Since j ∈ Jt were chosen arbitrarily, we can choose the best Jt∗ for every iteration t. Let LMIN (T ) :=
PT P                                    PT P                                       ∗
   t=1   j∈Jt∗ ℓj,t and LEXP3 (T ) :=     t=1    j∈Jt ℓj,t . Summing over j ∈ Jt , and using the fact
     PT Pn
that t=1 i=1 ℓi,t ≤ nLMIN  K
                              (T )
                                   , we have the following statement,
                                                                     nK ln n
                   E[LEXP3 (T )] ≥ (1 − γ)LMIN (T ) −                        − (e − 2)γLMIN (T )
                                                                       γ
Then, we get the following,
                                                                                             nK ln n
                         LMIN (T ) − E[LEXP3 (T )] ≤ (e − 1)γLMIN (T ) +
                                                                                               γ
                                                                                 q
                                                                                    n ln n
Using the fact that LMIN (T ) ≤ T K and choosing the input parameter as γ = min 1, (e−1)T ,
we obtain the following,
                                              √      √               √
                 LMIN (T ) − E[LEXP3 (T )] ≤ 2 e − 1K nT ln n ≤ 2.63K nT ln n
Therefore, considering the scaling factor, we have:
     T                                    T
                        ∥gj,t ∥2                    ∥gj,t ∥2     L2
     X            X                      X        X
           Ept                 2
                                   − min     Ept           2
                                                               = 2 (LMIN (T ) − E[LEXP3 (T )])
     t=1
                        (pj,t )       pt
                                         t=1
                                                    (pj,t )     pmin
                 j∈Jt                                      j∈Jt

                                                                              2.63L2 √
                                                                            ≤        K nT ln n
                                                                               p2min
                                                                                   √
                                                                            = O K nT ln n



Theorem 3 (Corrected version of Theorem 4 in Liu et al. (2020)). Suppose Assumptions 1-2 hold.
The convergence rate for (corrected) AdamBS using bandit sampling is given by:
                                              √               !
                                       √        d         1/4
                                  O d T + 3/4 (T ln n)
                                             n


Proof. From Lemma 11, we have shown that the cumulative regret Rπ (T ) can be decomposed into
the online regret Rπonline (T ) with the additional sub-linear terms. Hence, we are left to bound the
cumulative online regret Rπonline (T ). Recall the first key lemma (Lemma 1):

                                                v
                                           √           T
                                       √
                                                u
                                                                 ∥gj,t ∥2
                                                               X
                                                u 1 X
                   Rπonline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + dρ2 t 2       Ept               + ρ3
                                                  n K t=1        (pj,t )2
                                                                                    j∈Jt


We can apply Lemma 1 to AdamBS as AdamCB, since both AdamBS and AdamCB follow the same
model parameter update rule. However, we use the corrected lemma (Lemma 12) for AdamBS, rather
than applying the key lemma (Lemma 2) used for AdamCB. Recall Lemma 12:
                                                                                      
             T
             X               X ∥gj,t ∥2                  T
                                                         X              X ∥gj,t ∥2              √
                   Ept                         − min         Ept                       = O(K nT ln n)
             t=1
                                  (pj,t   )2       pt
                                                         t=1
                                                                            (pj,t   )2
                           j∈Jt                                      j∈Jt



                                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 ∥gj,t ∥2
                           PT          hP                 i
Let we denote M := minpt     t=1 E p t    j∈Jt (pj,t )  2  . Then by Lemma 12, we have
                                                 
                         XT        X ∥gj,t ∥2                      √
                             Ept                  = M + C ′ K nT ln n
                         t=1
                                        (pj,t )2
                                   j∈Jt

        ′
where C > 0 is a constant. By plugging above equation to Lemma 1, we obtain
                                         √ q
                π
                                 √         d             √
              Ronline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + ρ2 √     M + C ′ K nT ln n + ρ3
                                        n K
                                         √             √ q
                                 √         d √            d          √
                           ≤ ρ1 d T + ρ2 √     M + ρ2 √        C ′ K nT ln n + ρ3
                                        n K           n K
                                        √           √
                                 √    ρ2 d √     ρ5 d              1/4
                           = ρ1 d T + √       M+        (nT ln n) + ρ3
                                      n K          n
                      √          √    √                                              √
We use the fact that a + b ≤ a + b in the second inequality and we define ρ5 := ρ2 C ′ .
Now, we should consider M . Using the tower property and applying the optimal solution for pt at
each iteration, we can express M as,
                                             T   n
                                                          !2
                                            X   X
                                    M =K           ∥gi,t ∥
                                            t=1    i=1

This follows the same argument as in the proof of Theorem 1 (see Appendix B.4). Then, by plugging
M to the online regret bound expression,
                                   √               √
         π
                          √          d √             d            1/4
       Ronline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + ρ2 √        M + ρ5      (nT ln n) + ρ3
                                 n K                n
                                   √ u                                  √
                                        v                      !2
                                                T    n
                          √          d u      X     X                     d          1/4
                    = ρ1 d T + ρ2 √     t   K           ∥gi,t ∥ + ρ5        (nT ln n) + ρ3
                                 n K           t=1  i=1
                                                                         n
                                                                      √
                                     v                       !2
                                             T     n
                                     u
                          √    √ u       1 X X                          d          1/4
                    = ρ1 d T + dρ2   t
                                          2
                                                      ∥gi,t ∥ + ρ5        (nT ln n) + ρ3
                                        n t=1 i=1                     n

By Assumption 1, ∥gi,t ∥ ≤ L for i ∈ [n]
                                       √ and t ∈ [T ]. Then, the second term in the right-hand side
    √ inequality is bounded by Lρ2 dT , which diminishes by the first term that have order of
of above
O(d T ). Hence, the online regret Rπonline (T ) after T iterations is,
                                                          √                 !
                          π
                                            √               d           1/4
                        Ronline (T ) = O(d T ) + O             (nT ln n)
                                                           n

Finally, by Lemma 11, we can bound the cumulative regret using the bound of the online regret as
                                                          √                  !
                                      √        √             d           1/4
                                                                                   √
         Rπ (T ) = Rπonline (T ) + O( T ) = O(d T ) + O        (nT ln n)       + O( T )
                                                           n
                                   √             !
                          √          d       1/4
                 = O d T + 3/4 (T ln n)
                                  n

This completes the proof of Theorem 3.


                                                  34
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    E     Additional Algorithm

    E.1   DepRound Algorithm

    Algorithm 6: DepRound
                                                                                        Pn
  Input: Natural number K(< n), sample distribution p := (p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ) with          i
                                                                                          i=1 p = K
  Output: Subset of [n] with distinct K elements
                                  i
1 while there is an i with 0 < p < 1 do
2    Choose distinct i, j with 0 < pi < 1 and 0 < pj < 1
3    Set α = min{1 − pi , pj } and β = min{pi , 1 − pj }
4    Update pi and pj as:
                                      (
                                                                              β

                             i j        pi + α, pj − α with probability α+β
                           (p , p ) =                                         α
                                        pi − β, pj + β   with probability α+β

5   return {i : pi = 1, 1 ≤ i ≤ n}


    The DepRound (Gandhi et al., 2006) (Dependent Rounding) algorithm is used to select a subset of
    elements from a set while maintaining certain probabilistic properties. It ensures that the sum of
    probabilities is preserved and elements are chosen with the correct marginal probabilities.

    F     More on Numerical Experiments

    F.1   Details on Experimental Setup

    We compared our method, AdamCB, with Adam, AdamX, and corrected AdamBS. The experiments
    measured training loss and test loss, averaged over five runs with different random seeds, and included
    1-sigma error bars for reliability. Throughout the entire experiments, identical hyper-parameters are
    used with any tuning as shown in Table 2.

                              Table 2: Hyper-parameters used for experiments

                     Hyper-parameter                                      Value
                     Learning rate αt                                     0.001
                     Exponential decay rates for momentum β1,1 , β2       0.9, 0.999
                     Decay rate for β1,1 for convergence guarantee λ      1-1e-8
                     ϵ for non-zero division                              1e-8
                     Loss Function                                        Cross-Entropy
                     Batch Size K                                         128
                     exploration parameter γ                              0.4
                     Number of epochs                                     10

    We trained MLP models on the MNIST, Fashion MNIST, and CIFAR-10 datasets. The detailed
    architectures of the MLP models for each dataset are provided in Table 3.

            Table 3: MLP Architecture for MNIST/Fashion MNIST (left) and CIFAR10 (right)

          Layer Type       Input          Output               Layer Type         Input         Output
          Flatten          (N, 28281)     (N, 28281)           Flatten            (N, 32323)    (N, 32323)
          Dense + ReLU     (N, 28281)     (N, 512)             Dense + ReLU       (N, 32323)    (N, 512)
          Dense + ReLU     (N, 512)       (N, 256)             Dense + ReLU       (N, 512)      (N, 256)
          Dense            (N, 256)       (N, 10)              Dense              (N, 256)      (N, 10)

    We also trained CNN models on the same datasets. The detailed architectures of the CNN models
    for each dataset are presented in Table 4.


                                                       35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Table 4: CNN Architecture for MNIST/Fashion MNIST (left) and CIFAR10 (right)

                                                                                             Layer Type                    Input                    Output
  Layer Type                             Input               Output                          Conv + ReLU                   (N, 3, 32, 32)           (N, 64, 32, 32)
  Conv + ReLU                            (N, 1, 28, 28)      (N, 32, 28, 28)                 MaxPool                       (N, 64, 32, 32)          (N, 64, 16, 16)
  MaxPool                                (N, 32, 28, 28)     (N, 32, 14, 14)                 Conv + ReLU                   (N, 64, 16, 16)          (N, 128, 16, 16)
  Conv + ReLU                            (N, 32, 14, 14)     (N, 64, 14, 14)                 MaxPool                       (N, 128, 16, 16)         (N, 128, 8, 8)
  MaxPool                                (N, 64, 14, 14)     (N, 64, 7, 7)                   Conv + ReLU                   (N, 128, 8, 8)           (N, 256, 8, 8)
  Flatten                                (N, 64, 7, 7)       (N, 3136)                       MaxPool                       (N, 256, 8, 8)           (N, 256, 4, 4)
  Dense                                  (N, 3136)           (N, 128)                        Flatten                       (N, 256, 4, 4)           (N, 25644)
  Dense + Softmax                        (N, 128)            (N, 10)                         Dense                         (N, 25644)               (N, 512)
                                                                                             Dense + Softmax               (N, 512)                 (N, 10)


        Table 5: VGG Architecture for MNIST/Fashion MNIST (left) and CIFAR10 (right)

  Layer Type                       Input                   Output                            Layer Type               Input                    Output
  Conv + ReLU                      (N, 1, 28, 28)          (N, 64, 28, 28)                   Conv + ReLU              (N, 3, 32, 32)           (N, 64, 32, 32)
  Conv + ReLU                      (N, 64, 28, 28)         (N, 64, 28, 28)                   Conv + ReLU              (N, 64, 32, 32)          (N, 64, 32, 32)
  MaxPool                          (N, 64, 28, 28)         (N, 64, 14, 14)                   MaxPool                  (N, 64, 32, 32)          (N, 64, 16, 16)
  Conv + ReLU                      (N, 64, 14, 14)         (N, 128, 14, 14)                  Conv + ReLU              (N, 64, 16, 16)          (N, 128, 16, 16)
  Conv + ReLU                      (N, 128, 14, 14)        (N, 128, 14, 14)                  Conv + ReLU              (N, 128, 16, 16)         (N, 128, 16, 16)
  MaxPool                          (N, 128, 14, 14)        (N, 128, 7, 7)                    MaxPool                  (N, 128, 16, 16)         (N, 128, 8, 8)
  Conv + ReLU                      (N, 128, 7, 7)          (N, 256, 7, 7)                    Conv + ReLU              (N, 128, 8, 8)           (N, 256, 8, 8)
  Conv + ReLU                      (N, 256, 7, 7)          (N, 256, 7, 7)                    Conv + ReLU              (N, 256, 8, 8)           (N, 256, 8, 8)
  Conv + ReLU                      (N, 256, 7, 7)          (N, 256, 7, 7)                    Conv + ReLU              (N, 256, 8, 8)           (N, 256, 8, 8)
  MaxPool                          (N, 256, 7, 7)          (N, 256, 3, 3)                    MaxPool                  (N, 256, 8, 8)           (N, 256, 4, 4)
  Flatten                          (N, 256, 3, 3)          (N, 2304)                         Flatten                  (N, 256, 4, 4)           (N, 4096)
  Dense                            (N, 2304)               (N, 512)                          Dense                    (N, 4096)                (N, 512)
  Dense                            (N, 512)                (N, 512)                          Dense                    (N, 512)                 (N, 512)
  Dense                            (N, 512)                (N, 10)                           Dense                    (N, 512)                 (N, 10)



We also evaluated the AMSGrad optimizer and the corrected AdamBS algorithm (Algorithm 4) on
the CIFAR-10 dataset using both MLP and CNN models. The results are presented in Figures 3
and 4. From these plots, it is evident that our AdamCB algorithm outperforms the other Adam-based
algorithms. To further assess performance, we conducted experiments using the VGG model, which
is a larger architecture compared to the MLP and CNN models. The detailed structure of the VGG
architecture is provided in Table 5, and the results are shown in Figure 5.


                                                 Adam                  AdamBS                              AMSGrad
                                                 AdamX                 AdamBS (corrected)                  AdamCB (ours)
                                    (a) MNIST                                 (b) Fashion MNIST             2.4
                                                                                                                            (c) CIFAR-10
                                                            2.25
                    2.0                                     2.00                                            2.2
                                                            1.75
                    1.5                                                                                     2.0
       Train Loss


                                                            1.50
                    1.0                                     1.25                                            1.8
                                                            1.00
                                                                                                            1.6
                    0.5                                     0.75
                                                            0.50                                            1.4
                    0.0
                          0    2     4       6    8   10           0      2       4      6        8   10          0    2      4     6      8   10
                                      Epochs                                       Epochs                                     Epochs
                                                            2.25                                            2.2
                    2.0                                     2.00
                                                            1.75                                            2.0
                    1.5
       Test Loss


                                                            1.50
                                                                                                            1.8
                    1.0                                     1.25
                                                            1.00                                            1.6
                    0.5                                     0.75
                                                            0.50                                            1.4
                    0.0
                          0    2     4       6    8   10           0      2       4      6        8   10          0    2      4     6      8   10
                                      Epochs                                       Epochs                                     Epochs

                              Figure 3: Comparison of Adam-based optimizations on MLP model



                                                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 Adam                             AdamBS                                              AMSGrad
                                                                 AdamX                            AdamBS (corrected)                                  AdamCB (ours)
                                                     (a) MNIST                                           (b) Fashion MNIST                            2.50
                                                                                                                                                                            (c) CIFAR-10
                                                                                       2.25
                                                                                                                                                      2.25
                    2.0                                                                2.00
                                                                                                                                                      2.00
                                                                                       1.75
                    1.5                                                                                                                               1.75
       Train Loss
                                                                                       1.50
                                                                                                                                                      1.50
                    1.0                                                                1.25
                                                                                                                                                      1.25
                                                                                       1.00
                                                                                       0.75                                                           1.00
                    0.5
                                                                                       0.50                                                           0.75
                    0.0                                                                                                                               0.50
                          0                2          4     6     8          10               0      2        4                 6       8        10           0         2        4    6        8   10
                                                      Epochs                                                  Epochs                                                             Epochs
                                                                                                                                                      2.50
                                                                                       2.25
                                                                                                                                                      2.25
                    2.0                                                                2.00
                                                                                                                                                      2.00
                                                                                       1.75
                    1.5                                                                                                                               1.75
       Test Loss


                                                                                       1.50
                                                                                                                                                      1.50
                    1.0                                                                1.25
                                                                                                                                                      1.25
                                                                                       1.00
                                                                                       0.75                                                           1.00
                    0.5
                                                                                       0.50                                                           0.75
                    0.0                                                                                                                               0.50
                          0                2          4     6     8          10               0      2        4                 6       8        10           0         2        4    6        8   10
                                                      Epochs                                                  Epochs                                                             Epochs

                                   Figure 4: Comparison of Adam-based optimizations on CNN model

                                                                 Adam                             AdamBS                                              AMSGrad
                                                                 AdamX                            AdamBS (corrected)                                  AdamCB (ours)
                                                     (a) MNIST                                           (b) Fashion MNIST                             2.4
                                                                                                                                                                            (c) CIFAR-10
                                                                                       2.25
                    2.0                                                                2.00                                                            2.2
                                                                                       1.75
                    1.5                                                                                                                                2.0
       Train Loss


                                                                                       1.50
                    1.0                                                                1.25                                                            1.8
                                                                                       1.00
                                                                                                                                                       1.6
                    0.5                                                                0.75
                                                                                       0.50                                                            1.4
                    0.0
                          0                2          4     6     8          10               0      2        4                 6       8        10           0         2        4    6        8   10
                                                      Epochs                                                  Epochs                                                             Epochs
                                                                                                                                                       2.4
                                                                                       2.25
                    2.0                                                                2.00                                                            2.2
                                                                                       1.75
                    1.5                                                                                                                                2.0
       Test Loss


                                                                                       1.50
                    1.0                                                                1.25                                                            1.8
                                                                                       1.00
                                                                                                                                                       1.6
                    0.5                                                                0.75
                                                                                       0.50                                                            1.4
                    0.0
                          0                2          4     6     8          10               0      2        4                 6       8        10           0         2        4    6        8   10
                                                      Epochs                                                  Epochs                                                             Epochs

                                   Figure 5: Comparison of Adam-based optimizations on VGG model


F.2   Additional Experiments

To further evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method, we conducted additional experiments
using logistic regression, ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016), ConvNeXt-Base (Liu et al., 2022), and


                                                                             Adam                     AdamBS                                AdamCB (ours)
                                           2.5

                                                                                                                              2.0
                                           2.0

                                                                                                                              1.5
                              Train Loss


                                                                                                                  Test Loss


                                           1.5


                                                                                                                              1.0
                                           1.0


                                           0.5                                                                                0.5



                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                 0         2          4            6          8          10                         0        2         4            6        8            10
                                                                          Epochs                                                                           Epochs

  Figure 6: Comparison of Adam-based optimizations on the logistic regression model (MNIST)


                                                                                                              37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                        Adam                  AdamBS                          AdamCB (ours)
                       2.5
                                               (a) MNIST                       3.0
                                                                                                  (b) Fashion MNIST                   2.8
                                                                                                                                                    (c) CIFAR-10
                                                                                                                                      2.6
                       2.0                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                      2.4
                                                                               2.0
                                                                                                                                      2.2
       Train Loss
                       1.5
                                                                               1.5                                                    2.0
                       1.0                                                                                                            1.8
                                                                               1.0
                                                                                                                                      1.6
                       0.5                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                      1.4
                       0.0                                                     0.0                                                    1.2
                               0       2        4       6       8       10            0       2           4        6      8     10          0   2     4        6   8   10
                                                Epochs                                                    Epochs                                      Epochs
                                                                               3.0                                                    5.0

                       2.0                                                                                                            4.5
                                                                               2.5
                                                                                                                                      4.0
                       1.5                                                     2.0
       Test Loss


                                                                                                                                      3.5
                       1.0                                                     1.5                                                    3.0

                       0.5                                                                                                            2.5
                                                                               1.0
                                                                                                                                      2.0
                       0.0                                                     0.5
                               0       2        4       6       8       10            0       2           4        6      8     10          0   2     4        6   8   10
                                                Epochs                                                    Epochs                                      Epochs

                               Figure 7: Comparison of Adam-based optimizations on ResNet-18 model


                                                                        Adam                  AdamBS                          AdamCB (ours)
                                               (a) MNIST                       3.0
                                                                                                  (b) Fashion MNIST                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                    (c) CIFAR-10
                       3.0
                                                                               2.5
                       2.5                                                                                                            2.0
       Training Loss


                                                                               2.0
                       2.0
                                                                                                                                      1.5
                       1.5                                                     1.5

                       1.0                                                     1.0                                                    1.0
                       0.5                                                     0.5                                                    0.5
                       0.0
                                                                               0.0
                               0       2        4       6       8       10            0       2           4        6      8     10          0   2     4        6   8   10
                                                Epochs                                                    Epochs                                      Epochs
                                                                               3.0                                                    2.5
                       3.0
                                                                               2.5
                       2.5                                                                                                            2.0
                       2.0                                                     2.0
       Test Loss


                                                                                                                                      1.5
                       1.5                                                     1.5
                       1.0                                                     1.0                                                    1.0
                       0.5                                                     0.5                                                    0.5
                       0.0
                                                                               0.0
                               0       2        4       6       8       10            0       2           4        6      8     10          0   2     4        6   8   10
                                                Epochs                                                    Epochs                                      Epochs

                        Figure 8: Comparison of Adam-based optimizations on ConvNext-base model


                                                                        Adam                  AdamBS                          AdamCB (ours)
                       0.200
                                                (a) MNIST                       2.5
                                                                                                      (b) Fashion MNIST               2.5
                                                                                                                                                    (c) CIFAR-10
                       0.175
                                                                                2.0                                                   2.0
                       0.150
       Training Loss


                       0.125                                                    1.5                                                   1.5
                       0.100
                       0.075                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                      1.0
                       0.050
                                                                                0.5
                       0.025                                                                                                          0.5
                       0.000                                                    0.0
                                   0       2        4       6       8    10               0       2           4    6      8      10         0   2     4        6   8   10
                                                    Epochs                                                    Epochs                                      Epochs
                       0.200                                                    2.5                                                   2.5
                       0.175
                                                                                2.0                                                   2.0
                       0.150
                       0.125                                                    1.5
       Test Loss


                                                                                                                                      1.5
                       0.100
                       0.075                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                      1.0
                       0.050
                                                                                0.5
                       0.025                                                                                                          0.5
                       0.000                                                    0.0
                                   0       2        4       6       8    10               0       2           4    6      8      10         0   2     4        6   8   10
                                                    Epochs                                                    Epochs                                      Epochs

                       Figure 9: Comparison of Adam-based optimizations on ConvNext-large model



                                                                                                         38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ConvNeXt-Large (Liu et al., 2022) networks. The archecture of The logistic regression model was
employed to assess the performance of our algorithm in convex optimization settings.
For general non-convex optimization, we tested our method on the ResNet-18, ConvNeXt-Base,
and ConvNeXt-Large models. Notably, ResNet-18 (11.4 million parameters), ConvNeXt-Base
(89 million parameters), and ConvNeXt-Large (198 million parameters) are substantially larger
architectures compared to the simple MLP and CNN models evaluated in the previous section.
These experiments demonstrate the scalability and efficiency of our algorithm on larger, more
complex models.
In all experiments, our proposed algorithm, AdamCB, consistently outperformed existing methods,
reaffirming its effectiveness across both convex and non-convex optimization tasks and on models of
varying complexity.


                                                39
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    G    When L is not known

  Algorithm 7: Weight-Update (with unknown L)
  Input: wt−1 , pt , Jt , {gj,t }j∈Jt , Snull,t , γ ∈ [0, 1), Lt−1
1 Set Lt ← max(Lt−1 , maxj∈Jt ∥gj,t ∥)
2 for j = 1 to n do
                               p2        ∥g ∥2         L2t

3     Compute loss ℓj,t = Lmin    2    − (pj,t
                                            j,t )
                                                  2 + p 2     if j ∈ Jt ; otherwise ℓj,t = 0
                                   t                    min
4       if j ∈
             / Snull,t then
5            wj,t ← wj,t−1 exp (−Kγℓj,t /n)
6   return wt , Lt

    Lemma 13. (Lemma 9 when L is unknown) For all t ≥ 1, we have
                                      p           Lt
                                        v̂t ≤
                                              γ(1 − β1 )
    where v̂t is in AdamCB (Algorithm 1).

    Proof. The argument follows the same reasoning as presented in Lemma 9, with the modification
    that L is replaced by Lt , reflecting the condition that ∥gi,t ∥ ≤ Lt for all i ∈ [n] at any t.
    Lemma 14. (Lemma 1 when L is unknown) Suppose Assumptions 1-2 hold. AdamCB (Algorithm 1)
    with a mini-batch of size K, which is formed dynamically by distribution pt , achieves the following
    upper-bound for the cumulative online regret Rπonline (T ) over T iterations,
                                                  v
                                             √                T
                                       √
                                                  u
                                                                            ∥gj,t ∥2
                                                                      X
                                                 ′t 1
                                                             X
                                    ′
                                                                                       + ρ′3
                      π
                                                  u
                    Ronline (T ) ≤ ρ1 d T + dρ2                  Ep
                                                     n2 K t=1 t             (pj,t )2
                                                                             j∈Jt

    where ρ′1 , ρ′2 , and ρ′3 are defined as follows:
                                                        √
                    D2 LT                            α 1 + ln T                            dβ1 D2 LT
         ρ′1 =                 ,       ρ′2 =             √               ,    ρ′3 =
                 2αγ(1 − β1 )2                 (1 − β1 )2 1 − β2 (1 − η)              2αγ(1 − β1 )2 (1 − λ)2
    Note that d is the dimension of parameter space and the inputs of Algorithm 1 follows these conditions:
                                                                                                   √
    (a) αt = √αt , (b) β1 , β2 ∈ [0, 1), β1,t := β1 λt−1 for all t ∈ [T ], λ ∈ (0, 1), (c) η = β1 / β2 ≤ 1,
    and (d) γ ∈ [0, 1).

    Proof. The proof is the same as Lemma 1 until bounding the terms (13), (14), and (15).

    Bound for the term (13). Following the same reasoning as Lemma 1, we have
      " d T                                                      #       d
                                                                                                        √
                   p                                                         p
       XX             v̂t,u             ∗ 2               ∗ 2
                                                                     D2 X      T v̂T,u      dD2 Lt
    E                          (θt,u − θ,u ) − (θt+1,u − θ,u )     ≤                    ≤             2
                                                                                                          T
       u=1 t=1
               2αt (1 − β1,t )                                       2α u=1 (1 − β1,T )   2αγ(1 − β1 )
    where the last inequality is by Lemma 13.

    Bound for the term (14).           Nothing changes here.

    Bound for the term (15). Following the same reasoning as Lemma 1, we obtain
         " d T         p                       #               " d T                        #
          X X β1,t v̂t−1,u                           D2         XX          q
                                    ∗        2
       E                          (θ − θt,u ) ≤              E          β1,t (t − 1)v̂t−1,u
          u=1 t=2
                   2αt−1 (1 − β1 ) ,u            2α(1 − β1 )    u=1 t=2
    Therefore, from Lemma 13, we obtain
          " d T         p                       #                 " T                  #
            X X β1,t v̂t−1,u
                                     ∗        2       dD2          X          p
        E                          (θ − θt,u ) ≤                E      β1,t Lt (t − 1)                         (23)
            u=1 t=2
                    2αt−1 (1 − β1 ) ,u            2αγ(1 − β1 )2    t=2



                                                              40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Since Lt is a running max, {Lt }Tt=1 is a non-decreasing sequence, i.e., L1 ≤ L2 ≤ · · · ≤ LT . Thus,
the inequality (23) becomes
           " d T         p                         #                     " T               #
            X X β1,t v̂t−1,u
                                       ∗         2        dD2 LT          X       p
        E                            (θ − θt,u ) ≤                    E       β1,t (t − 1)
            u=1 t=2
                     2αt−1 (1 − β1 ) ,u                2αγ(1 − β1 )2      t=2
Note that
  T                  T                   T                  T
 X        p          X        p          X   p              X                                          β1
      β1,t (t − 1) =   β1 λt−1 (t − 1) ≤   β1 (t − 1)λt−1 ≤   β1 tλt−1 ≤
  t=2                         t=2                       t=2                        t=2
                                                                                                    (1 − λ)2
where the first inequality is from the fact that β1 ≤ 1, and the last inequality is from Lemma 5. Thus,
the bound for the term (15) is
                   " d T          p                         #
                    X X β1,t v̂t−1,u
                                                 ∗                      dβ1 D2 LT
                 E                            (θ,u − θt,u )2 ≤
                    u=1 t=2
                              2αt−1 (1 − β1 )                    2αγ(1 − β1 )2 (1 − λ)2

We now bounded three terms: (13), (14), and (15). Hence,
                                                     √                 d
          π              dD2 LT      √             α ln T + 1         X
        Ronline (T ) ≤                 T +            √                   E [∥g1:T,u ∥]
                       2αγ(1 − β1 )2        (1 − β1 )2 1 − β2 (1 − η) u=1
                                   dβ1 D2 LT
                          +
                              2αγ(1 − β1 )2 (1 − λ)2
Thus, we can express Rπonline (T ) as
                                                              d
                                                     √        X
                                Rπonline (T ) ≤ ρ′1 d T + ρ′2   E [∥g1:T,u ∥] + ρ′3
                                                              u=1

where ρ′1 , ρ′2 , and ρ′3 are defined as the following:
                                                     √
                  D 2 LT                          α 1 + ln T                            dβ1 D2 LT
     ρ′1 =                   ,      ρ′2 =             √               ,    ρ′3 =
               2αγ(1 − β1 )2                (1 − β1 )2 1 − β2 (1 − η)              2αγ(1 − β1 )2 (1 − λ)2
The subsequent proof process is same as Lemma 1.

Note that, by Assumption 1, LT is always less than or equal to the theoretical upper bound of the
maximum gradient norm across all iterations (L). Hence, we have ρ′1 ≤ ρ1 , ρ′2 = ρ2 , and ρ′3 = ρ3 .
This implies that Lemma 1 holds even when L is not known.
Lemma
      q  15. (Lemma     2 when L is unknown) Suppose Assumptions 1-2 hold. If we set γ =
min 1, n(e−1)T
             ln (n/K)
                   K   , the batch selection (Algorithm 2) and the weight update rule (Algorithm 7)
following AdamCB (Algorithm 1) implies
                                                            
            T        X ∥gj,t ∥2           T         X ∥gj,t ∥2        r
          X
                                  − min
                                         X                                     n
               Ept                          Ep t
                                                               = O    KnT ln
           t=1
                        (pj,t )2      pt
                                         t=1
                                                      (pj,t )2                 K
                         j∈Jt                                 j∈Jt


Proof. The proof is the same as Lemma 2. However, at the last part, where we scale,
   T                                        T
                     L2t ∥gj,t ∥2                         L2t ∥gj,t ∥2
   X            X                          X         X
         Ept                         − min     E pt                       = LMIN-K (T ) − E[LEXP3-K (T )]   (24)
   t=1          j∈J
                    p2min (pj,t )2      pt
                                           t=1       j∈J
                                                         p2min (pj,t )2
                   t                                     t


Since Lt is a running max, {Lt }Tt=1 is a non-decreasing sequence, i.e., L1 ≤ L2 ≤ · · · ≤ LT .
Hence, Eq.(24) becomes
                                                     2.63L2
                                                            r
                                                                         n
                     LMIN-K (T ) − E[LEXP3-K (T )] ≤ 2 T KnT ln
                                                      pmin              K
By Assumption 1, LT is always less than or equal to L, which implies LT = O(1). This completes
the proof of Lemma 15.


                                                         41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 15 implies that Lemma 2 holds even when L is not known.
Theorem 4. (Regret bound of AdamCB (Theorem 1) when L is unknown) Suppose Assumptions 1-2
hold, and we run AdamCB for a total T iterations with αt = √αt and with β1,t := β1 λt−1 , λ ∈ (0, 1).
Then, the cumulative regret of AdamCB (Algorithm 1) with batch size K is upper-bounded by
                                             √              1/4 !
                                     √         d T       n
                                O d T + 3/4           ln           .                            (25)
                                            n      K K

Proof. The overall proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 1 (when L is known) detailed in
Appendix B.4. The part that is different is when bounding the term Eq.(18) in Lemma 11.
                                           T                        √
                                          X
                                                  ∗    ∗       2αL2T T
                       (18) ≤ (LT /γ)         E[∥θt − θ ∥] ≤ 2
                                          t=1
                                                             ϵγ (1 − β1 )

By Assumption 1, LT is always less than or equal to the upper bound of the maximum   √ gradient
norm across all iterations (L), which implies LT = O(1). Therefore, we have (18) = O( T ). This
implies that Lemma 11 still holds. Since both Lemma 1 and Lemma 2 hold even when L is not
known according to Lemma 14 and Lemma 15, we complete the proof of Theorem 4 by following
the same proof process as Theorem 1.


                                                 42
