Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C O I N D: E NABLING L OGICAL C OMPOSITIONS                                                                                                                                               IN
D IFFUSION M ODELS
       Sachit Gaudi Gautam Sreekumar Vishnu Naresh Boddeti
       Michigan State University
       {gaudisac,sreekum1,vishnu}@msu.edu



                                                                                A BSTRACT
                  How can we learn generative models to sample data with arbitrary logical compo-
                  sitions of statistically independent attributes? The prevailing solution is to sample
                  from distributions expressed as a composition of attributes’ conditional marginal
                  distributions under the assumption that they are statistically independent. This pa-
                  per shows that standard conditional diffusion models violate this assumption, even
                  when all attribute compositions are observed during training. And, this violation
                  is significantly more severe when only a subset of the compositions is observed.
                  We propose C O I N D to address this problem. It explicitly enforces statistical inde-
                  pendence between the conditional marginal distributions by minimizing Fisher’s
                  divergence between the joint and marginal distributions. The theoretical advan-
                  tages of C O I N D are reflected in both qualitative and quantitative experiments,
                  demonstrating a significantly more faithful and controlled generation of samples
                  for arbitrary logical compositions of attributes. The benefit is more pronounced for
                  scenarios that current solutions relying on the assumption of conditionally inde-
                  pendent marginals struggle with, namely, logical compositions involving the NOT
                  operation and when only a subset of compositions are observed during training.
                  Our code is available at https://github.com/sachit3022/compositional-generation/


1            I NTRODUCTION                                                                                     Support                   Uniform
                                                                                                                                    Composed
                                                                                                                                                         Non-uniform
                                                                                                                                                       Composed
                                                                                                                                                                                Partial
                                                                                                                                                                          Composed
                                                                                                               Method                GLIDE     COIND    GLIDE     COIND    GLIDE      COIND



                                                                                                                         4 ∧ Pink
Color (C2)


                                   Color (C2)


                                                                        Color (C2)


                                                                                                                        4 ∧ Cyan


                                                                                                              4 ∧ ¬(Pink ∨ Green)


             0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9                   0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9       ¬(3 ∨ 4) ∧ Pink

                  Digit (C1)                           Digit (C1)                               Digit (C1)

             (a) Uniform                        (b) Non-uniform                      (c) Partial support                             (d) Generated samples
Figure 1: Generative Modeling of Logical Compositions. (a-c) Consider the task of generating
MNIST samples for any logical composition of digits and colors by learning on observational data of
different supports. (d) Standard diffusion models fail to generate data with arbitrary logical compo-
sitions of attributes. We generate data from simple unseen compositions (row 2), and more complex
logical compositions (rows 3,4) through C O I N D, even under non-uniform and partial support.

Many applications of generative models, including image editing (Kim et al., 2022; Brooks et al.,
2023), desire explicit and independent control over statistically independent attributes. For example,
in face generation, one might want to control the amount of hair, smile, etc., independently. This
challenge relates to the broader task of logical compositionality in generative models, where the
goal is to combine attributes according to logical relations. Consider the illustrative task in Fig. 1
of generating realistic samples of colored handwritten digits with explicit and independent control
over the composition of color and digit. For example, “generate an image of digit 4 while excluding
the colors green and pink". This composition can be logically expressed as “4 ∧ ¬[Green ∨ Pink]”,
where ∧, ∨, and ¬ represent the three primitive logical operators AND, OR, and NOT, respectively.
Existing solutions (Liu et al., 2022; Du et al., 2020; Nie et al., 2021) realize this goal by mapping the
logical expressions into a probability distribution involving the conditional marginal distributions


                                                                                            1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


p(image | digit = 4), p(image | color ̸= Green), and p(image | color ̸= Pink), and sampling
from it. These marginal distributions are obtained either by learning separate energy-based models
for each compositional attribute (Du et al., 2020; Nie et al., 2021) or by factorizing the attributes’
learned joint distribution Liu et al. (2022). Both approaches, however, are predicated on the critical
assumption that the conditional marginal distributions are statistically independent of each other.
Employing the approaches mentioned above, for instance Liu et al. (2022), to our illustrative ex-
ample, we observe that when the conditional diffusion model is learned on data with non-uniform
(Fig. 1b) or partial (Fig. 1c) support of the compositional attributes, the models fail to generate re-
alistic samples (columns 3 and 5 of row 2 in Fig. 1d) or generate realistic samples with logically
inaccurate compositions (columns 3 and 5 of rows 3 and 4 in Fig. 1d). This is true even for simple
unseen logical compositions of attributes (AND in row 2 of Fig. 1d) or for complex logical com-
positions (rows 3 and 4 of Fig. 1d involving a NOT operation). Such failure under partial support
was also observed by Du et al. (2020). Surprisingly, note that even when all compositions of the
attributes are observed, the model fails to generate realistic samples (column 1 of row 2 in Fig. 1d).
These observations naturally raise the following research questions that this paper seeks to answer:
– (RQ1) Why do standard classifier-free conditional diffusion models fail to generate data with
arbitrary logical compositions of attributes? We hypothesize that violating the assumption that the
conditional marginal distributions are statistically independent of each other will result in poor image
quality, diminished control over the generated image attributes, and, ultimately, failure to adhere to
the desired logical composition. We verify and confirm our hypothesis through a case study in § 3.
– (RQ2) How can we explicitly enable conditional diffusion models to generate data with arbitrary
logical compositions of attributes? We adopt the principle of independent causal mechanisms (Pe-
ters et al., 2017) to express the conditional data likelihood in terms of the constituent conditional
marginal distributions to ensure that the model does not learn non-existent statistical dependencies.
 Summary of contributions.
    1. In Section 3, we show that conditional diffusion models trained to maximize the likelihood of
       the observed data do not learn independent conditional marginal distributions, even when all
       compositions of the attributes are uniformly (Fig. 1a) observed. Furthermore, this problem
       is exacerbated in more practical scenarios where we learn from non-uniform (Fig. 1b) or
       partial (Fig. 1c) support of the compositional attributes. Instead, the models learn non-
       existent statistical dependencies induced by unknown confounding factors.
    2. Through causal modeling, we derive a training objective, C O I N D, comprising the standard
       score-matching loss and a conditional independence violation loss required to enforce the
       COnditional INdependence relations necessary for enabling logical compositions in condi-
       tional Diffusion models.
    3. Strong inductive biases, in the form of the conditional independence relations in C O I N D, en-
       able arbitrary logical compositionality in conditional diffusion models with fine-grained con-
       trol over conditioned attributes and diversity for unconditioned attributes. C O I N D achieves
       these goals while being monolithic and is scalable with the number of attributes.

2    L OGICAL C OMPOSITIONALITY IN D IFFUSION M ODELS

We study the problem of generating data with attributes that satisfy a given logical relation between
them. We consider the case where the attributes are statistically independent of each other. However,
not all attribute compositions may be observed during training. To study this problem, we first
model the underlying data-generation process using a suitable causal model that relates data and
their independently varying attributes.
Notations. We use bold lowercase and uppercase characters to denote vectors (e.g., a) and matri-
ces (e.g., A) respectively. Random variables are denoted by uppercase Latin characters (e.g., X).
The distribution of a random variable X is denoted as p(X), or as pθ (X) if the distribution is param-
eterized by a vector θ. We adopt non-standard terminology where marginals denote the conditionals
p(X | Ci ) rather than integrated marginals, p(Ci ) emphasizing their functional role as modular com-
ponents in our compositional framework. Correspondingly, joint refers to p(X | C), acknowledging
this deliberate departure from probabilistic conventions due to a lack of better terminology.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                              Unobserved Confounding
Data Generation Process. The data generation process con-
                                                                             ... C                ... C
sists of observed data X (e.g., images) and its attribute vari- C       C 1     2   C    n C   1       2               n


ables C1 , C2 , . . . , Cn (e.g., color, digit, etc.). To have explicit
control over these attributes during generation, they should X          X C1   C2X X      X
                                                                                         Cn    C1     XC2              Cn


vary independently of each other. In this work, we limit our
study to only those causal graphs in which the attributes are not          X                    X

causally related and can hence vary independently, as shown (a) True underly- (b) Causal model
in Fig. 2a. Each Ci assumes values from a set Ci and their ing causal model during training
Cartesian product C = C1 × · · · × Cn is referred to as the at- Figure 2: (a) C1 , C2 , . . . , Cn vary
tribute space. Each attribute Ci generates its own observed freely and independently in the un-
component XCi = fCi (Ci ), which together with unobserved derlying causal graph. (b) How-
exogenous variables UX form the composite observed data ever, they become dependent dur-
X = f (XC1 , . . . , XCi , UX ) (see Fig. 2a). We do not restrict ing training due to unknown and
f much except that it should not obfuscate individual observed unobserved confounding factors.
components in X (Wiedemer et al., 2024). A simple example
of f is the concatenation function. We also assume that all fCi are invertible and therefore it is
possible to estimate C1 , . . . , Cn from X. These assumptions together ensure that C1 , . . . , Cn are
mutually independent given X despite being seemingly d-connected.
Problem Statement. When the training data is sampled according to the causal graph in Fig. 2a,
all attribute compositions are equally likely to be observed. We refer to this scenario as uniform
support (illustrated in Fig. 1a). However, real-world datasets often deviate from the independence
due to unobserved confounders such as sample selection bias (Storkey, 2008), inducing an attribute
shift. As shown in Fig. 2b, this shift modifies the causal structure during training through unobserved
confounding relationships, resulting in non-uniform support (Fig. 1b) where attribute compositions
exhibit unequal occurrence probabilities. In extreme cases, this dependence could lead to the training
samples consisting of only a subset of all attribute compositions (Fig. 1c), i.e., Ctrain ⊂ C. We refer to
this scenario as partial support. We aim to learn conditional diffusion models under these scenarios
to generate samples with attributes that satisfy a given logical compositional relation between them.
The attribute space in our problem statement has the following properties. (1) The attribute space
observed during training Ctrain covers C in the following sense:
Definition 1 (Support Cover). Let C = C1 × · · · × Cn be the Cartesian product of n finite sets
C1 , . . . , Cn . Consider a subset Ctrain ⊂ C, where |Ctrain | = m. Let Ctrain = {(c1j , . . . , cnj ) : cij ∈
Ci , 1 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ j ≤ m} and C˜i = {cij : 1 ≤ j ≤ m} for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. The Cartesian product of
these sets is C˜train = C˜1 × · · · × C˜n . We say Ctrain covers C iff C = C˜train .

Informally, this assumption implies that every possible value that Ci can assume is present in the
training set, and open-set attribute compositions do not fall under this definition. For instance, in the
Colored MNIST example in Fig. 1, we are not interested in generating a digit with an unobserved
11th color. (2) For every ordered tuple c ∈ Ctrain , there is another c′ ∈ Ctrain such that c and c′ differ
on only one attribute. Similar assumptions were discussed in (Wiedemer et al., 2024).
Preliminaries on Score-based Models. In this work, we train conditional score-based mod-
els (Song et al., 2021b) using classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022) to generate data
corresponding to a given logical attribute composition. Score-based models learn the score of the
observed data distributions ptrain (X) and ptrain (X | C) through score matching (Hyvärinen, 2005).
Once the score of a distribution is learned, samples can be generated using Langevin dynamics.
For logical attribute compositional generation, the given attribute composition is decomposed in
terms of two primitive logical compositions: (1) AND operation (e.g., C1 = c1 ∧ C2 = c2 gener-
ates data where attributes C1 and C2 takes values c1 and c2 respectively), and (2) NOT operation
(e.g., C1 = ¬c1 generates data where the attribute C1 takes any value except c1 ). Liu et al. (2022)
proposed the following modifications during sampling to enable AND and NOT logical operations
between the attributes, assuming that the diffusion model learns the conditionalQnindependence rela-
tions from the underlying data-generation process, i.e., p(C1 , . . . , Cn |X) = i=1 p(Ci |X).
Logical AND (∧) operation: Since pθ (C1 ∧ C2 | X) = pθ (C1 | X)pθ (C2 | X) samples are
generated for the logical composition C1 ∧ C2 by sampling from the following score:

  ∇X log pθ (X | C1 ∧ C2 ) = ∇X log pθ (X | C1 ) + ∇X log pθ (X | C2 ) − ∇X log pθ (X)                            (1)


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Logical NOT (¬) operation: Following the approximation pθ (¬C2 | X) ∝ pθ (C12 |X) , the score to
sample data for the logical composition C1 ∧ ¬C2 can be expressed as,
    ∇X log pθ (X | C1 ∧ ¬C2 ) = ∇X log pθ (X) + ∇X log pθ (X | C1 ) − ∇X log pθ (X | C2 ) (2)

Precise Control: To achieve precise control over attribute composition, the hyperparameter γ is
used to modulate the relative intensity of attribute C2 with respect to C1 . We sample from the
distribution, ∇X log pθ (X | C1 ∧ ↑ C2 ), expressed as
                  ∇X log pθ (X | C1 ) + γ∇X log pθ (X | C2 ) − γ∇X log pθ (X)                       (3)

Logical OR (∨) operation: From the rules of Boolean algebra, C1 ∨ C2 operation can be expressed
in terms of ∧ and ¬ as ¬(¬C1 ∧ ¬C2 ). Following the approximation for ¬ from above, it follows
that p(¬(¬C1 ∧ ¬C2 )) ≈ p(C1 )p(C2 ).
For example, to generate colored handwritten digits with the “4 ∧ ¬[Green ∨ Pink]" logical compo-
sition, the score of the logical composition can be decomposed into its constituent logical primitive
operations and further in terms of the score of marginals, which can be obtained from the trained
diffusion models. Therefore, ∇X log pθ (X | 4 ∧ ¬ [G ∨ P]) is given by:
= ∇X log pθ (X | C1 = 4 ∧ C2 = ¬G) + ∇X log pθ (X | C1 = 4 ∧ C2 = ¬P) − ∇X log pθ (X)
= 2∇X log pθ (X | C1 = 4) − ∇X log pθ (X | C2 = G) − ∇X log pθ (X | C2 = P) + ∇X log pθ (X)
Note that the scores to sample from these primitive logical compositions involve conditional
marginal likelihood terms X | Ci . Therefore, to perform logical composition, it is critical to accu-
rately learn the conditional marginals of the attributes.
Evaluation We evaluate the distributions learned by the model based on their accuracy in gen-
erating images with attributes that align with the desired compositions for a logical relation. For
example, to evaluate AND (∧) composition, consider sampling an arbitrary digit and color, repre-
sented as C = (4, Cyan). We generate images X̂ by sampling from Eq. (1), and subsequently infer
attributes, (ĉ1 , ĉ2 ) = (ϕC1 (X̂), ϕC2 (X̂)). We then verify if (ĉ1 , ĉ2 ) ⊆ {4} × {Cyan}, and this
process is averaged over all combinations in C to obtain CS.
Conformity Score (CS) To formally define CS: For a logical relation, R. This relation is defined
as a boolean function over the attribute space C, such that R : C → {0, 1}. This induces a constrained
attribute space given by R = {(c1 , . . . , cn ) | R(c1 , . . . , cn ) = 1} ⊆ C. The CS is defined as:
                                                                                n
                  CS(R, θ) := EC∼p(C) EU ∼p(U ) [1RC ((ϕCi (gθ (R(C), U )))i=1 )]                   (4)
where R(C) can represent various logical operations such as ∧, ¬, and ∨ on the attribute space C.
Here, gθ (R(C), U ) denotes a generative model parameterized by θ, which samples according to the
logical relations specified above. The variable U represents exogenous noise in the diffusion model.
The functions ϕCi are attribute-specific classifiers that infer attributes from the generated images.
The term 1RC , is an indicator function, equals 1 if the inferred attributes (ϕCi (gθ (R(C), U )))ni=1 ⊆
RC . Further details regarding the Conformity Score can be found in App. D.6.

3     W HY DO CONDITIONAL DIFFUSION MODELS FAIL TO GENERATE DATA
      WITH ARBITRARY LOGICAL COMPOSITIONS OF ATTRIBUTES ?

To address (RQ1), we utilize the task of generating synthetic images from the Colored MNIST
dataset for any given combination of color and digit, as introduced in § 1. To study the effect of data
support, we consider the three training distributions of attribute compositions defined in § 2: (1) uni-
form support, where every ordered pair in C has an equal chance of being observed (Fig. 1a), (2) non-
uniform support, where every ordered pair in C appears but with unequal probabilities (Fig. 1b), and
(3) partial support, where only subset of ordered pairs, Ctrain ⊂ C are observed (Fig. 1c).
For each support, we train a diffusion model and evaluate the conditional joint, pθ (X | C) and
marginal, pθ (X | Ci ) distributions. During inference, the images are separately sampled from the
joint distribution, ∇X log pθ (X | C), and from the product of the learned marginals as shown in
Eq. (1). We refer to the former method as joint sampling and the latter as marginal sampling. To


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Support
                  Conformity Score
                                       JSD ↓   Table 1: Conformity Scores and Jensen-Shannon
                Joint ↑   Marginal ↑           divergence for samples generated from joint and
  Uniform        99.98      98.15      0.16    marginal distributions learned by models under vari-
  Non Uniform    99.98      86.10      0.30    ous support settings for the Colored MNIST dataset.
  Partial        33.14      7.40       2.75
measure the accuracy of the attributes in the generated image in accordance to the desired attributes,
we use conformity score (CS) defined in § 2. Tab. 1 compares the joint and the marginal distributions
learned by models trained under various training scenarios. We draw the following conclusions.
Diffusion models struggle to generate unseen attribute compositions.         From the conformity
scores of images sampled from the joint distribution, we conclude that while the models trained
with uniform and non-uniform support generate images with accurate attribute compositions, those
trained with partial support struggle to generate images for unseen attribute compositions. The
standard training objective of diffusion models is to maximize the likelihood of conditional gen-
eration, for every observed attribute composition, the model accurately learns ptrain (X | C), i.e.,
pθ (X | C) ≈ ptrain (X | C) However, with partial support, the model does not observe samples for
every attribute composition from ptrain (X | C). Therefore, the model does not accurately learn the
density of the unobserved support region.
Diffusion models violate underlying Conditional Independence relations. Although the dif-
fusion model is trained on all marginals (X | Ci ), per the support cover assumption, marginals
samples performs inferior to that of sampling from the joint distribution. This further drop in con-
formity score when sampled from the product of marginals ( Eq. (1)) for the models trained under
non-uniform and partial support settings is due to the disparity between the joint distribution and the
product of marginals, which points to the violation of independence relations from the underlying
data-generation process in the learned model. Refer to App. B.1 for a detailed proof. To further
strengthen the claim, we measure this violation as the disparity between Q the conditional joint distri-
                                                                             n
bution pθ (C | X) and the product of conditional marginal distributions i pθ (Ci | X) learned by
the guidance term in a model using Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSD):
                                                                n
                                       "                                      !#
                                                               Y
                    JSD = EC,X∼pdata DJS pθ (C | X) ||            pθ (Ci | X)                       (5)
                                                                 i
where DJS is the Jensen-Shannon divergence and following (Li et al., 2023) pθ is obtained by eval-
uating the implicit classifier learned by the diffusion model. More details can be found in App. D.7.
A positive JSD value suggests that the model fails to adhere to the independence relations present
in the underlying causal model. Our findings (Tab. 1) indicate that as the training distribution of
attribute compositions diverges from the true underlying distribution – where attributes vary inde-
pendently – the trained models increasingly violate independence relations, as reflected by the JSD.
These findings demonstrate diffusion models lack inherent compositional bias, instead propagate
dependencies as present in their training data.
Training objective of the diffusion models is not suitable for logical compositionality.              The
objective of the diffusion models trained with classifier-free guidance is to maximize the condi-
tional likelihood of power-set of attributes. However, due to confounding induced by the train-
ing
Qn support (Fig. 2b), the attributes become dependent during training, i.e., ptrain (C1 , . . . , Cn ) ̸=
   i=1 ptrain (Ci ). As a result, the conditional distribution of marginals does not match its true under-
lying distribution. i.e pθ (X | Ci ) ≈ ptrain (X | Ci ) ̸= pdata (X | Ci ) Refer to App. B.2 for formal
proof. Therefore, any method (Nie et al., 2021) that relies on training on these incorrect marginals or
relies on conditional independence (Liu et al., 2022) is bound to fail. Moreover, even when realistic
samples of unseen composition are successfully generated, it is by accident rather than design.

        Failure of Logical Compositionality

    Standard conditional diffusion models trained with classifier-free guidance struggle to gen-
    erate data with arbitrary logical compositions of attributes because they violate the indepen-
    dence relations inherent in the causal data-generation process.

Based on these observations, we propose C O I N D to train diffusion models that explicitly enforce
the conditional independence dictated by the underlying causal data-generation process to encourage
the model to learn accurate marginal distributions of the attributes.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4   C O I N D: E NFORCING C ONDITIONALLY I NDEPENDENT M ARGINAL TO
    E NABLE L OGICAL C OMPOSITIONALITY
In this section, we propose C O I N D to answer (RQ2) posed in § 1: How can we explicitly enable
conditional diffusion models to generate data with arbitrary logical compositions of attributes?
In the previous section, we observed that diffusion models do not obey the underlying causal rela-
tions, learning incorrect attribute marginals, and hence struggling to demonstrate logical composi-
tionally as we showed in Fig. 1. To remedy this, C O I N D uses a training objective that explicitly
enforces the causal factorization to ensure that the trained diffusion models obey the underlying
causal relations. From the causal graph Fig. 2a, along with the assumption of C1 ⊥⊥ . . . ⊥⊥ Cn | X
                                                 Qn p(X|Ci )p(Ci )
mentioned in § 2, we have p(X | C) = p(X)  p(C)     i   p(X)       . Note that the invariant p(X | C)
is now expressed as the product of marginals employed for sampling. Therefore, training the diffu-
sion model by maximizing this conditional likelihood is naturally more suited for learning accurate
marginals for the attributes. We minimize the distance between the true conditional likelihood and
the learned conditional likelihood as,
                                                                                 !
                                                pθ (X) Y pθ (X | Ci )pθ (Ci )
                     Lcomp = W2 p(X | C),                                                          (6)
                                                pθ (C) i           pθ (X)
where W2 is 2-Wasserstein distance. Applying the triangle inequality to Eq. (6) we have,
                                                                    n
                                                                                          !
                                                            pθ (X) Y pθ (X | Ci )pθ (Ci )
  Lcomp ≤ W2 (p(X | C), pθ (X | C)) + W2 pθ (X | C),                                               (7)
          |              {z          }                      pθ (C) i          pθ (X)
               Distribution matching    |                        {z                       }
                                                             Conditional Independence
(Kwon et al., 2022) showed that the Wasserstein distance between p0 (X), q0 (X) is upper bounded
by the square root of the score-matching objective.
                                      q
            W2 (p0 (X), q0 (X)) ≤ K Ep0 (X) [||∇X log p0 (X) − ∇X log q0 (X)||22 ]

Distribution matching: Following this result, the first term in Eq. (7) is upper bounded by the
standard score-matching objective of diffusion models (Song et al., 2021b),
                  Lscore = Ep(X,C) ∥∇X log pθ (X | C) − ∇X log p(X | C)∥22                     (8)
Conditional Independence: Similarly, the second term in Eq. (7) is upper bounded by score-
matching between the joint and product of marginals
                                                 X
 LCI = E∥∇X log pθ (X | C) − ∇X log pθ (X) −         [∇X log pθ (X | Ci ) − ∇X log pθ (X)] ∥22 (9)
                                                      i
Substituting Eq. (8), Eq. (9) in Eq. (7) will result in our final learning objective
                                                 p               p
                                   Lcomp ≤ K1 Lscore + K2 LCI                                     (10)
where K1 , K2 are positive constants, i.e., the conditional independence objective LCI is incorporated
alongside the existing score-matching loss Lscore .
LCI , is the Fisher divergence between the joint and the product of marginals. From the prop-
erties of Fisher’s divergence Sánchez-Moreno et al. (2012). LCI = 0 iff pθ (X | C) =
pθ (X) Qn pθ (X|Ci )pθ (Ci )
pθ (C)    i     pθ (X)       . Detailed derivation of the upper bound can be found in App. B.3.
Practical Implementation. A computational burden presented by LCI in Eq. (9) is that the re-
quired number of model evaluations increases linearly with the number of attributes. To mitigate
this burden, we approximate the mutual conditional independence with pairwise conditional inde-
pendence (Hammond & Sun, 2006). Thus, the modified LCI becomes,
LCI = Ep(X,C) Ej,k ∥∇X log pθ (X | Cj , Ck ) − ∇X log pθ (X | Cj ) − ∇X log pθ (X | Ck ) + ∇X log pθ (X)∥22
The weighted sum of the square of the terms in Eq. (10) has shown stability. Therefore, C O I N D’s
training objective:
                                       Lfinal = Lscore + λLCI                                   (11)
where λ is the hyper-parameter that controls the strength of conditional independence. The reduction
to the practical version of the upper bound (Eq. (10)) is discussed in extensively in App. C. For
guidance on selecting hyper-parameters in a principled manner, please refer to App. C.3. Finally,
our proposed approach can be implemented with just a few lines of code, as outlined in Algorithm 1.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5    D OES C O I N D IMPROVE THE LOGICAL COMPOSITIONALITY ?


C O I N D encourages diffusion models to learn conditionally independent marginals of attributes, and
thereby improve their logical compositionality capabilities. In this section, we design experiments
to evaluate C O I N D on two questions: (1) Does C O I N D effectively train diffusion models that obey
the underlying causal model?, and (2) Does C O I N D improve the logical compositionality of these
models? We measure the JSD of the trained models to answer the first question. To answer the
second question, we use two primitive logical compositional tasks: (a) ∧ (AND) composition and
(b) ¬ (NOT) composition. In each case, the generative model is provided with a logical relation
between the attributes, and the task is to generate images with attributes that satisfy this logical rela-
tion. A more detailed description of task construction can be found in App. D.2. Beyond improved
logical compositionality, we ask: Does learning conditionally independent marginals lead to greater
diversity in uncontrolled attributes and enhanced controllability of attributes?
Datasets. We use the following image datasets with labeled attributes for our experiments: (1)
Colored MNIST dataset described in § 1, where the attributes of interest are digit and color,
(2) Shapes3d dataset (Kim & Mnih, 2018) containing images of 3D objects in various environ-
ments where each image is labeled with six attributes of interest. (3) CelebA with gender and smile
attributes demonstrates effectiveness of C O I N D on real-world datasets. Refer to App. D.5.
Observed training distributions. We evaluate C O I N D on four scenarios
where we observe different distributions of attribute compositions during
training: (1) Uniform support, (2) Non-uniform support (3) Diagonal par-
tial support, as defined in § 2. (4) Orthogonal partial support includes only
the attribute compositions along the axes originating from a corner of the hy-
percube C, following (Wiedemer et al., 2024) (Fig. 3). For Colored MNIST
experiments, we evaluate with uniform, non-uniform, and diagonal partial
support. For Shapes3d experiments, we evaluate with uniform and orthogo-
nal partial support, following the compositional setup in (Schott et al., 2020).
We evaluate CelebA on orthogonal partial support, where all compositions Figure 3: Orthogo-
except unseen male smiling celebrities are observed.                             nal partial support
Baselines. LACE (Nie et al., 2021) and Composed GLIDE (Liu et al., 2022) are our primary
baselines. LACE trains distinct energy-based models (EBMs) for each attribute and combines them
following the compositional logic described in § 2 during sampling. A similar approach was pro-
posed by (Du et al., 2020). However, in our experimental evaluation for LACE, we train distinct
score-based models instead of EBMs. In contrast, Composed GLIDE samples from score-based
models by factorizing the joint distribution into marginals, assuming these models had implicitly
learned conditionally independent marginals of attributes. Additional details about the baselines are
delegated to App. D.3.
Metrics. We assess how accurately the models have captured the underlying data generation pro-
cess using the JSD, defined in § 3. To measure the accuracy of the attributes in the generated image
w.r.t. the input logical composition, we use conformity score (CS) from § 2. As a reminder, CS mea-
sures the accuracy with which the model adds the desired attributes to the generated image using
attribute-specific classifiers. In addition to the conformity score, since the Shapes3d dataset contains
unique ground truth images corresponding to the input logical relation, we directly compare gen-
erated samples with reference images at the pixel level using the variance-weighted coefficient of
determination, R2 . Additionally, for CelebA, we measure FID (Seitzer, 2020). We evaluate uniform
and non-uniform support on the generations for the input logical relations correspond to attribute
compositions that span the attribute space C. In other cases, we evaluate models ability to generate
input logical relations corresponding to the unseen compositional support, i.e., C \ Ctrain .
☞ Learning Independent Marginals Enables Logical Compositionality
Fig. 4a compares C O I N D with baselines on ∧ and ¬ composition tasks. The “¬ Color” task gener-
ates images with the negation applied on color attribute, while“¬ Digit” applies the negation to the
digit attribute. From these results, we make the following observations:
Conditional diffusion models do not learn accurate marginals even when all attribute compo-
sitions are observed during training with equal probability. This is evident from the positive JSD


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Support         Method                JSD ↓   ∧ (CS) ↑   ¬ Color (CS)↑   ¬ Digit (CS) ↑
                                                                                                     100
                  LACE                    -      96.40        92.56            83.67
                  Composed GLIDE        0.16     98.15        99.30            81.64
  Uniform                                                                                            75
                  C O I N D (λ = 0.2)   0.14     99.73        99.32            84.94


                                                                                            CS (∧)
                  C O I N D (λ = 1.0)   0.10     99.99        99.33            89.60
                                                                                                     50
                  LACE                    -      82.61        65.16            69.51
  Non-uniform     Composed GLIDE        0.30     86.10        81.61            70.44
                  C O I N D (λ = 1.0)   0.15     99.95        92.41            84.98                 25
                  LACE                    -      10.85        9.03             28.24
  Partial         Composed GLIDE        2.75      7.40        5.09             33.86                       10−1          100
                  C O I N D (λ = 1.0)   1.17     52.38        53.28            52.59                               JSD
                       (a) Results on Colored MNIST Dataset                                                 (b) JSD vs CS
Figure 4: Results on Colored MNIST dataset. (a) We compare JSD and CS of C O I N D against
baselines trained under various settings and on different compositional tasks. (b) Plotting CS against
JSD in the log scale of the models trained under different settings reveals a negative correlation.

of the methods trained with uniform support. Furthermore, the conformity score (CS) is lower when
JSD is higher. This observation has significant ramifications for compositional generative models.
This result contradicts the intuitive expectation that uniformly observing the whole compositional
support during training is sufficient to generate arbitrary logical compositions of attributes. And,
it suggests that even in this ideal yet impractical case, the current objectives for training diffusion
models are insufficient for controllable and accurate closed-set, let alone open-set, compositional
generation. As such, we conjecture that scaling the datasets without inductive biases (conditional
independence of marginals in this case) is insufficient for arbitrary logical compositional generation.
Even methods like LACE that train separate models for each attribute fail on ¬ composition tasks.
This suggests that softer inductive biases, such as learning separate marginals for each attribute with-
out paying heed to the desired independence relations, are insufficient for logical compositionality.
In the more practical scenarios of non-uniform and partial support, JSD increases with non-uniform
support and worsens further with partial support due to incorrect marginals as discussed in § 3. This
result suggests that current state-of-the-art models learned on finite datasets likely operate in the
non-uniform or partial support scenario and thus may fail to generate accurate and realistic data for
arbitrary logical compositions of attributes.
Logical AND (∧) and NOT (¬) compositionality deteriorates with increasing dependence between
the marginals. The negative correlation between JSD and CS was noted in § 3 and can be observed in
Fig. 4b, which shows JSD-vs-CS for ∧ compositions across different methods, and under different
settings for observed support. This negative correlation strongly suggests that violation of condi-
tional independence plays a major role in the diminished logical compositionality demonstrated by
standard diffusion models.
By enforcing conditional independence between the attributes during training, C O I N D achieves
lower JSD and improves both ∧ and ¬ compositionality in non-uniform and partial support. Even
when trained on non-uniform support, C O I N D matches compositionality with the uniform support
in terms of compositional score. Under partial support setting, C O I N D achieves ≈ 2 − 10× fold
improvement over the baselines on ∧ and ¬ compositions. These results demonstrate that enforcing
conditional independence between the marginals is vital for enabling arbitrary logical compo-
sitions in conditional diffusion models.


            (a) LACE; H = 1.82              (b) Composed GLIDE; H = 1.71                     (c) C O I N D; H = 2.63
Figure 5: Images generated by C O I N D for the logical composition digit = 4 under non-uniform
scenario are significantly diverse compared to the baselines. H is the Shannon entropy.
☞ C O I N D generates diverse samples.        It is desirable that any attribute not part of the logical
composition for generation assumes diverse values in the generated samples to avoid harmful gen-
erated content—including stereotypes (Dehdashtian et al., 2025) and biases (Luccioni et al., 2024).
In Fig. 5, we observe that although C O I N D does not explicitly optimize for diversity, the samples
generated by C O I N D for the logical relation digit = 4 are significantly more diverse compared


                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to the baselines. We quantitatively measure the diversity of these images using the Shannon en-
tropy H of the color attributes in the generated images. Higher Shannon entropy indicates more
diversity. Entropy is maximum for a uniform distribution with H(uniform) = log2 (10) = 3.32,
since there are 10 colors. We observe that H(C O I N D) = 2.63, while H(LACE) = 1.82,
H(Composed GLIDE) = 1.71. Although C O I N D does not explicitly seek diversity, breaking the
dependence induced by unknown confounders exhibits diversity in attributes.

                                                                                                                    Composed
                                                                                               Expected C O I N D    GLIDE     LACE
                                               ∧ Composition       ¬ Composition
   Support       Method                JSD ↓
                                                                                   Uniform
                                                2
                                               R ↑    CS ↑          2
                                                                   R ↑    CS↑      ∧ comp.
                 LACE                    -     0.97   91.19        0.85   50.00
   Uniform       Composed GLIDE        0.302   0.94   83.75        0.91   48.43      Partial
                 C O I N D (λ = 1.0)   0.215   0.98   95.31        0.92   55.46    ∧ comp.

                 LACE                    -     0.88   62.07        0.70   30.10
   Orthogonal    Composed GLIDE        0.503   0.86   51.56        0.61   34.63      Partial
                                                                                   ¬ comp.
                 C O I N D (λ = 1.0)   0.287   0.97   91.10        0.92   53.90
                (a) Quantitative Results on Shapes3D Dataset                        (b) Visual comparison of samples
Figure 6: Results on Shapes3d dataset. (a) We compare JSD, R2 , and CS of C O I N D against the
baselines trained with uniform and partial support on the Shapes3d dataset for ∧ and ¬ composition
tasks. (b) Samples generated by C O I N D match the expected image in all cases.

☞ C O I N D is scalable with attributes. We use the Shapes3d dataset to evaluate the scalability
of C O I N D w.r.t. the number of attributes. As a reminder, every image in the Shapes3d dataset is
labeled with six attributes of interest. For the negation composition task, the ¬ operator is applied
to the shape attribute such that the attribute composition satisfying this logical relation is unique.
Detailed descriptions of the composition tasks are provided in App. D.2. Fig. 6a compares C O I N D
against the baselines for the uniform and orthogonal partial support scenarios. C O I N D leads to
a significant decrease in JSD and, consequently, a significant increase in the composition score.
When trained with orthogonal support, the performance (CS) of both LACE and Composed GLIDE
suffers significantly while C O I N D matches its performance when trained on uniform support. In
conclusion, C O I N D affords superior logical compositionality from a single monolithic model in a
sample-efficient manner even as the number of attributes increases.
☞ C O I N D generates unseen compositions of real-world face images
We evaluate ability of C O I N D to generate un-
                                                                         “smiling male" “smiling"∧“male"
seen “smiling male celebrities". Diffusion Method                  JSD ↓
                                                                         CS ↑ FID ↓     CS ↑      FID ↓
model is trained on all compositions of the
                                                 LACE                -     -       -    24.20     80.40
CelebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015) except gender Composed GLIDE 2.44 2.51 61.21 10.55 95.41
= “male” and smiling = “true”. This is equiva- C O I N D (λ = 100) 1.82 8.63 43.97 8.79           43.76
lent to the orthogonal support scenario shown in
Fig. 3. During inference, the model is asked to Table 2: Results on CelebA dataset. C O I N D out-
generate images with the unseen attribute com- performs the baselines on both CS and FID across
bination gender = “male” and smiling = “true” various compositionality tasks.
through both joint sampling and ∧ composition.
Tab. 2 compares C O I N D against baselines in terms of CS and FID. (1) C O I N D outperforms the
baseline by > 4× in joint. (2) C O I N D generates realistic faces, closer to smiling male celebrities in
the held out set, as measured by FID and displayed in Fig. 7c(γ = 1). In App. E.3, we show that
C O I N D extends to Text-to-Image models by fine-tuning Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022).
☞ C O I N D provides fine-grained control over attributes. In addition to merely generating sam-
ples with conditioned attributes, C O I N D can also control the amount of attributes in the sample. For
example, in the task of generating face images of smiling male celebrities, we may wish to adjust
the amount of smiling without affecting gender-specific attributes. To achieve this, we sample from
Eq. (3), where γ controls the strength of smile. Fig. 7 shows the result of increasing γ to increase
the amount of smiling in the generated image. The subjects in the face images generated by C O I N D
smile more as γ increases without any changes to any gender-specific attribute. For instance, the
images for γ = 1 show a soft smile while the subjects in the images for γ = 6 show teeth. However,
those generated by baselines contain gender-specific attributes such as long hair and earrings. These
distinctions are quantified in Figs. 7a and 7b. Refer to App. E.2 for more analysis.


                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                Methods
                                                                                                        COIND         Composed GLIDE   LACE
                LACE           Composed GLIDE                  CoInD


                                                                                                  γ=0
                                                                       increases as γ increases
          125                             40


                                                                         The amount of smile

                                                                                                  γ=1
          100                             30
    FID


                                     CS


                                                                                                  γ=2
           75                             20

           50
                                          10


                                                                                                  γ=6
                  2        4     6                2        4       6
                       γ                               γ

           (a) FID with γ                      (b) CS with γ                                                    (c) Samples with γ

Figure 7: Effect of γ on FID and CS: Varying the amount of smile in a generated image through
γ does not affect the FID of C O I N D. However, the smiles in the generated images become more
apparent, leading to easier detection by the smile classifier and improved CS.



6          R ELATED W ORK

Our work concerns compositional generalization in generative models, where the goal is to gener-
ate data with unseen attribute compositions expressed through logical relations between attributes.
One class of approaches achieves logical compositionality by combining distinct models trained for
each attribute (Du et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Nie et al., 2021; Du et al., 2023). In contrast, we
are interested in monolithic diffusion models that learn logical compositionality. Besides being ex-
pensive and scaling linearly with the number of attributes, these models fail under practical partial
support scenarios. Liu et al. (2022) studied logical compositionality broadly without differentiat-
ing between attribute supports and proposed methods to represent logical compositions in terms of
marginal probabilities obtained through factorization of the joint distribution. However, these fac-
torized sampling methods fail since the underlying generative model learns inaccurate marginals. In
comparison, C O I N D is trained to obey the independence relations from the underlying causal graph.
Also, (Cho et al., 2024) note that diffusion models lack the conditional independence needed for
controllability and address this with a hyperparameter during sampling. We argue that, even with
disentangled features, learning accurate marginals tackles the root cause more effectively than such
post-hoc adjustments. Encouragingly, Okawa et al. (2023) shows that compositional abilities emerge
multiplicatively, and Liang et al. (2024) highlights factorization in diffusion models, suggesting they
naturally exhibit compositional capabilities. However, these studies focus on generating from the
joint distribution—a special case of logical compositionality—and are limited to binary attributes.
Our work extends these ideas to more general compositions. Lastly, (Wiedemer et al., 2024) studies
compositional generalization for supervised learning and provides sufficient conditions for compo-
sitionality. Our empirical observations in generative models are consistent with their theoretical
results, suggesting that their findings could perhaps be extended to conditional diffusion models.


7          C ONCLUSION

Conditional diffusion models struggle to generate data for arbitrary attribute compositions, even
when all attribute compositions are observed during training. Existing methods represent logical
relations in terms of the learned marginal distributions, assuming that the diffusion model learns the
underlying conditional independence relations. We showed that this assumption does not hold in
practice and worsens when only a subset of these attribute compositions are observed during train-
ing. To mitigate this problem, we proposed C O I N D to train diffusion models by maximizing con-
ditional data likelihood in terms of the marginal distributions that are obtained from the underlying
causal graph. Our causal modeling provides C O I N D a natural advantage in logical compositional-
ity by ensuring it learns accurate marginals. Our experiments on synthetic and real image datasets
highlight the theoretical benefits of C O I N D. Unlike existing methods, C O I N D is monolithic, easy to
implement, and demonstrates superior logical compositionality. C O I N D shows that adequate induc-
tive biases such as conditional independence between marginals are necessary for effective logical
compositionality. Refer to Apps. F and G for more discussions, analysis and limitations of C O I N D.


                                                                                            10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research (award #N00014-
23-1-2417). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of ONR. We also thank Mashrur
Morshed for his insights on improving diffusion model training and for sharing the bare-bones code,
Lan Wang for providing the code for fine-tuning Stable Diffusion, and Ramin Akbari for his assis-
tance with the proofs presented in Apps. B and C.

R EFERENCES
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. InstructPix2Pix: Learning to Follow Image
  Editing Instructions. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  2023.
Wonwoong Cho, Hareesh Ravi, Midhun Harikumar, Vinh Khuc, Krishna Kumar Singh, Jingwan
 Lu, David I. Inouye, and Ajinkya Kale. Enhanced controllability of diffusion models via feature
 disentanglement and realism-enhanced sampling methods. In European Conference on Computer
 Vision, 2024.
Sepehr Dehdashtian, Gautam Sreekumar, and Vishnu Naresh Boddeti. OASIS Uncovers: High-
  Quality T2I Models, Same Old Stereotypes. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2025.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion Models Beat GANs on Image Synthesis. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Yilun Du and Leslie Kaelbling. Position: Compositional Generative Modeling: A Single Model is
  Not All You Need. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, and Igor Mordatch. Compositional Visual Generation with Energy Based
  Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Yilun Du, Conor Durkan, Robin Strudel, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Sander Dieleman, Rob Fergus,
  Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Arnaud Doucet, and Will Sussman Grathwohl. Reduce, Reuse, Recycle:
  Compositional Generation with Energy-Based Diffusion Models and MCMC. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Peter J Hammond and Yeneng Sun. The essential equivalence of pairwise and mutual conditional
  independence. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 135(3):415–427, 2006.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image
  Recognition. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-Free Diffusion Guidance, 2022.            URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2207.12598.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Aapo Hyvärinen. Estimation of Non-Normalized Statistical Models by Score Matching. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 6:695–709, 2005.
Gwanghyun Kim, Taesung Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. DiffusionCLIP: Text-Guided Diffusion Mod-
 els for Robust Image Manipulation. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, 2022.
Hyunjik Kim and Andriy Mnih. Disentangling by Factorising. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2018.
Dohyun Kwon, Ying Fan, and Kangwook Lee. Score-based Generative Modeling Secretly Mini-
  mizes the Wasserstein Distance. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Tuomas Kynkäänniemi, Miika Aittala, Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Timo Aila, and Jaakko Lehtinen.
  Applying Guidance in a Limited Interval Improves Sample and Distribution Quality in Diffusion
  Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alexander C. Li, Mihir Prabhudesai, Shivam Duggal, Ellis Brown, and Deepak Pathak. Your Dif-
  fusion Model is Secretly a Zero-Shot Classifier. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
  puter Vision, 2023.
Qiyao Liang, Ziming Liu, Mitchell Ostrow, and Ila R Fiete. How Diffusion Models Learn to Fac-
  torize and Compose. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Yaron Lipman, Marton Havasi, Peter Holderrieth, Neta Shaul, Matt Le, Brian Karrer, Ricky T. Q.
  Chen, David Lopez-Paz, Heli Ben-Hamu, and Itai Gat. Flow Matching Guide and Code, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.06264.
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Josh Tenenbaum, and Antonio Torralba. Learning to Compose Visual
  Relations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional Visual
  Generation with Composable Diffusion Models. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
  2022.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep Learning Face Attributes in the Wild.
  In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2015.
Sasha Luccioni, Christopher Akiki, Margaret Mitchell, and Yacine Jernite. Stable Bias: Evaluating
  Societal Representations in Diffusion Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2024.
Weili Nie, Arash Vahdat, and Anima Anandkumar. Controllable and Compositional Generation
 with Latent-Space Energy-Based Models, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.
 10873.
Maya Okawa, Ekdeep S Lubana, Robert Dick, and Hidenori Tanaka. Compositional Abilities
 Emerge Multiplicatively: Exploring Diffusion Models on a Synthetic Task. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of Causal Inference: Founda-
  tions and Learning Algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  Resolution Image Synthesis With Latent Diffusion Models. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Pablo Sánchez-Moreno, Alejandro Zarzo, and Jesús S Dehesa. Jensen divergence based on Fisher’s
  information. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 45(12):125305, 2012.
Lukas Schott, Julius Von Kügelgen, Frederik Träuble, Peter Vincent Gehler, Chris Russell, Matthias
  Bethge, Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, and Wieland Brendel. Visual Representation
  Learning Does Not Generalize Strongly Within the Same Domain. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2020.
Maximilian Seitzer. pytorch-fid: FID Score for PyTorch. https://github.com/mseitzer/
 pytorch-fid, August 2020. Version 0.3.0.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models. In Inter-
   national Conference on Learning Representations, 2021a.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative Modeling by Estimating Gradients of the Data Distribu-
  tion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-Based Generative Modeling through Stochastic Differential Equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021b.
Amos Storkey. When Training and Test Sets Are Different: Characterizing Learning Transfer. In
 Dataset Shift in Machine Learning. The MIT Press, 2008.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Max Welling and Yee W Teh. Bayesian Learning via Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, 2011.
Thaddäus Wiedemer, Prasanna Mayilvahanan, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel. Composi-
  tional generalization from first principles. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Preliminaries of Score-based Models                                                           15

     B   Proofs for Claims                                                                           16
         B.1 Proof for the case study in § 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16
         B.2 Standard diffusion model objective is not suitable for logical compositionality .       16
         B.3 Step-by-step derivation of C O I N D in § 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17

     C   Practical Considerations                                                                    18
         C.1 Scalability of LCI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    18
         C.2 Simplification of Theoretical Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      19
         C.3 Choice of Hyperparameter λ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20

     D Experiment Details                                                                            20
       D.1 C O I N D Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       20
       D.2 Details of Logical Compositionality Task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          21
       D.3 Training details, Architecture, and Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        22
       D.4 Analytical Forms of Support Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          23
       D.5 Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      23
       D.6 Conformity Score (CS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           23
       D.7 Computing JSD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         24
       D.8 Measuring Diversity in Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         24

     E   C O I N D for Face Image Generation                                                         25
         E.1 C O I N D can successfully generate real-world face images . . . . . . . . . . . .      25
         E.2 C O I N D provides fine-grained control over attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
         E.3 Finetuning T2I models with C O I N D improves logical compositionality . . . . .        27

     F   Discussion on C O I N D                                                                     28
         F.1 Connection to compositional generation from first principles . . . . . . . . . .        28
         F.2 2D Gaussian: Closed-form Analysis of C O I N D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        28
         F.3 Extension to Gaussian source flow models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        30
         F.4 Compositional vs Monolithic models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        30
         F.5 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     30

     G Additional Results and Discussion on C O I N D                                                31
       G.1 Learning under non-uniform p(Ci ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         31
       G.2 Failure examples of C O I N D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31
       G.3 Conformity score for each attribute combination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         31
       G.4 C O I N D also improves conditional generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        32
       G.5 C O I N D can interpolate between discrete attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     33


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    P RELIMINARIES OF S CORE - BASED M ODELS
Score-based models Score-based models (Song et al., 2021b) learn the score of the observed data
distribution, ptrain (X) through score matching (Hyvärinen, 2005). The score function sθ (x) =
∇x log pθ (x) is learned by a neural network parameterized by θ.
                                              h                              i
                                                                           2
                            Lscore = Ex∼ptrain ∥sθ (x) − ∇x log ptrain (x)∥2               (12)
During inference, sampling is performed using Langevin dynamics:
                                    η                 √
                      xt = xt−1 + ∇x log pθ (xt−1 ) + ηϵt , ϵt ∼ N (0, 1)            (13)
                                    2
where η > 0 is the step size. As η → 0 and T → ∞, the samples xt converge to pθ (X) under
certain regularity conditions (Welling & Teh, 2011).
Diffusion models Song & Ermon proposed a scalable variant that involves adding noise to the
data. Ho et al. has shown its equivalence to Diffusion models. Diffusion models are trained by
adding noise to the image x according to a noise schedule, and then neural network, ϵθ is used to
predict the noise from the noisy image, xt . The training objective of the diffusion models is given
by:
                                                                           2
                             Lscore = Ex∼ptrain Et∼[0,T ] ∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t)∥                     (14)
                                                      √         √                     QT
Here, the perturbed data xt is expressed as: xt = ᾱt x + 1 − ᾱt ϵ where ᾱt = i=1 αi , for a
pre-specified noise schedule αt . The score can be obtained using,
                                                        ϵθ (xt , t)
                                        sθ (xt , t) ≈ − √                                           (15)
                                                          1 − ᾱt
Langevin dynamics can be used to sample from the sθ (xt , t) to generate samples from p(X). The
conditional score (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) is used to obtain samples from the conditional distri-
bution pθ (X | C) as:
                  ∇Xt log p(Xt | C) = ∇Xt log pθ (Xt ) +γ∇Xt log pθ (C | Xt )
                                      |     {z      }            | {z }
                                            Unconditional score            noisy classifier

where γ is the classifier strength. Instead of training a separate noisy classifier, Ho & Salimans have
extended to conditional generation by training ∇Xt log pθ (Xt | C) = sθ (Xt , t, C). The sampling
can be performed using the following equation:
              ∇Xt log p(Xt | C) = (1 − γ)∇Xt log pθ (Xt ) + γ∇Xt log pθ (Xt | C)                    (16)
However, the sampling needs access to unconditional scores as well. Instead of modelling
∇Xt log pθ (Xt ), ∇Xt log pθ (Xt |C) as two different models Ho & Salimans have amortize train-
ing a separate classifier training a conditional model sθ (xt , t, c) jointly with unconditional model
trained by setting c = ∅.
In the general case of classifier-free guidance, a single model can be effectively trained to accom-
modate all subsets of attribute distributions. During the training phase, each attribute ci is randomly
set to ∅ with a probability puncond . This approach ensures that the model learns to match all possible
subsets of attribute distributions. Essentially, through this formulation, we use the same network to
model all the possible subsets of conditional probability.
Once trained, the model can generate samples conditioned on specific attributes, such as ci
and cj , by setting all other conditions to ∅. The conditional score is then computed as,
∇Xt log pθ (Xt |ci , cj ) = xt , ci,j ), where ci,j represents the condition vector with all values other
than i and j set to ∅. This method allows for flexible and efficient sampling across various attribute
combinations.
Estimating Guidance Once the diffusion model is trained, we investigate the implicit classifier,
pθ (C|X), learned by the model. This will give us insights into the learning process of the diffusion
models. (Li et al., 2023) have shown a way to calculate pθ (Ci = ci | X = x), borrowing equation
(5), (6) from (Li et al., 2023).
                                                   p(ci ) pθ (x | ci )
                               pθ (Ci = ci | x) = P
                                                   k p(ck ) pθ (x | ck )



                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            exp{−Et,ϵ [∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t, ci )∥2 ]}
                     pθ (Ci = ci | x) =                                                                  (17)
                                          ECi [exp{−Et,ϵ [∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t, ci )∥2 ]}]
Likewise, we can extend it to joint distribution by
                                                  exp{−Et,ϵ [∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t, ci,j )∥2 ]}
              pθ (Ci = ci , Cj = cj | x) =                                                               (18)
                                             ECi ,Cj [exp{−Et,ϵ [∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t, ci,j )∥2 ]}]
Practical Implementation The authors Li et al.. have showed many axproximations to compute
Et,ϵ . However, we use a different approximation inspired by Kynkäänniemi et al. (2024), where we
sample 5 time-steps between [300,600] instead of these time-steps spread over the [0, T].

B     P ROOFS FOR C LAIMS
In this section, we detail the mathematical derivations for case study from § 3 in App. B.1, relate the
origin of the conditional independence violation to the unsuitable loss function of vanilla diffusion
models in App. B.2, and then derive the final loss function of C O I N D in App. B.3.

B.1   P ROOF FOR THE CASE STUDY IN § 3

In this section, we prove that failure of compositionality in diffusion models is due to the violation
of conditional independence.
Following conditional independence relation:
                                                    Y
                                      p(C | X) =          p(Ci | X)                              (CI relation)
                                                      i
This CI relation is used by several works (Liu et al., 2022; Nie et al., 2021), including ours, to derive
the expression for the joint distribution p(X | C) in terms of the marginals p(X | Ci ) for logi-
cal compositionality. As a reminder, logical compositionality is preferred over simple conditional
generation as it (1) provides fine-grained control over the attributes, (2) facilitates NOT relations on
attributes, and (3) is more interpretable. The joint likelihood is written in terms of the marginals
using the CI relation and the causal factorization as,
                                           p(X) Y p(X | Ci )p(Ci )

                             p(X | C) =                                                    (JM relation)
                                           p(C) i            p(X)
Note that CI relation is crucial for JM relation to hold. We sample from joint likelihood using the
score of LHS of JM relation, referred to as joint sampling in § 3. Similarly, we sample using the
score of RHS of JM relation, referred to as marginal sampling in § 3. If the learned generative
model satisfies the JM relation, then there should not be any difference in the CS between joint
sampling and marginal sampling. However, in Tab. 1, we see a drop in CS, implying JM relation is
not satisfied in the learned model.
JM relation must hold in the learned generative model if CI relation is true in the learned generative
model. Therefore, we check if the CI relation holds in the generative model by measuring JSD
between LHS and RHS of CI relation as shown in Eq. (5) in the main paper. The results Tab. 1
confirm that the CI relation does not hold in the learned model. This is a significant finding since
existing works (Liu et al., 2022; Nie et al., 2021) blindly trust the model to satisfy CI relation,
leading to severe performance drop when the training support is non-uniform or partial.
The CI relation is violated in the learned model because the standard training objective is not suitable
for compositionality, as it does not account for the incorrect ptrain (X | Ci ). The proof is detailed in
the next section App. B.2. Therefore, we proposed C O I N D to ensure the JM relation was satisfied
by explicitly learning the marginal likelihood according to the causal factorization.

B.2   S TANDARD DIFFUSION MODEL OBJECTIVE IS NOT SUITABLE FOR LOGICAL
      COMPOSITIONALITY

This section proves that the violation in conditional independence in diffusion models is due to
learning incorrect marginals, ptrain (X | Ci ) under Ci ̸⊥⊥ Cj . We leverage the causal invariance


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


property: ptrain (X | C) = ptrue (X | C), where ptrain is the training distribution and ptrue is the true
underlying distribution.
Consider the training objective of the score-based models in classifier free formulation Eq. (12). For
the classifier-free guidance, a single model sθ (x, C) is effectively trained to match the score of all
subsets of attribute distributions. Therefore, the effective formulation for classifier-free guidance
can be written as,
                                       h                                                 i
                                                                                       2
                  Lscore = Ex∼ptrain ES ∥∇x log pθ (x | cS ) − ∇x log ptrain (x | cS )∥2          (19)

where S is the power set of attributes.
From the properties of Fisher divergence, Lscore = 0 iff pθ (X | cS ) = ptrain (X | cS ), ∀S. In the
case of marginals, pθ (X | Ci ) i.e. S = {Ci } for some 1 ≤ i ≤ n,

                     pθ (X | Ci ) = ptrain (X | Ci )
                                    X
                                  =      ptrain (X | Ci , C−i )ptrain (C−i | Ci )
                                       C−i
                                       X
                                  =          ptrue (X | Ci , C−i )ptrain (C−i | Ci )
                                       C−i
                                       X
                                  ̸=         ptrue (X | Ci , C−i )ptrue (C−i ) = ptrue (X | Ci )
                                       C−i

           =⇒ pθ (X | Ci ) ̸= ptrue (X | Ci )                                               (20)
           Qn
Where C−i = j=1 Cj , which is every attribute except Ci . Therefore, the objective of the score-
                  j̸=i
based models is to maximize the likelihood of the marginals of training data and not the true marginal
distribution, which is different from the training distribution when Ci ̸⊥⊥ Cj .

B.3   S TEP - BY- STEP DERIVATION OF C O I N D IN § 4

The objective is to train the model by explicitly modeling the joint likelihood following the causal
factorization from Eq. (JM relation). The minimization for this objective can be written as,
                                                                              !
                                               pθ (X) Y pθ (X | Ci )pθ (Ci )
                     Lcomp = W2 p(X | C),                                                       (21)
                                                pθ (C) i        pθ (X)

where W2 is 2-Wasserstein distance. Applying the triangle inequality to Eq. (21) we have,
                                                                          n
                                                                                                !
                                                                  pθ (X) Y pθ (X | Ci )pθ (Ci )
  Lcomp ≤ W2 (p(X | C), pθ (X | C)) + W2              pθ (X | C),                                 (22)
          |              {z          }                            pθ (C) i      pθ (X)
               Distribution matching   |                               {z                       }
                                                                   Conditional Independence

(Kwon et al., 2022) showed that under some conditions, the Wasserstein distance between
p0 (X), q0 (X) is upper bounded by the square root of the score-matching objective. Rewriting
Equation 16 from (Kwon et al., 2022)
                                     q
            W2 (p0 (X), q0 (X)) ≤ K Ep0 (X) [||∇X log p0 (X) − ∇X log q0 (X)||22 ]       (23)

Distribution matching Following Eq. (23) result, the first term in Eq. (22), replacing p0 as p and
q0 as pθ will result in
                                     q
       W2 (p(X | C), pθ (X | C)) ≤ K1 Ep0 (X) [||∇X log p(X | C) − ∇X log pθ (X)||22 ]
                                     p
                                 = K1 Lscore                                                  (24)


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Conditional Independence Following Eq. (23) result, the second term in Eq. (22), replacing p0
                            Qn pθ (X|Ci )pθ (Ci )
as pθ and q0 (X) as ppθθ(X)
                        (C)  i      pθ (X)
                                                          n
                                                                                !
                                                  pθ (X) Y pθ (X | Ci )pθ (Ci )
                                   W2 pθ (X | C),
                                                   pθ (C) i     pθ (X)
                v
                u                                         n
                u                                 pθ (X) Y pθ (X | Ci )pθ (Ci ) 2
              ≤ tE∥∇X log pθ (X | C) − ∇X log                                  ∥2
                                                  pθ (C) i      pθ (X)

Further simplifying and incorporating ∇X log pθ (Ci ) = 0 and ∇X log pθ (C) = 0 will result in
                            n
                                                 !
                   pθ (X) Y pθ (X | Ci )pθ (Ci )
 W2 pθ (X | C),
                   pθ (C) i         pθ (X)
       v                                            X
 ≤ K2 u                                                 [∇X log pθ (X | Ci ) − ∇X log pθ (X)] ∥22
       u
       u  E∥∇  X log pθ (X | C) − ∇ X log pθ (X) −
       t                                              i
          |                                          {z                                        }
                                                        LCI
        p
 = K2       LCI                                                                                   (25)

Substituting Eq. (24), Eq. (25) in Eq. (22) will result in our final learning objective
                                               p                p
                                   Lcomp ≤ K1 Lscore + K2 LCI                                     (26)
where K1 , K2 are positive constants, i.e., the conditional independence objective LCI is incorporated
alongside the existing score-matching loss Lscore .
Note that Eq. (25) is the Fisher divergence between the joint pθ (X | C) and the causal factorization
pθ (X) Q pθ (X|Ci )pθ (Ci )
pθ (C)    i    pθ (X)       from Eq. (JM relation). From the properties of Fisher divergence (Sánchez-
                                                            Qn pθ (X|Ci )pθ (Ci )
Moreno et al., 2012), LCI = 0 iff pθ (X | C) = ppθθ(X)  (C)    i     pθ (X)       and further implying,
Q
   i pθ (Ci | X) = ptrain (C | X)
When Lcomp = 0: Pθ (X | C) = Ptrain (X | C) = P (X | C), and i pθ (Ci | X) = ptrain (C |
                                                                         Q
X). This implies that the learned marginals obey the causal independence relations from the data-
generation process, leading to more accurate marginals.

C     P RACTICAL C ONSIDERATIONS
To facilitate scalability and numerical stability for optimization, we introduce two approximations
to the upper bound of our objective function Eq. (10).

C.1   S CALABILITY OF LCI

A key computational challenge posed by Eq. (9) is that the number of model evaluations grows
linearly with the number of attributes. The Eq. (9) is derived from conditional independence formu-
lation as follows:                                Y
                                    pθ (C | X) =       pθ (Ci | X).                             (27)
                                                    i
By applying Bayes’ theorem to all terms, we obtain,
                          pθ (X | C)pθ (C) Y pθ (X | Ci )pθ (Ci )
                                             =                                                    (28)
                                pθ (X)           i
                                                    pθ (X)
Note that this formulation is equal to the causal factorization. From this, by applying logarithm and
differentiating w.r.t. X, we derive the score formulation.
                                                  X
                  ∇X log pθ (X | C) = ∇X log          pθ (X | Ci ) − ∇X log pθ (X)               (29)
                                                    i



                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The L2 norm of the difference between LHS and RHS of the objective in Eq. (29) is given by, which
forms our LCI objective.
                                                                                   !
                                               X
          LCI = ∥∇X log pθ (X | C) − ∇X log       pθ (X | Ci ) − ∇X log pθ (X) ∥22           (30)
                                                        i

Due to the i , in the equation, the number of model evaluations grows linearly with the number
            P
of attributes (n). This O(n) computational complexity hinders the approach’s applicability at scale.
To address this, we leverage the results of (Hammond & Sun, 2006), which shows conditional in-
dependence is equivalent to pairwise independence under large n to reduce the complexity to O(1)
in expectation. This allows for a significant improvement in scalability while maintaining computa-
tional efficiency. Using this result, we modify Eq. (27) to:
                          pθ (Ci , Cj | X) = pθ (Ci | X)pθ (Cj | X). ∀i, j
Accordingly, we can simplify the loss function for conditional independence as follows:
  LCI = Ep(X,C) Ej,k ∥∇X [log pθ (X|Cj , Ck ) − log pθ (X|Cj ) − log pθ (X|Ck ) + log pθ (X)]∥22 .
                                                                                               (31)
In score-based models, which are typically neural networks, the final objective is given as:
           LCI = Ep(X,C) Ej,k ∥sθ (X, Cj , Ck ) − sθ (X, Cj ) − sθ (X, Ck ) + sθ (X, ∅)∥22       (32)
where sθ (·) := ∇X log pθ (·) is the score of the distribution modeled by the neural network. We
leverage classifier-free guidance to train the conditional score sθ (X, Ci ) by setting Ck = ∅ for all
k ̸= i, and likewise for sθ (X, Ci , Cj ), we set Ck = ∅ for all k ̸∈ {i, j}.

C.2   S IMPLIFICATION OF T HEORETICAL L OSS

In Eq. (10), we showed that the 2-Wassertein distance between the true joint distribution p(X | C)
and the causal factorization in terms of the marginals p(X  √ | Ci ) is upper
                                                                           √ bounded by the weighted
sum of the square roots of Lscore and LCI as Lcomp ≤ K1 Lscore + K2 LCI . In practice, however,
we minimized a simple weighted sum of Lscore and LCI , given by Lfinal = Lscore + λLCI as shown
in Eq. (11) instead of Eq. (10). We used Eq. (11) to avoid the instability caused by larger gradi-
ent magnitudes (due to the square root). Eq. (11) also provided the following practical advantages:
(1) the simplicity of the loss function that made hyperparameter tuning easier, and (2) the similarity
of Eq. (11) to the loss functions of pre-trained diffusion models allowing us to reuse existing hyper-
parameter settings from these models. We did not observe any significant difference in conclusion
between the models trained on Eq. (10) and Eq. (11) as shown in Tabs. 3 and 4. Both approaches
significantly outperformed the baselines.

 Support          Method                           JSD ↓    ∧ (CS) ↑    ¬ Color (CS)↑     ¬ Digit (CS) ↑
                  LACE                                -      96.40           92.56             83.67
                  Composed GLIDE                    0.16     98.15           99.30             81.64
 Uniform          Theoretical C O I N D Eq. (10)    0.12     98.44           100.00            81.25
                  C O I N D (λ = 0.2)               0.14     99.73            99.32            84.94
                  C O I N D (λ = 1.0)               0.10     99.99            99.33            89.60
                  LACE                                -      82.61           65.16             69.51
                  Composed GLIDE                    0.30     86.10           81.61             70.44
 Non-uniform      Theoretical C O I N D Eq. (10)    0.17     96.88           93.75             72.66
                  C O I N D (λ = 1.0)               0.15     99.95           92.41             84.98
                  LACE                                -      10.85           9.03              28.24
                  Composed GLIDE                    2.75      7.40           5.09              33.86
 Partial          Theoretical C O I N D Eq. (10)    1.11     23.44           64.84             53.12
                  C O I N D (λ = 1.0)               1.17     52.38           53.28             52.59

  Table 3: Results on Colored MNIST to directly minimize the upper bound (K1 = 1, K2 = 0.1)



                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Support       Method                                JSD ↓      ∧ Composition        ¬ Composition
                                                                        2
                                                                      R ↑        CS ↑       R2 ↑      CS↑
                     LACE                                    -        0.97      91.19      0.85       50.00
                     Composed GLIDE                        0.302      0.94      83.75      0.91       48.43
       Uniform       Theoretical C O I N D Eq. (10)        0.270      0.98      92.19      0.92       64.06
                     C O I N D (λ = 1.0)                   0.215      0.98      95.31      0.92       55.46
                     LACE                                    -        0.88      62.07      0.70       30.10
                     Composed GLIDE                        0.503      0.86      51.56      0.61       34.63
       Partial       Theoretical C O I N D Eq. (10)        0.450      0.93      78.13      0.88       51.56
                     C O I N D (λ = 1.0)                   0.287      0.97      91.10      0.92       53.90

Table 4: Results on Shapes3D with the objective of directly minimizing the upper bound Eq. (10)
(K1 = 1, K2 = 0.1)


C.3   C HOICE OF H YPERPARAMETER λ

Effect of λ on the Learned Conditional Independence.            C O I N D enforces conditional inde-
pendence between the marginals of the attributes learned by the model by minimizing LCI defined
in Eq. (32). Here, we investigate the effect of LCI on the effectiveness of logical composition-
ality by varying its strength through λ in Eq. (11). Figure 8 plots JSD and CS (∧) as functions
of λ for models trained on the Colored MNIST dataset under the diagonal partial support setting.
When λ = 0, training relies solely on the score matching loss, re-       2.86                  54.86

sulting in higher conditional dependence between Ci | X. As λ
increases, CS improves since ensuring conditional independence           2.05                  36.69


                                                                                                              CS (∧)
between the marginals also encourages more accurate learning of                   JSD
the true marginals. However, when λ takes large values, the model        1.25                  18.52
learns truly independent conditional distribution C | X but effec-
tively ignores the input compositions and generates samples based
                                                                         0.44                  0.35
solely on the prior distribution pθ (X). As a result, CS drops.               0     5
                                                                                    λ
                                                                                            10

The value for the hyperparameter λ is chosen such that the gradi-
ents from the score-matching objective Lscore and the conditional Figure 8: Effect of λ on logi-
independence objective LCI are balanced in magnitude. One way cal compositionality under di-
to choose λ is by training a vanilla diffusion model and setting λ = agonal partial support on the
Lscore                                                                  Colored MNIST dataset.
  LCI . We used two values for λ in our experiments and noticed
that they gave similar results, indicating that the approach was stable for various values of λ.


D     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

In this section, we outline the high-level design choices of our approach.        We
provide full implementation details in our publicly available code and checkpoints at
https://github.com/sachit3022/compositional-generation/.

D.1   C O I N D A LGORITHM

To compute pairwise independence in a scalable fashion, we randomly select two attributes, i and j,
for a sample in the batch and enforce independence between them. As the score in Eq. (15) is given
by ϵ√θ (xt ,t)
       1−ᾱ
               . The final equation for enforcing LCI will be:
         t


                       1                                                                                 2
             LCI =           ϵθ (xt , t, ci ) + ϵθ (xt , t, cj ) − ϵθ (xt , t, ci,j ) − ϵθ (xt , t, c∅ ) 2
                     1 − ᾱt
We follow Ho et al. (2020) to weight the term by 1 − ᾱt . This results in an algorithm for C O I N D,
requiring only a few modifications of lines from (Ho & Salimans, 2022), highlighted below.


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 C O I N D Training
 1: repeat
 2: (c, x0 ) ∼ ptrain (c, x)
 3: ck ← ∅ with probability puncond         ▷ Set element of index,k i.e, ck to ∅ with puncond ∀k ∈ [0, N ]
    probability
 4: i ∼ Uniform({0, . . . , N }), j ∼ Uniform({0, . . . , N } \ {i}) ▷ Select two random attribute indices
 5: t ∼ Uniform({1, . . . , T })
 6: ϵ ∼ N√(0, I) √
 7: xt = ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ
 8: ci , cj , ci,j ← c
 9:    ci ← {ck = ∅ | k ̸= i}, cj ← {ck = ∅ | k ̸= j}, ci,j ← {ck = ∅ | k ̸∈ {i, j}}, c∅ ← ∅
10:   LCI = ||ϵθ (xt , t, ci ) + ϵθ (xt , t, cj ) − ϵθ (xt , t, ci,j ) − ϵθ (xt , t, c∅ )||22
11:  Take gradient descent step one
         ∇θ [∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t, c)∥2 +λLCI ]
12: until converged


Practical Implementation In our experiments, we have used puncond = 0.2 and for Shapes3D
instead of enforcing Ci ⊥
                        ⊥ Cj | X, for all i, j enforcing Ci ⊥⊥ C−i | X for all i have led to slightly
better results.

D.2     D ETAILS OF L OGICAL C OMPOSITIONALITY TASK

We designed the following task to evaluate two primitive logical compositions. (1) AND Composi-
tion ∧, (2) NOT Composition ¬
AND Composition To evaluate the ∧ composition, we apply the ∧ operation over all the attributes
to generate a respective image. Consider an image from the Shapes3D dataset (see Figure Fig. 9).
The image is generated by some function, f , with the input c = [ 6 8 4 6 2 11 ]. The
following image can be queried using the logical expression C1 = 6 ∧ . . . ∧ C6 = 11. We follow
Equation Eq. (1) to sample from the above logical composition. To reiterate, for the ∧ composition
task on Shapes3D, the sampling equation is given by ∇X pθ (X | C1 = 6 ∧ . . . ∧ C6 = 11):
                                    X
                   ∇X log pθ (X) +      [∇X log pθ (X | Ci ) − ∇X log pθ (X)]                 (33)
                                                  i

Similarly, to evaluate the AND composition for the Colored MNIST dataset, we perform the ∧
operation over digit C1 and color C2 .
NOT Composition To evaluate the ¬ compositions, the image is
queried as an AND on all the attributes except the object attribute,
which is queried by its negation. For example, consider the same im-
age from Figure Fig. 9, where the object sphere (C5 = 2) can be ex-
pressed as C5 = ¬[0 ∨ 1 ∨ 3], because the object class can only take
four possible values. Therefore, the same image can be described as
C1 = 6 ∧ . . . ∧ C5 = ¬[0 ∨ 1 ∨ 3] . . . ∧ C6 = 11. The only possi-
ble generation that meets these criteria is the image (Fig. 9) displayed as
expected.
The sampling equation for a test image with attributes
C1 , C2 , C3 , C4 , C5 , C6 can be written as C1 = 6 ∧ C2 = 8 ∧ C3 = Figure 9: Image from
4 ∧ C4 = 6 ∧ C5 = ¬[0 ∨ 1 ∨ 3] ∧ C6 = 11. Following Eq. (2), the Shapes3d with attributes
sampling equation is written as follows:                             c = [6, 8, 4, 6, 2, 11]
   ∇X log pθ (X|C1 = 6) + ∇X log pθ (X|C2 = 8) + ∇X log pθ (X|C3 = 4)
         + ∇X log pθ (X|C4 = 6) + ∇X log pθ (X|C6 = 11) − ∇X log pθ (X|C5 = 0)
                        − ∇X log pθ (X|C5 = 1) − ∇X log pθ (X|C5 = 3) − ∇X log pθ (X)
Similarly, for Colored MNIST, we perform two kinds of negation operations: one on digit and
another on color. In Section § 2, we have shown negation on color 4 ∧ ¬[Green ∨ Pink], along with


                                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


its sampling equation. A similar logic can be followed for negation on color; an example of negation
on digit is ¬[3 ∨ 4] ∧ Pink.
For ∧ and ¬, evaluations are strictly restricted to unseen compositions under orthogonal partial
support for Shapes3D and under diagonal partial support for Colored MNIST. This approach allows
us to explore how effectively the model handles logical operations through unseen image generation.
Additionally, we evaluate compositions observed during training with less frequency under non-
uniform support.


D.3    T RAINING DETAILS , A RCHITECTURE , AND S AMPLING

Training Composed GLIDE & C O I N D We train the diffusion model using the DDPM noise
scheduler. The model architecture and hyperparameters used for all experiments are detailed in
Tab. 5.
Training LACE The LACE method involves training multiple energy-based models for each
attribute and sampling according to logical compositional equations. However, we use score-based
models instead. We follow the architecture outlined in Tab. 5 for each attribute to train multiple
score-based models. For Colored MNIST, which has two attributes, we create two models—one
for each attribute—using the same architecture as other methods, effectively doubling the model
size. Similarly, for Shapes3D with six attributes, we develop six models. We reduce the Block Out
Channels for each attribute model to fit these into memory while keeping all other hyperparameters
consistent. Since we train a single model per attribute, we do not match the joint distribution,
preventing us from evaluating it and measuring the JSD.
Sampling To generate samples for a given logical composition, we sample from equations from
App. D.2 using DDIM (Song et al., 2021a) with 100 steps.

                                        Colored MNIST                                   Shapes3D
 Hyperparameter
                            C O I N D & Composed GLIDE        LACE       C O I N D & Composed GLIDE      LACE
 Optimizer                           AdamW                  AdamW                 AdamW                 AdamW
 Learning Rate                      2.0 × 10−4             2.0 × 10−4            2.0 × 10−4            2.0 × 10−4
 Num Training Steps                    50000                 100000                100000                100000
 Train Noise Scheduler                DDPM                   DDPM                  DDPM                  DDPM
 Train Noise Schedule                 Linear                 Linear                Linear                Linear
 Train Noise Steps                     1000                   1000                  1000                  1000
 Sampling Noise Schedule              DDIM                   DDIM                  DDIM                  DDIM
 Sampling Steps                         150                    150                   100                   100
 Model                                 U-Net                  U-Net                 U-Net                 U-Net
 Layers per block                        2                      2                     2                     2
 Beta Schedule                        Linear                 Linear                Linear                Linear
 Sample Size                          28x3x3                 28x3x3                64x3x3                64x3x3
 Block Out Channels                [56,112,168]           [56,112,168]        [56,112,168,224]        [56,112,168]
 Dropout Rate                           0.1                    0.1                   0.1                   0.1
 Attention Head Dimension                8                      8                     8                     8
 Norm Num Groups                         8                      8                     8                     8
 Number of Parameters                  8.2M                8.2M × 2                17.2M               8.2M × 6

Table 5: Hyperparameters for Colored MNIST and Shapes3D used by C O I N D, Composed GLIDE,
and LACE

CelebA To generate CelebA images, we scale the image size to 128 × 128. We use the latent
encoder of Stable Diffusion 3 (SD3) to encode the images to a latent space and perform diffusion in
the latent space. The architecture is similar to the Colored MNIST and Shapes3D, except that Block
out Channels are scaled as [224, 448, 672, 896]. We use a learning rate of 1.0 × 10−4 and train the
model for 500,000 steps on one A6000 GPU.
FID Measure To evaluate both the generation quality and how well the generated samples align
with the natural distribution of ’smiling male celebrities’, we use the FID metric (Seitzer, 2020).
Notably, we calculate the FID score specifically on the subset of ’smiling male celebrities,’ as our
primary objective is to assess the model’s ability to generate these unseen compositions. We generate
10000 samples to evaluate FID.


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T2I: Finetuning SDv1.5 We finetune SDv1.5 with the data constructed from CelebA, where the
labels are converted to text. For example, a label of (male=1, smiling=1) is converted to a “photo of
a smiling male celebrity."

D.4      A NALYTICAL F ORMS OF S UPPORT S ETTINGS

Below are the analytical expressions for the densities under the various support settings that we
considered in the paper. Let ni be the number of categories for the attribute Ci . For non-uniform
and diagonal partial support settings, we assume that ni = nj = n, ∀i, j, i ̸= j.

• Uniform setting: p(Ci = c1 ) = n1i and p(Ci = c1 , Cj = c2 ) = p(Ci = c1 )p(Cj = c2 ) = ni1nj .
                                                       (
                                                              1
                                                                  , c1 = 0 or c2 = 0
• Orthogonal support setting: p(Ci = c1 , Cj = c2 ) = ni +nj −1
                                                         0,          otherwise

                                                  a, c2 ≤ c1 ≤ c2 + 1
• Non-uniform setting: p(Ci = c1 , Cj = c2 ) =                           . where n12 ≤ b ≤ a ≤
                                                  b, otherwise
    1
  2n−1
                                                                  (
                                                                        1
                                                                      2n−1 ,   c2 ≤ c1 ≤ c2 + 1
• Diagonal partial support setting: p(Ci = c1 , Cj = c2 ) =                                     .
                                                                      0,       otherwise

D.5      DATASETS

Colored MNIST Dataset In Section § 1, we introduced the Colored MNIST dataset. Here, we
will detail the dataset generation process. We selected 10 visually distinct colors 1 , taking the value
C2 ∈ [0, 9]. The dataset is constructed by coloring the grayscale images from MNIST by converting
them into three channels and applying one of the ten colors to non-zero grayscale values.
The training data is composed of three types of support:

         • Uniform Support: A digit and a color are randomly selected to create an image.
         • Diagonal Partial Support: A digit is selected, and during training, it is only assigned one
           of two colors, C2 ∈ {d, d + 1}, except for 9, which only takes one color. This creates a
           dataset where compositions observed during training are along the diagonal of the C space,
           meaning each digit is seen only with its corresponding colors.
         • Non-uniform Support: All compositions are observed, but combining a digit and its cor-
           responding colors occurs with a higher probability (0.5). The remaining color space is
           distributed evenly among other colors, resulting in approximately a 0.25 probability for
           each corresponding color and a 0.0625 probability for each remaining color.

Shapes3D Full support for Shapes3D consists of all samples from the dataset. For orthogonal
support, we use the composition split of Shapes3D as described by Schott et al.., whose code is
publicly available 2 .
CelebA CelebA consists of 40 attributes, from which we select the "smiling" and "male" at-
tributes. We train generative models on all combinations of these attributes except (smiling=1,
male=1), resulting in an orthogonal partial support.

D.6      C ONFORMITY S CORE (CS)

In Section 2, we described the Conformity Score (CS) to quantify the accuracy of the generation
per the prompt. To measure the CS, we train a single ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) classifier with
multiple classification heads, one corresponding to each attribute, and trained on the full support.
This classifier estimates the attributes in the generated image, x, and extracts these attributes as
   1
       https://mokole.com/palette.html
   2
       https://github.com/bethgelab/InDomainGeneralizationBenchmark


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ϕ(x) = [cˆ1 , . . . , cˆn ]. These attributes are matched against the input prompt that generated the image
to obtain accuracy.
To explain further, for example, if the prompt is to generate “4 ∧ ¬[Green ∨ Pink]”, the generated
sample will have a CS of 1 if cˆ1 = 4 and cˆ2 ̸∈ {Green, Pink}. We average this across all the prompts
in the test set, which determines the CS for a given task.
The effectiveness of the classifier in predicting the attributes is reported in Table 10.

 Feature   Attributes    Possible Values     Accuracy           Feature    Attributes     Possible Values   Accuracy
 C1        Digit               0-9             98.93            C1         Gender             {0,1}           98.2
 C2        color            10 values           100             C2         Smile              {0,1}           92.1
            (a) Colored MNIST Dataset                                           (b) CelebA Dataset
                           Feature      Attributes       Possible Values        Accuracy
                           C1           floor hue       10 values in [0, 1]         100
                           C2           wall hue        10 values in [0, 1]         100
                           C3           object hue      10 values in [0, 1]         100
                           C4           scale            8 values in [0, 1]         100
                           C5           shape            4 values in [0-3]          100
                           C6           orientation    15 values in [-30, 30]       100
                                               (c) Shapes3D Dataset

Figure 10: Independent attribute, their possible values, and the classifier accuracy in estimating them
for different datasets


D.7    C OMPUTING JSD

We are interested in understanding the causal structure learned by diffusion models. Specifically,
we aim to determine whether the learned model captures the conditional independence between
attributes, allowing them to vary independently. This raises the question: Do diffusion models learn
the conditional independence between attributes? The conditional independence is defined by:
                                pθ (Ci , Cj | X) = pθ (Ci | X)pθ (Cj | X)                                        (34)
We aim to measure the violation of this equality using the Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSD) to
quantify the divergence between two probability distributions:
                        JSD = Epdata [DJS (pθ (C | X) || pθ (Ci | X)pθ (Cj | X))]                                (35)
The joint distribution, pθ (Ci , Cj | X), and the marginal distributions, pθ (Ci | X) and pθ (Cj | X),
are evaluated at all possible values that Ci and Cj can take to obtain the probability mass function
(pmf). The probability for each value is calculated using Equation Eq. (18) for the joint distribution
and Equation Eq. (17) for the marginals.

Practical Implementation For the diffusion model with multiple attributes, the violation in con-
ditional mutual independence should be calculated using all subset distributions. However, we focus
on pairwise independence. We further approximate this in our experiments by computing JSD be-
tween the first two attributes, C1 and C2 . We have observed that computing JSD between any
attribute pair does not change our examples’ conclusion.

D.8    M EASURING D IVERSITY IN ATTRIBUTES

To achieve explicit control over certain attributes during the generation process, these attributes must
vary independently. Therefore, an ideal generative model must be able to produce samples where
all except the controlled attributes take diverse values. This diversity can be measured by the en-
tropy of the uncontrolled attributes in the generated samples, where higher entropy suggests greater
diversity. Therefore, the accurate generation of controlled and diverse uncontrolled attributes for
the given the underlying data distribution has uniform attributes indicates that the model has suc-
cessfully learned when the underlying attribute distribution is uniform. In contrast, for non-uniform


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


distributions—such as the Gaussian example discussed in App. G.1—a simple diversity argument
no longer applies, and minimum KL divergence between the model and the true distribution be-
comes the appropriate measure. Under a uniform attribute assumption, however, the KL divergence
essentially reduces to maximum entropy.
For example, consider the generation of colored MNIST digits. In this case, controllability means
that the model has learned that digit and color attributes are independent. When prompted to generate
a specific digit (controlled attribute), the model should generate this digit in all possible colors
(uncontrolled attribute) with equal likelihood, implying maximum entropy for the color attribute
and diverse generation. We measure this entropy by generating samples xi ∼ pθ (X | c1 = 4) and
passing them through a near-perfect classifier to obtain the color predictions p(Cˆ2 ) = p(ϕ2 (xi )).
The diversity is then quantified as: H = Ecˆ2 ∼p(Cˆ2 ) [log2 p(cˆ2 )]
Ensuring diversity through explicit control has applications in bias detection and mitigation in gen-
erative models. For example, a biased model may generate images of predominantly male doctors
when asked to generate images of “doctors”. Ensuring diversity in uncontrolled attributes like gen-
der or race can limit such biases.


E     C O I N D FOR FACE I MAGE G ENERATION

In § 5, we demonstrated that C O I N D outperforms baseline methods on the unseen logical com-
positionality task using synthetic datasets. In App. E.1, we showcase the success of C O I N D in
generating face images from the CelebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015), where C O I N D demonstrates su-
perior control over attributes compared to the baseline. C O I N D also allows us to adjust the strength
of various attributes and thus provides more fine-grained control over the compositional attributes,
as shown in App. E.2. Finally, in App. E.3, we extend C O I N D to text-to-image (T2I) models widely
used in practice to generate face images by providing the desired attributes as logical expressions of
text prompts.
Problem Setup We choose the CelebA dataset to evaluate C O I N D’s ability to generate real-world
images. We choose the binary attributes “smiling” and “gender” as the attributes we wish to control.
During training, all combinations of these attributes except gender = “male” and smiling = “true” are
observed, similar to the orthogonal support shown in Fig. 3. During inference, the model is tasked
to generate images with the attribute combination gender = “male” and smiling = “true”, which was
not observed during training.
Metrics Similar to the experiments on the synthetic image datasets in § 5, we assess the accuracy
of the generation w.r.t. the input desired attribute combination CS (conformity score). We also
measure the violation of the learned conditional independence using JSD. In addition to CS, we
compute FID (Fréchet inception distance) between the generated images and the real samples in
the CelebA dataset where gender = “male” and smiling = “true”. A lower FID implies that the
distribution of generated samples is closer to the real distribution of the images in the validation
dataset.

E.1   C O I N D CAN SUCCESSFULLY GENERATE REAL - WORLD FACE IMAGES

Tab. 2 shows the quantitative results of C O I N D and Composed GLIDE trained from scratch in the
tasks of joint sampling and ∧ composition. Similar to our observations from previous experiments,
C O I N D achieves better CS in both tasks by learning accurate marginals as demonstrated by lower
JSD. When sampled from the joint likelihood, C O I N D achieves a nearly 4× improvement in CS
over the baseline.

E.2   C O I N D PROVIDES FINE - GRAINED CONTROL OVER ATTRIBUTES

So far, we studied the capabilities of C O I N D to dictate the presence and absence of attributes in the
task of controllable image generation. However, there are applications where we desire fine-grained
control over the attributes. Specifically, we may want to control the amount of each attribute in the
generated sample. We can mathematically formulate this task by revisiting the formulation of logical
expressions of attributes in terms of the score functions of marginal likelihood. As an example, the


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       COIND             Composed GLIDE                         LACE


                                     γ=0
          increases as γ increases
            The amount of smile

                                     γ=1
                                     γ=2
                                     γ=6


Figure 11: By adjusting γ, C O I N D allows us to the vary the amount of “smile” in the generated
images. However, Composed GLIDE associates the smile attribute with the gender attribute due to
their association in the training data. Hence, the images generated by Composed GLIDE contain
gender-specific attributes such as long hair and earrings.


∧ operation can be written as,
    ∇X log pθ (X | C1 ∧ C2 ) = ∇X log pθ (X | C1 ) + ∇X log pθ (X | C2 ) − ∇X log pθ (X)
Here, to adjust the amount of attribute added to the generated sample, we can weigh the score
functions using some scalar γ, as follows,
                                      ∇X log pθ (X | C1 ) + γ∇X log pθ (X | C2 ) − γ∇X log pθ (X)                      (36)
where γ controls for the amount of C2 attribute.

                                                                          Methods
                                                          LACE           Composed GLIDE                 CoInD



                                                 125                                 40

                                                 100                                 30
                                           FID


                                                                                CS


                                                  75                                 20

                                                  50
                                                                                     10
                                                         2           4     6                 2          4         6
                                                                 γ                                  γ
                                             (a) Variation of FID with γ             (b) Variation of CS with γ

Figure 12: Effect of γ on FID and CS: Varying the amount of smile in a generated image through
γ does not affect the FID of C O I N D. However, the smiles in the generated images become more
apparent, leading to easier detection by the smile classifier and improved CS.

Fig. 11 shows the effect of increasing γ to adjust the amount of smiling in the generated image. Ide-
ally, we expect increasing γ to increase the amount of smiling without affecting the gender attribute.
When γ = 0 (top row), both C O I N D and Composed GLIDE generate images of men who are not
smiling. As γ increases, we notice that the samples generated by C O I N D show an increase in the
amount of smiling, going from a short smile to a wider smile to one where teeth are visible. Note
that the training dataset did not include any images of smiling men or fine-grained annotations for
the amount of smiling in each image. This conclusion is strengthened by Fig. 12b that shows an
increase in CS when γ increases. CS increases when it is easier for the smile classifier to detect the
smile. C O I N D provides this fine-grained control over the smiling attribute without any effect on the
realism of the images, as shown by the minimal changes in FID in Fig. 12a.


                                                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In contrast, the images generated by Composed GLIDE show an increase in the amount of smiling
while adding gender-specific attributes such as long hair and makeup. We conclude that, by strictly
enforcing a conditional independence loss between the attributes, C O I N D provides fine-grained
control over the attributes, allowing us to adjust the intensity of the attribute in the image without
additional training. As shown in Tab. 2, C O I N D outperforms the baselines for generating unseen
compositions. Tuning γ further improves the generation.

E.3     F INETUNING T2I MODELS WITH C O I N D IMPROVES LOGICAL COMPOSITIONALITY

                   “smiling male”              “smiling” AND “male”              “smiling” NOT “female”



Composed
      GLIDE


  COIND


Figure 13: Samples generated after fine-tuning SDv1.5 on CelebA. The first row shows images gen-
erated by SDv1.5 fine-tuned on CelebA, while the second row shows images generated by SDv1.5
fine-tuned with C O I N D. Columns indicate samples generated from the respective prompts indicated
above.

We proposed C O I N D to improve control over the attributes in an image through logical expressions
of these attributes. Since larger pre-trained diffusion models such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach
et al., 2022) have become more accessible, we seek to incorporate the benefits of C O I N D in these
models. This section shows that text-to-image (T2I) models can be fine-tuned to generate images
using logical expressions of text prompts. Specifically, we use Stable Diffusion v1.5 (SDv1.5) to
generate face images from the CelebA dataset where smiling and gender attributes can be controlled.
We consider both joint and marginal sampling, similar to our case study in § 3. For joint sampling,
we provide SDv1.5 with the prompt “Photo of a smiling male celebrity”. In the marginal sampling,
we provide the values for smiling and gender attributes using separate prompts – “Photo of a smiling
celebrity” ∧ “Photo of a male celebrity”. Then, we sample from these marginal likelihoods resulting
from these prompts following Eq. (1). To evaluate ¬ capabilities, we use the prompts “Photo of a
smiling celebrity” ¬ “Photo of a female celebrity” and follow Eq. (2).

                                           ↓       Joint          ∧ Composition       ¬ Composition
 Support       Method                JSD
                                               CS ↑     FID ↓         CS ↑   FID ↓    CS ↑       FID ↓
               Composed GLIDE         0.57     56.57    58.31     14.19      73.53    11.02     115.95
 Orthogonal
               C O I N D (λ = 1.0)    0.37     58.57    58.19     49.15      61.16    18.80     86.31

   Table 6: Results on SDv1.5 fine-tuning. C O I N D outperforms the baseline on all the metrics.

Discussion

  1. In Tab. 6, C O I N D improves performance across all metrics – achieving 3.46× and 2× im-
     provement in CS over Composed GLIDE in ∧ and ¬ composition tasks. The images generated
     by C O I N D have better FID than those from the baseline.
  2. Visual inspection of the generated samples for the same random seed provides insights into
     how Composed GLIDE and C O I N D perceive the prompts. Images in columns 1, 3, and 5 of
     Fig. 13 were generated with the same random seed. Similarly, those in columns 2 and 4 share
     the random seed. We note the following observations:


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          – Both Composed GLIDE and C O I N D generated images with the desired attributes when
            sampled from the joint likelihood using “photo of a smiling male celebrity”. The images
            generated by these models from the same random seed were also visually similar. This
            shows that both models can aptly set attributes in the generated images and have identical
            stochastic profiles, leading to unspecified attributes that assume similar values.
          – When the attributes were passed as the ∧ expression “smiling” ∧ “male”, C O I N D gen-
            erated images that were visually similar to those with matching random seeds generated
            from joint sampling. This implies that C O I N D learned accurate marginals that help it to
            correctly model the joint likelihood.
          – When tasked with generating images for “smiling” ∧ “male”, Composed GLIDE gener-
            ated images of smiling persons with gender-specific attributes such as thinner eyebrows,
            commonly seen in photos of female celebrities. These gender-specific features increase
            when the task is to generate images of “smiling” ¬ “female”. In contrast, C O I N D gen-
            erates images of smiling celebrities while adding attributes such as a beard. Thus, we
            conclude that C O I N D offers better control over the desired attributes without affecting
            correlated attributes.

F     D ISCUSSION ON C O I N D
F.1    C ONNECTION TO COMPOSITIONAL GENERATION FROM FIRST PRINCIPLES

Compositional generation from first principles Wiedemer et al. (2024) have shown that restricting
the function to a certain compositional form will perform better than a single large model. In this
section, we show that, by enforcing conditional independence, we restrict the function to encourage
compositionality.
Let c1 , c2 , . . . , cn be independent components such that c1 , c2 , . . . , cn ∈ R. Consider an injective
function f : Rn → Rd defined by f (c) = x. If the components, c are conditionally independent
given x the cumulative functions, F must satisfy the following constraint:
                                                                             Y
                              FCi ,Cj ,...,Cn |X=x (ci , cj , . . . , cn ) =   FCi |X=x (ci )           (37)
                                                                              i

FC−1
   i ,Cj ,...,Cn |X=x
                      (x) = inf{ci , cj , . . . , cn   | F (ci , cj , . . . , cn ) ≥ x}, where Fc−1
                                                                                                 i ,cj ,...,Cn |X=x
                                                                                                                    is a
generalized inverse distribution function.
                                                                              Y
                   f (ci , cj , . . . , cn ) = (f ◦ Fc−1
                                                      i ,cj ,...,Cn |X=x
                                                                         )(       FCi |X=x (ci ))
                                                                              i
                                                                                  X
                                         = (f ◦ Fc−1
                                                  i ,cj ,...,Cn |X=x
                                                                     ◦ e)(             log FCi |X=x (ci ))
                                                                                   i
                                                X
                                         = g(        ϕi (ci ))
                                                 i



Therefore, we are restricting f to take a certain functional form. However, it is difficult to show
that the data generating process, f , meets the rank condition on the Jacobian for the sufficient sup-
port assumption Wiedemer et al. (2024), which is also the limitation discussed in their approach.
Therefore, we cannot provide guarantees. However, this section provides a functional perspective of
C O I N D.

F.2    2D G AUSSIAN : C LOSED - FORM A NALYSIS OF C O I N D

In this section, we derive closed-form expressions for the score functions underlying our method
and demonstrate how C O I N D leverages conditional independence constraints to generate the true
data distribution.
Data Generation Process We consider data generated from two independent attributes, C1 and
C2 , which are binary variables taking values in {−1, +1}. The observed variable X is defined as:
                                                X = f (C1 ) + f (C2 ),                                             (38)


                                                             28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            2                             2                         2

        1
                            1                             1                         1
   C2
                            0                             0                         0
        1
                            1                             1                         1

    3       1        1
        3       C1          2                             2                         2
                                2   1   0   1   2             2   1   0   1     2       2   1   0   1   2



(a) True underlying data (b) Training data Orthog-     Conditional distribu-       Conditional   distri-
    distribution             onal Support          (c) tion learned by vanilla (d) bution learned by
                                                       diffusion objective         COIND

Figure 14: C O I N D respects underlying independence conditions thereby generating true data distri-
bution (d).


where
                                    f (c) = c + σϵ,       ϵ ∼ N (0, I).
Thus, f (C1 ) produces a Gaussian mixture along the x-axis with means at −1 and +1, and similarly
f (C2 ) produces a mixture along the y-axis with means at −1 and +1 (see blue plot on the axis of
Figure 14a). The combination yields a two-dimensional Gaussian mixture (Figure 14a).
Training Setup and Orthogonal Support For training, we assume orthogonal support where
only the following combinations of (C1 , C2 ) are observed: {(−1, −1), (−1, +1), (+1, −1)}. The
model is then tasked with generating samples from the unseen composition (+1, +1). Recall that
our assumptions (see Section 2) are satisfied: C1 and C2 independently generate X, and all possible
values for each attribute are observed at least once during training.
Score Function Decomposition Let s+1,+1 (x) denote the score corresponding to p(x | C1 =
+1, C2 = +1), and let s1,∅ (x) denote the marginal score p(x | C1 = +1) (with a similar definition
for s∅,1 (x)). Leveraging Eq. (1) s+1,+1 (x) is decomposed as follows:

                            s+1,+1 (x) = s1,∅ (x) + s∅,1 (x) − s∅,∅ (x),                                (39)

where s∅,∅ (x) is the score of the training data and not full data.
For example, when training on the observed combination (+1, −1), the score function of the
s1,∅ , s∅,1 , is a Gaussian, and written in closed form as
                                                   µ+1,−1 − x
                                        s1,∅ (x) =            ,
                                                       σ2
                                                   µ+1,−1 − x
                                        s∅,1 (x) =            .                                         (40)
                                                       σ2
In contrast, the score of s∅,∅ (x), is the mixture (over the three training components) given as:
                                                             2      µi −x
                                             P
                                               i N (x; µi , σ I)     σ2
                                s∅,∅ (x) =       P                2
                                                                            .                     (41)
                                                    i N (x; µi , σ I)


However, when using Langevin dynamics for sampling (see Eq. (13)), the naive combination in
Eq. (39) produces an incorrect conditional distribution (Figure 14c). Specifically, the generated dis-
tribution shows a spurious red blob between the (+1, −1) and (−1, +1) modes rather than a proper
Gaussian centered at (+1, +1). This shows that Diffusion models interpolate between the modes,
rather than following underlying conditional independence and generalizing to unseen modes.
Correcting with Conditional Independence Constraints Instead of modeling s1,∅ (x) directly,
C O I N D learns the joint scores for the three observed combinations:

                                s−1,−1 (x),     s+1,−1 (x),       s−1,+1 (x).


                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


These are then combined under the assumption of pairwise conditional independence to infer the
score for the unseen composition:
                         s−1,−1 (x) = s+1,∅ (x) + s∅,+1 (x) − s∅,∅ (x),
                            s+1,−1 (x) = s+1,∅ (x) + s∅,−1 (x) − s∅,∅ (x),
                          s−1,+1 (x) = s−1,∅ (x) + s∅,+1 (x) − s∅,∅ (x),                                  (42)
which leads to the following expression for the unseen (+1, +1) composition:
                        s+1,+1 (x) = s+1,∅ (x) + s∅,+1 (x) − s∅,∅ (x)
                                      = s+1,−1 (x) + s−1,+1 (x) − s−1,−1 (x)
                                          [µ+1,−1 + µ−1,+1 − µ−1,−1 ] − x
                                      =                                   .                               (43)
                                                        σ2
The derivation above shows that C O I N D effectively enforces conditional independence constraints
to generate the unseen data distribution. This analysis underscores the necessity of incorporating
conditional independence constraints into diffusion models to faithfully reproduce the target distri-
bution, particularly when extrapolating to unseen compositions.

F.3   E XTENSION TO G AUSSIAN SOURCE FLOW MODELS

Diffusion models can be viewed as a specific case of flow-based models where: (1) the source dis-
tribution is Gaussian, and (2) the forward process follows a predetermined noise schedule (Lipman
et al., 2024). Can we reformulate C O I N D in terms of velocity rather than score, thereby generaliz-
ing it to accommodate arbitrary source distributions and schedules? When the source distribution
is gaussian, score and velocity are related by affine transformation as detailed in Tab. 1 of (Lipman
et al., 2024).
                               stθ (x, C1 , C2 ) = at x + bt utθ (x, C1 , C2 )                    (44)
replacing sθ (·) into Eq. (32)
            t

       LCI = Ep(X,C),t∼U [0,1] Ej,k ∥stθ (x, Cj , Ck ) − stθ (x, Cj ) − stθ (x, Ck ) + stθ (x)∥22
           = Ep(X,C),t∼U [0,1] Ej,k b2t ∥utθ (x, Cj , Ck ) − stθ (x, Cj ) − utθ (x, Ck ) + utθ (x)∥22


However we can ignore b2t , weighting for the time step t.
      LCI = Ep(X,C),t∼U [0,1] Ej,k ∥utθ (x, Cj , Ck ) − utθ (x, Cj ) − utθ (x, Ck ) + utθ (x)∥22   (45)


Therefore, if the source distribution is gaussian and for any arbitrary noise schedule, constraint in
score translates directly to velocity constraint as given as Eq. (45).

F.4   C OMPOSITIONAL VS M ONOLITHIC MODELS

Our findings echo the prior observations (Du & Kaelbling, 2024) that composite models consisting
of separate diffusion models trained on individual factors (e.g., LACE) demonstrate better ∧ compo-
sitionality under partial support than sampling from factorized distributions learned by monolithic
models (e.g., Composed GLIDE). However, we found that monolithic models can be significantly
improved by enforcing the conditional independence constraints necessary for enabling logical com-
positionality. For instance, C O I N D achieved a 2.4× better CS on Colored MNIST with diagonal
partial support and a 1.4× improvement on orthogonal partial support on Shapes3D compared to
LACE.

F.5   L IMITATIONS

This paper considered compositions of a closed set of attributes. As such, C O I N D requires pre-
defined attributes and access to data labeled with the corresponding attributes. Moreover, C O I N D
must be enforced during training, which requires retraining the model whenever the attribute space
changes to include additional values. Instead, state-of-the-art generative models seek to operate
without pre-defined attributes or labeled data and generate open-set compositions. Despite the seem-
ingly restricted setting of our work, our findings provide valuable insights into a critical limitation of
current generative models, namely their failure to generalize for unseen compositions, by identifying
the source of this limitation and proposing an effective solution to mitigate it.


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G                A DDITIONAL R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION ON C O I N D

G.1              L EARNING UNDER NON - UNIFORM p(Ci )


                                                                                                                                            Coind
                                                                                                                                            True
    Color (C2)


                                                                                                                            0.2


                                                                                                                   p(C2 | C1 = 4)
                                        Method                JSD ↓   ∧ (CS) ↑   ¬ Color (CS)↑   ¬ Digit (CS) ↑
                                        LACE                    -      89.22        58.59            57.81                  0.1
                                        Composed GLIDE        0.27     91.74        88.91            78.39
                                        C O I N D (λ = 1.0)   0.16     99.61        98.51            83.03
                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                    0   1     2     3   4        5   6   7   8   9
                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9                                                                                                                       C2
                       Digit (C1)

    (a) Gaussian support                  (b) Quantitative results for Gaussian support                           (c) p(C2 | C1 = 4) vs pθ (C2 |
                                                                                                                  C1 = 4)

Figure 15: Results on Gaussian support: When the independent attributes have non-uniform cat-
egorical distributions, the joint distribution of attribute combinations is not uniform. Even in this
case, C O I N D learns pθ (Ci | Cj ) accurately.

In our experiments, we considered the uniform support setting as an example where the attribute
variables are independent of each other in the training data, i.e., C1 ⊥⊥ C2 | X during training.
However, uniform support is not the only scenario that can arise from independent attribute variables.
In this section, we show that C O I N D can learn accurate marginals irrespective of the distribution of
Ci .
We designed an experiment using the Colored MNIST images where the attributes C1 and C2 as-
sume values from a non-uniform categorical distribution that resembles a discrete Gaussian distri-
bution. The resulting joint distribution of the attributes, which we refer to as Gaussian support, is
illustrated in Fig. 15a. We trained C O I N D and baselines on this dataset and evaluated on ∧ and
¬ compositionality tasks. Apart from comparing the CS of baselines and C O I N D on these com-
positionality tasks, we also evaluate if C O I N D accurately learns p(Ci ) by comparing the learned
pθ (Ci | Cj ) against the true p(Ci | Cj ). Intuitively, this verifies if C O I N D generates images with
uncontrolled attributes matching their distribution in the training dataset.
Fig. 15b quantitatively compares C O I N D against Composed GLIDE on CS in both ∧ and ¬ compo-
sitionality tasks. Like our previous experiments, C O I N D outperforms Composed GLIDE w.r.t. CS
in all tasks. In Fig. 15c, we verify if C O I N D has learned pθ (C2 | C1 ) accurately by comparing it
against the true distribution p(C2 | C1 ). pθ (C2 | C1 = c∗ ) = pϕ (C2 | X)pθ (X | C1 = c∗ ) is ob-
tained as the histogram density of the attributes that appear in the generated images when C1 = c∗ .
We observe that the learned distribution pθ (C2 | C1 = 4) is close to the true distribution, forming a
bell shape.

G.2              FAILURE EXAMPLES OF C O I N D

Here, we examine some samples generated by C O I N D where it failed to include the desired at-
tributes. We show these failure cases from each dataset, i.e., Colored MNIST, Shapes3d, and
CelebA datasets. Samples from Colored MNIST and Shapes3d datasets are taken from the par-
tial support setting, while the ones from the CelebA dataset are taken from the orthogonal support
setting. Fig. 16a shows some failure samples from the Colored MNIST dataset. The images in the
first row contain digits with colors leaking from the nearby seen attribute combination. Those in the
second row correspond to ¬ approximation and have wrong attributes due to the approximation in
the probabilistic formulation in Eq. (2). Some images, like those in the third row, are unrealistic,
although they may contain the desired attributes. We observe similar failures in Shapes3d samples
shown in Fig. 16b where the C O I N D deviates from the desired compositions (column 1). Some
failed samples from the CelebA dataset are shown in Fig. 16c. The samples correspond to the task
of “smile” ∧ “male”. In the top image, it is hard to distinguish if the subject is smiling or laughing.
In some samples, we observed only a weak or soft smile. This could be because a smile is difficult
to control due to its limited spatial presence in an image.

G.3              C ONFORMITY SCORE FOR EACH ATTRIBUTE COMBINATION


                                                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Red ¬ (1 ∨ 2)
                                                                                     Real        COIND
                          7 ∧ Dark Green
                                                                                                                                    “Male” ∧ “Smiling”


                                                                Single attribute
          Similar color


                                                                   mismatch


                                                                                                                     Smile or
                                                                                                                      laugh
                            9 ¬ Cream       Yellow ¬ (2 ∨ 3)


                                                                Attribute mismatch
       Wrong attributes


                                                                  ¬ composition
       ¬ compositions


                            4 ∧ Cream      8 ¬ (Cream ∨ Blue)


                                                                                                                     quantify
                                                                                                                     Hard to
                                                                    Unrealistic
          Unrealistic


       (a) Failure samples from Colored (b) Failure samples                                                from (c) Failure samples from
       MNIST dataset                    Shapes3d dataset                                                        CelebA dataset

 Figure 16: Some samples generated by C O I N D where it could not enforce the desired attributes.


In all our experiments, we report CS as the primary metric                                                                                                               100

to evaluate if the generative model produced images with                                                       37   15   92     89   36   27   53   77   99   99


                                                                                                           9
accurate attributes. However, CS is the average accuracy                                                       0    50   0      17   1    54   85 100 99      39



                                                                                                           8
across all unseen attribute combinations. Not all attribute
                                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                                                                               2    61   58     32   50   89 100 99      21   4
combinations may be generated with equal accuracy.                                                         7
                                                                                                               53   52   90     90   79 100 100 92       84 100
                                                                                                           6

                                                                                                                                                                         60
For instance, Fig. 17 shows the CS for each attribute                                                          96   78   94     95 100 99      97   98   49   39
                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                   Color


combination in the ∧ compositionality task in Colored                                                          77 100 99 100 100 99 100 97               80   97
                                                                                                           4


MNIST image generation with partial support setting                                                                                                                      40

(row 10 in Fig. 4a). As a reminder, C O I N D achieved                                                         8    82 100 100 39         4    8    7    89   22
                                                                                                           3


52.38% CS on unseen attribute combinations in this task.                                                       7    100 100 98       50   16   2    2    59   9
                                                                                                           2


                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                               100 100 70       89   97   93   93   79   48   47
We can see that C O I N D can successfully generate all seen
                                                                                                           1


attribute combinations that appear on the diagonal. Some                                                       100 100 99       90   74   98   98   98   82   42
                                                                                                           0


                                                                                                                                                                         0
unseen attribute combinations achieve > 90% CS, while                                                          0     1   2      3     4   5    6    7    8    9

others have nearly 0% CS. We do not observe the model                                                                                 Digit

struggling to generate images with any specific attribute
or digit, although some colors have a generally lower CS                                          Figure 17: Heatmap showing CS
than others. For example, colors 2 and 3 have zero CS                                             for each attribute combination in the
with more digits than others. On the other hand, colors                                           ∧ compositionality task in Colored
4, 5, and 6 have high CS with all digits. We hypothesize                                          MNIST generation with partial support
that this disparity in CS could depend on the nature of                                           (row 10 in Fig. 4a)
attributes and the similarity between the values they can
take.


G.4    C O I N D ALSO IMPROVES CONDITIONAL GENERATION


  Support                          Configuration                     CS
  Uniform                          Vanilla                      99.98                Support                        Configuration                       R2          CS
  Uniform                          C O I N D(λ = 1)              100
  Non-uniform                      Vanilla                      99.98                Uniform                        Vanilla                         0.99           100
  Non-uniform                      C O I N D(λ = 1)             99.98                Uniform                        C O I N D(λ = 1)                0.99           100
  Diagonal partial                 Vanilla                      33.14                Orthogonal partial             Vanilla                         0.97           95.88
  Diagonal partial                 C O I N D(λ = 0.5)           68.82                Orthogonal partial             C O I N D(λ = 1)                0.99           99.57
                          (a) Colored MNIST                                                                     (b) Shapes3D

                                Table 7: Overall Performance Metrics for Conditional generation


                                                                                       32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given an ordered n-tuple from the attribute space not observed during training, can C O I N D generate
images corresponding to this sampled from joint distribution, Pθ (X|C)? To answer this question,
we train C O I N D and the baselines on Colored MNIST and Shapes3d datasets. Tab. 7 shows the
results. As expected, the vanilla model, under full support, generates samples corresponding to the
joint distribution. However, as demonstrated in § 3, models trained on partial support fail to generate
samples for unseen attribute compositions. In addition to the improved performance on logical
compositionality, enforcing conditional independence explicitly improves conditional generation as
well and produces better results on partial support compared to vanilla diffusion models for both
Colored MNIST and Shapes3D datasets.

G.5   C O I N D CAN INTERPOLATE BETWEEN DISCRETE ATTRIBUTES

In some cases, it may be necessary to have control over       Observed     Interpolated  Observed
continuous-valued attributes such as height or thickness.          ◦               ◦
However, the datasets with continuous annotations may          26             28           30◦
not be available to train such models. Or we may be in-
terested in using a pre-trained model that was trained to
generate images with discrete attributes. In such cases,
can we generate samples where attributes take arbitrary
values that do not belong to the set of training annota-
tions? We show that C O I N D can interpolate between
the discrete values of an attribute on which it was orig- Figure 18: Although C O I N D was only
inally trained and thus essentially produce images with trained to generate images with orienta-
continuous-valued attributes.                             tions 26° and 30°, it successfully gener-
                                                          ated a sample with 28° orientation.
As mentioned in the main paper, we trained C O I N D to
generate images from the Shapes3d dataset using the la-
bels provided in (Kim & Mnih, 2018). The labels provided for the orientation attribute were discrete,
although orientation itself is continuous.
In Fig. 18, we highlight the images generated by C O I N D where the subject has orientations 26° and
30°. We interpolate between observed discrete values linearly and generate the samples shown in the
second column of Fig. 18. By carefully observing the variation in the gap between the corner of the
cube and the corner of the room, we notice that C O I N D generated an image where the orientation of
the cube is midway between those of 26° and 30°. This demonstrates that C O I N D offers a promising
direction where training on datasets with discrete annotations is sufficient to generate samples with
continuous-valued attributes.


                                                  33
