Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A D EEP G ENERATIVE L EARNING A PPROACH FOR
T WO - STAGE A DAPTIVE ROBUST O PTIMIZATION
 Aron Brenner, Rahman Khorramfar, Jennifer Sun, & Saurabh Amin
 Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
 {abrenner,khorram,jennisun,amins}@mit.edu



                                           A BSTRACT
         Two-stage adaptive robust optimization (ARO) is a powerful approach for plan-
         ning under uncertainty, balancing first-stage decisions with recourse decisions
         made after uncertainty is realized. To account for uncertainty, modelers typi-
         cally define a simple uncertainty set over which potential outcomes are consid-
         ered. However, classical methods for defining these sets unintentionally capture a
         wide range of unrealistic outcomes, resulting in ineffective and costly planning in
         anticipation of unlikely contingencies. In this work, we introduce AGRO, a solu-
         tion algorithm that performs adversarial generation for two-stage adaptive robust
         optimization using a variational autoencoder. AGRO generates high-dimensional
         contingencies that are simultaneously adversarial and realistic, improving the ro-
         bustness of first-stage decisions at a lower planning cost than standard methods.
         To ensure generated contingencies lie in high-density regions of the uncertainty
         distribution, AGRO defines a tight uncertainty set as the image of “latent” uncer-
         tainty sets under the VAE decoding transformation. Projected gradient ascent is
         then used to maximize recourse costs over the latent uncertainty sets by leveraging
         differentiable optimization methods. We demonstrate the cost-efficiency of AGRO
         by applying it to both a synthetic production-distribution problem and a real-world
         power system expansion setting. We show that AGRO outperforms the standard
         column-and-constraint algorithm by up to 1.8% in production-distribution plan-
         ning and up to 8% in power system expansion.



1    Introduction
Growing interest in data-driven stochastic optimization has been facilitated by the increasing avail-
ability of more granular data for a wide range of settings where decision-makers hedge against
uncertainty and shape operational risks through effective planning. Adaptive robust optimization
(ARO) – also known as adjustable or multi-stage robust optimization – is a class of stochastic op-
timization models with applications spanning optimization of industrial processes (Gong & You,
2017), transportation systems (Xie et al., 2020), and energy systems planning (Bertsimas et al.,
2012). In this work, we aim to solve data-driven two-stage ARO problems under high-dimensional
uncertainty. These problems take the form:

                             min c⊤ x + max min d(ξ)⊤ y ,                                        (1)
                            x∈X               ξ∈U y∈Y(ξ,x)

where x denotes “here-and-now” first-stage decisions and y denotes the “wait-and-see” recourse
decisions made after the random variable ξ ∈ RD is realized. The set U ⊂ RD represents the uncer-
tainty set, encompassing all possible realizations of ξ that must be accounted for when identifying
the optimal first-stage decisions x. Here, we assume that the first-stage decisions x are mixed-
integer variables taking values in X while the recourse decisions y take values in the polyhedral set
Y(ξ, x) = {y | B(ξ)y ≥ b(ξ) − A(ξ)x, y ≥ 0}, where d(·), B(·), b(·), and A(·) are affine
functions of ξ. Additionally, we assume feasibility and boundedness of the recourse problem (i.e.
complete recourse) for any first-stage decision x ∈ X and uncertainty realization ξ ∈ U.


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Example (Power System Expansion Planning). As an illustrative application of ARO, consider
the problem of capacity expansion planning for a regional generation and transmission system. In
this case, x denotes long-term decisions (i.e., installing renewable power plants and transmission
lines), which require an upfront investment c⊤ x. As time unfolds and demand for electricity ξ
becomes known, electrical power y ∈ Y(ξ, x) can be generated and dispatched to meet demand
at a recourse cost of d(ξ)⊤ y. To ensure robustness against uncertain demand, first-stage decisions
balance investment costs with the worst-case recourse costs incurred over the uncertainty set U.
The uncertainty set U plays a major role in shaping planning outcomes and should be carefully con-
structed based on the available data. To optimize risk measures such as worst-case costs or value-
at-risk, it is desirable to construct U to be as small as possible while still satisfying probabilistic
guarantees of coverage (Hong et al., 2021). However, standard methods for constructing such uncer-
tainty sets can yield highly conservative solutions to problem 1 – i.e., solutions that over-commit or
otherwise allocate resources ineffectively in anticipation of extreme contingencies – particularly in
the case of high-dimensional and irregularly distributed uncertainties for which high-density regions
are not well-approximated by conventional (e.g., polyhedral or ellipsoidal) uncertainty sets. While
recent works have proposed using deep learning methods to construct tighter uncertainty sets for
single-stage robust optimization (Goerigk & Kurtz, 2023; Chenreddy et al., 2022), such approaches
have not yet been extended to the richer but more challenging setting of ARO.
We propose AGRO, a solution algorithm that embeds a variational autoencoder (VAE) within a
column-and-constraint generation (CCG) scheme to perform adversarial generation of realistic con-
tingencies for two-stage adaptive robust optimization. Our contributions are listed below:

       • Extension of deep data-driven uncertainty sets to ARO. We propose a formulation for
         the adversarial subproblem that extends recent approaches for learning tighter uncertainty
         sets in robust optimization (RO) (Hong et al., 2021; Goerigk & Kurtz, 2023; Chenreddy
         et al., 2022) to the case of ARO, a richer class of optimization models for planning that
         allows for recourse decisions to be made after uncertainty is realized.
       • ML-assisted optimization using exact solutions. In contrast to approaches that train pre-
         dictive models for recourse costs (Bertsimas & Kim, 2024; Dumouchelle et al., 2024),
         AGRO optimizes with respect to exact recourse costs. Importantly, this eliminates the need
         to construct a large dataset of solved problem instances for model training.
       • Fast heuristic solution algorithm. To solve the adversarial subproblem quickly, we uti-
         lize a projected gradient ascent (PGA) method for approximate max-min optimization that
         differentiates recourse costs with respect to VAE-generated uncertainty realizations. By
         backpropagating through the decoder, we are able to search for worst-case realizations
         with respect to a latent variable while limiting our search to high-density regions of the
         underlying uncertainty distribution.
       • Application to ARO with synthetic and historical data. We apply our solution algorithm
         to two problems: (1) a production-distribution problem with synthetic demand data and (2)
         a long-term power system expansion problem with historical supply/demand data. We
         show that AGRO is able to reduce total costs by up to 1.8% for the production-distribution
         problem and up to 8% for the power system expansion problem when compared to solutions
         obtained by the classical CCG algorithm.


2     Background

2.1   ARO Preliminaries
Uncertainty Sets. A fundamental modeling choice in both single-stage RO and ARO is the defi-
nition of the uncertainty set U, which captures the range of uncertainty realizations for which the
first stage decision x must be robust. In a data-driven setting, the classical approach for defining
U is to choose a class of uncertainty set – common examples include box, budget, or ellipsoidal
uncertainty sets (see Appendix A.1) – and to “fit” the set to the data using sample estimates of the
mean, covariance, and/or minimum/maximum values. A parameter Γ > 0 is usually introduced to
determine the size of the uncertainty set, and by extension, the desired degree of robustness.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Γ is often chosen to ensure a probabilistic guarantee of level α, or in the case of problem 1, to ensure:

                                 ⊤                                         ⊤
              max min d(ξ) y ≤ ν =⇒ Pξ∼pξ                    min d(ξ) y ≤ ν ≥ α,                      (2)
              ξ∈U y∈Y(ξ,x)                                      y∈Y(ξ,x)

where ν can be understood as an upper bound for the α-value-at-risk (VaR) of the recourse cost.
To obtain such a probabilistic guarantee, one typically identifies an appropriate value for Γ by
leveraging concentration inequalities in the case of single-stage RO (Bertsimas et al., 2021), or
more generally, using robust quantile estimates of data “depth” (e.g., Mahalanobis depth) such that
Pξ∼pξ (ξ ∈ U) ≥ α with high probability (Hong et al., 2021).
In order to reduce over-conservative decision-making, one would prefer U to provide a tight ap-
proximation of the probabilistic constraint. In other words, it is desirable to make U as small as
possible while still satisfying equation 2. Classical uncertainty sets, however, tend to yield looser
approximations of such constraints as the dimensionality of ξ increases (Lam & Qian, 2019). To
this end, recent works have proposed learning frameworks for constructing tighter uncertainty sets
in single-stage RO settings, which we discuss in Section 2.2.
Column-and-Constraint Generation. Once U is defined, one can apply a number of methods to
either exactly (Zeng & Zhao, 2013; Thiele et al., 2009) or approximately (Kuhn et al., 2011) solve
the ARO problem. We focus our discussion on the CCG algorithm (Zeng & Zhao, 2013) due to its
prevalence in the ARO literature – including its use in recent learning-assisted methods (Bertsimas
& Kim, 2024; Dumouchelle et al., 2024) – and because it provides a nice foundation for introducing
AGRO in Section 3. The CCG algorithm is an exact solution method for ARO that iteratively
identifies “worst-case” uncertainty realizations ξ i by maximizing recourse costs for a given first-
stage decision x∗ . These uncertainty realizations are added in each iteration to the finite scenario
set S, which is used to instantiate the main problem:
                 min     c⊤ x + γ                                                                   (3a)
                 x,y,γ

                  s.t. x ∈ X ,                                                                      (3b)
                              i            i    i         i
                         A(ξ )x + B(ξ )y ≥ b(ξ ),                          i = 1, . . . , |S|       (3c)
                          i
                         y ≥ 0,                                            i = 1, . . . , |S|       (3d)
                                    ⊤ i
                         γ ≥ d(ξ) y ,                                      i = 1, . . . , |S|       (3e)
where γ denotes the worst-case recourse cost obtained over S. In each iteration i of the CCG
algorithm, additional variables (i.e., columns) y i and constraints y i ∈ Y(ξ i , x) corresponding to
the most recently identified worst-case realization are added to the main problem.
Solving the main problem yields a set of first-stage decisions, x∗ , which are fixed as parameters in
the adversarial subproblem:
                                          max       min       d(ξ)⊤ y.                               (4)
                                          ξ∈U y∈Y(ξ,x∗ )

Solving the adversarial subproblem yields a new worst-case realization ξ i to be added to S. This
max-min problem can be solved by maximizing the dual objective of the recourse problem subject
to its optimality (i.e., KKT) conditions (Zeng & Zhao, 2013). Despite its prominence in the litera-
ture, the KKT reformulation of problem 4 yields a bilinear optimization problem; specifically, one
for which the number of bilinear terms scales linearly with the dimensionality of ξ. This need to
repeatedly solve a large-scale bilinear program can cause CCG to be computationally demanding in
the case of high-dimensional uncertainty. To this end, a number of alternative solution approaches –
including some that leverage ML methods – have been proposed that approximate recourse decisions
in order to yield more tractable reformulations.


2.2    Related Work
Approximate and ML-assisted ARO. As an alternative to CCG and other exact methods, linear
decision rules (LDRs) are commonly used to approximate recourse decisions as affine functions
of uncertainty (Kuhn et al., 2011). To better approximate recourse costs using a richer class of


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


functions, Rahal et al. (2022) propose a “deep lifting” procedure with neural networks to learn
piecewise LDRs. Bertsimas & Kim (2024) train decision trees to predict near-optimal first-stage
decisions, worst-case uncertainty, and recourse decisions, which are deployed as part of a solution
algorithm for ARO. Similarly, Dumouchelle et al. (2024) train a neural network to approximate
optimal recourse costs conditioned on first-stage decisions, which they embed as a mixed-binary
linear program (Fischetti & Jo, 2018) within a CCG-like algorithm.
While these methods offer a way to avoid the challenging bilinear subproblem in CCG, they come
with certain drawbacks. In particular, these methods optimize with respect to an approximation of
recourse decision-making that is either simplified and endogenized as first-stage variables (in the
case of LDRs) or learned in a supervised manner. As such, they cannot be expected to reduce plan-
ning costs over CCG. Moreover, in the case of (Dumouchelle et al., 2024; Bertsimas & Kim, 2024),
a large dataset of recourse problem instances must be collected and solved, which can be compu-
tationally demanding. Additionally, these works are focused on improving problem tractability and
do not consider the challenge of loose uncertainty sets in high-dimensional settings.
Data-driven Uncertainty Sets. Some works have aimed to address this issue of loose uncertainty
representation for single-stage RO by learning tighter uncertainty sets from data. One of the earliest
such works, Tulabandhula & Rudin (2014), takes a statistical learning approach to building uncer-
tainty sets from data. Hong et al. (2021) provide a method for calibrating Γ using measures of “data
depth” and propose clustering and dimensionality reduction methods for constructing uncertainty
sets. More similarly to our work, Goerigk & Kurtz (2023) introduce a solution algorithm that first
constructs a “deep data-driven” uncertainty set as the image of a Gaussian superlevel set under a
neural network-learned transformation and then iteratively identifies worst-case realizations by op-
timizing through the neural network. Chenreddy et al. (2022) extend their approach to construct
uncertainty sets conditioned on the observation of a subset of covariates.
Both Goerigk & Kurtz (2023) and Chenreddy et al. (2022) leverage the main result of Fischetti & Jo
(2018) to embed a neural network within an adversarial subproblem formulated as a mixed-binary
linear program. However, extending this approach to ARO with high-dimensional uncertainty poses
significant challenges. Specifically, the lack of a closed-form expression for the recourse cost leads
to an adversarial subproblem that becomes a mixed-binary bilinear program (see Appendix A.2).
While solution algorithms for such problems exist, their convergence will be slow for instances
involving a large number of binary variables, as is the case when embedding neural networks. This
underscores the need for fast, alternative approaches capable of generating approximate solutions
for such bilinear adversarial problems, thereby enabling efficient worst-case analysis with “deep
data-driven uncertainty” to extend beyond single-stage RO to the more general case of ARO.



3    Methodology

We now describe AGRO, a CCG-like solution algorithm that performs adversarial generation for
robust optimization. As illustrated in Figure 1, AGRO modifies the classical CCG algorithm in
two key ways. (1) To reduce costs resulting from over-conservative uncertainty representations,
we construct an uncertainty set with known probability mass by training a VAE and projecting
spherical uncertainty sets from the latent space into the space of ξ. (2) Rather than attempt to solve
the resulting adversarial subproblem with an embedded neural network as a mixed-binary bilinear
program, we propose a PGA heuristic that quickly identifies cost-maximizing realizations using the
gradient of the recourse cost with respect to ξ.
Like Dumouchelle et al. (2024); Goerigk & Kurtz (2023); Chenreddy et al. (2022), we optimize
“through” a trained neural network to obtain worst-case uncertainty realizations. However, rather
than approximate recourse decisions using a predictive model as previous works have done for
ARO (Dumouchelle et al., 2024; Bertsimas & Kim, 2024), we exactly solve the recourse problem
as a linear program in each iteration. Doing so also removes the computational effort required for
building a dataset of recourse problem solutions – i.e., solving a large number of linear programs to
obtain an accurate predictive model for recourse cost given ξ and x. In what follows, we describe
how AGRO first learns tighter uncertainty sets and then solves the adversarial subproblem within a
CCG-like scheme.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: The AGRO solution algorithm. (i) First-stage decisions x∗ are obtained by solving a main problem,
which approximates the original ARO uncertainty set U by a finite scenario set S (see problem 3) (ii) The latent
variable z is sampled from within Z and decoded to obtain an initial ξ. (iii) The recourse problem is solved
given x∗ and ξ and its optimal objective value is differentiated with respect to ξ and (after backpropagating
through the decoder fθ ) z. (iv) A gradient ascent step is taken to update z, which is then projected onto Z
and decoded to obtain an updated ξ. Steps (iii) and (iv) are iterated until converging to a worst-case ξ. (v) The
worst-case ξ is then added to S, at which point the main problem is re-optimized.



3.1    Deep Data-Driven Uncertainty Sets

AGRO constructs tight uncertainty sets as nonlinear and differentiable transformations of spheri-
cal uncertainty sets lying in the latent space RL with L < D, where D is the dimensionality of
ξ. We approach learning these transformations as a VAE estimation task. Let z ∼ N (0, IL ) be
an isotropic Gaussian random variable and let hϕ : RD → RL and fθ : RL → RD respectively
denote the encoder and decoder of a VAE model trained to generate samples from pξ (Kingma &
Welling, 2013). Specifically, hϕ is trained to map samples of uncertainty realizations to samples
from N (0, IL ) while fθ is trained to perform the reverse mapping. Here, L denotes the VAE bottle-
neck dimension, a hyperparameter that plays a large role in determining the fidelity and diversity of
generated samples (see Appendix A.3), which must be tuned through trial and error. We discuss the
role of the bottleneck dimension further in Section 4.
We note that our approach can be extended to other classes of deep generative models that learn
such a mapping from N (0, IL ) to pξ such as generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al.,
2014), normalizing flows (Papamakarios et al., 2021), and diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020), which
tend to produce samples with higher fidelity in general (Bond-Taylor et al., 2021). We employ a
VAE architecture as VAEs are known to exhibit relatively high stability in training and low compu-
tational effort for sampling (Bond-Taylor et al., 2021), making them highly conducive to integration
within an iterative optimization framework. Additionally, experimental findings suggest significant
cost reductions from AGRO over classical CCG even when using a generative model that produces
samples with only moderate fidelity (see Section 4).
To construct the uncertainty set U, we first consider a “latent” uncertainty set given by the L-ball
Z := B(0, Γ). We select the radius Γ such that the decoded uncertainty set U = {fθ (z) | z ∈ Z}
satisfies Pξ∼pξ (ξ ∈ U) ≥ α with confidence level δ. Letting Ξ ∈ RN ×D be our training dataset,
we leverage Theorem 1 from Hong et al. (2021) to obtain Γ according to the following steps.

      1. Split Ξ into two disjoint sets: one with N1 ≥ log δ/ log α samples reserved for calibrating
         the size of the uncertainty set (i.e., steps 2 and 3) and another with (N − N1 ) samples for
         training the VAE.

      2. After training the VAE, project the calibration data into the latent space and sort the result-
         ing L2 norms, i.e. rj := ∥hϕ (ξ (j) )∥2 for all ξ (j) in the calibration set, to obtain the order
         statistics of {r1 , . . . , rN1 }. We denote these order statistics by r(1) ≤ · · · ≤ r(N1 ) .


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          3. Choose Γ = r(ℓ) , where j is defined as:
                                          (     i−1                          )
                                                X     N1 k         N1 −k
                             ℓ = min        j             α (1 − α)      ≥1−δ .
                                 1≤j≤N1               k
                                                    k=0

This procedure effectively prescribes Γ to be a robust (with respect to the sample size) α-quantile
estimate of the norm of encoded samples drawn from pξ with confidence level δ. Figure 2 shows a
comparison of classical uncertainty sets against a tighter uncertainty set constructed by the proposed
VAE-based method for samples from a nonunimodal bivariate distribution.


      2                            2                               2                          2

      0                            0                               0                          0
ξ2


                            ξ2


                                                              ξ2


                                                                                         ξ2
      2                            2                               2                          2
             2   0    2                  2    0     2                  2     0       2             2   0    2
                 ξ1                           ξ1                            ξ1                         ξ1
            (a) Box                    (b) Budget                  (c) Ellipsoidal                (d) VAE

Figure 2: A comparison of classical uncertainty sets (a)-(c) with the proposed VAE-learned uncertainty set
(d) for an illustrative bivariate distribution. By covering a smaller region in RD , the VAE-learned uncertainty
set (d) is more likely to yield a tighter approximation of the probabilistic constraint in equation 2 and less
conservative first-stage decisions.


3.2       Adversarial Subproblem
Bilinear Formulation. As the main problem in AGRO is the same as problem 3 for the classical
CCG algorithm, we focus our discussion on the adversarial subproblem. Given a VAE decoder with
ReLU activations fθ : RL → RD , a latent uncertainty set Z = B(0, Γ), and the first-stage decisions
x∗ , we formulate the adversarial subproblem as

                                               ⊤
                        max         min ∗ d(ξ) y ξ = fθ (z), z ∈ Z .                            (5)
                            z, ξ       y∈Y(ξ,x )

To solve problem 5, one can reformulate it as a single-level maximization problem by taking the
dual of the recourse problem and maximizing the objective with respect to z subject to (1) opti-
mality conditions (i.e., primal/dual feasibility and strong duality) of the recourse problem and (2)
constraints encoding the input-output mapping for the ReLU decoder network, ξ = fθ (z) (Fischetti
& Jo, 2018). This formulation is presented in full as problem 7 in Appendix A.2. As discussed in
Section 2.2, however, this problem can be extremely computationally demanding to solve. There-
fore, we propose an alternative approach for solving problem 5 based on PGA to efficiently obtain
approximate solutions.
Projected Gradient Ascent Heuristic. Let q : RD × X → R denote the optimal objective value of
the recourse problem as a function of ξ and x. It is then possible to differentiate q with respect to ξ
by implicitly differentiating the optimality conditions of the recourse problem at an optimal solution
(Amos & Kolter, 2017). Doing so provides an ascent direction for maximizing q with respect to z
by backpropagating through fθ . As such, we maximize q using PGA over Z.
Specifically, to solve the adversarial subproblem using PGA, we first randomly sample an initial
z from a distribution supported on Z. We then transform z to obtain the uncertainty realization
ξ = fθ (z) and solve the recourse problem with respect to ξ to obtain q(ξ, x∗ ) and ∂q(ξ, x∗ )/∂ξ.
Using automatic differentiation, we obtain the gradient of ξ with respect to z and perform the update:
                                                   ∂q(ξ, x∗ ) dξ

                                 z ← ΠZ z + η                       ,
                                                      ∂ξ      dz
where η > 0 denotes the step-size hyperparameter and ΠZ denotes the projection operator given
by ΠZ (z) = min{Γ, ∥z∥2 } × z/∥z∥2 . By projecting onto the set Z with radius Γ, we ensure


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that the solution to the adversarial subproblem is neither unrealistic nor overly adversarial. This
procedure is repeated until convergence of q(fθ (z), x∗ ) to a local maximum or another criterion
(e.g., a maximum number of iterations) is met.
PGA is not guaranteed to converge to a worst-case uncertainty realization (i.e., global maximum
of problem 5) as q(fθ (z), x∗ ) is nonconcave in z. To escape local minima, we randomly initialize
PGA with I different samples of z in each iteration and select the worst-case uncertainty realization
obtained after maximizing with PGA. We then update the set S and re-optimize the main problem
to complete one iteration of AGRO. Additional iterations of AGRO are then performed until conver-
gence of the main problem and adversarial subproblem objectives, i.e., |γ − q(fθ (z), x∗ )| < ϵ, for
tolerance ϵ. Algorithm 2 provides the full pseudocode for AGRO.


4     Experiments
To demonstrate AGRO’s efficacy in reducing planning costs, we apply our approach in two sets of
experiments: a synthetic production-distribution problem and a real-world power system capacity
expansion problem. For all experiments, we let α = 0.95 and fix the confidence level δ to be 0.05
(see Section 3.1).


4.1   Production-Distribution Problem
Problem Description. We first apply AGRO to an adaptive robust production-distribution problem
with synthetic demand data in order to evaluate its performance over a range of uncertainty distri-
butions. We consider a two-stage problem in which the first-stage decisions x ∈ R|I| correspond to
the total number of items produced at each facility i ∈ I while second-stage decisions correspond
to the quantities y ∈ R|I|×|J | distributed to a set of demand buses J after demands ξ ∈ R|J | have
been realized. Production incurs a unit cost of c in the first stage while shipping and unmet demand
incur unit costs of d ∈ R|I|×|J | and d′ ∈ R respectively. Here, transportation costs vary by origin
and destination while the cost of unmet demand is uniform across buses.
Experimental Setup. In each experiment, we generate the demand dataset Ξ ∈ RN ×|J | by drawing
samples from a Gaussian mixture distribution with 3 correlated components. We vary the problem
size over the range (|I|, |J |) ∈ {(4, 3), (8, 6), (12, 9), (16, 12)}, and perform 50 experimental tri-
als for each problem size. In each trial, we sample a dataset of 2500 samples, each of which is
then divided into a 1000-sample VAE training set (split 80/20 for model training/validation), 500-
sample Γ-calibration set, and 1000-sample test set. Additional implementation details are provided
in Appendix B.1.
Towards understanding how the VAE bottleneck dimension informs optimization outcomes, we vary
L ∈ {1, 2, 4}. We report standard generative fidelity and diversity metrics for trained VAEs in
Appendix B.1.1. To evaluate costs, we fix the solved investment decision x and compute c⊤ x +
F̂ −1 (α; x), where F̂ −1 (α; x) is the α-quantile of recourse costs obtained over the test set given
x. We compare cost and runtime results obtained by AGRO to those obtained by a classical CCG
algorithm, for which we consider both budget and ellipsoidal uncertainty sets with sizes calibrated
according to the approach described by Hong et al. (2021).
Costs and Runtime. The relative improvement in out-of-sample costs (i.e., c⊤ x + F̂ −1 (α; x))
obtained by AGRO in comparison to CCG is shown in Figure 3. Cost comparisons for CCG with
ellipsoidal uncertainty sets are omitted for the cases with |J | > 6 as the resulting CCG subprob-
lem could not be solved to optimality within the time limit of 900 seconds. Figure 3 shows that
AGRO’s relative advantage over classical CCG in minimizing costs grows as the dimensionality of
uncertainty increases. This is expected as classical uncertainty sets are known to provide looser
approximations of probabilistic constraints in higher dimensional settings (Lam & Qian, 2019).
Runtime results provided in Table 2 (see Appendix B.1.1) also show that runtimes for AGRO scale
much better than those for CCG with a budget uncertainty set. In particular, CCG is solved 80 times
faster than AGRO with L = 4 for |J | = 3 but is about 10 times slower than AGRO with L = 4 for
|J | = 12.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bottleneck Dimension. The effect of the VAE bottleneck dimension on out-of-sample costs can
be observed from the box-plot in Figure 3. In particular, solutions obtained from AGRO using
VAEs with L = 4 outperform CCG more consistently than solutions obtained with L < 4. This
is likely due to the fact that VAEs with L = 4 achieve a greater coverage of pξ (see Table 4 in
Appendix B.1.1), and consequently, will consistently yield uncertainty sets that satisfy the proba-
bilistic constraint. On the other hand, models with lower bottleneck dimensions are more prone to
“overlooking” adversarial realizations due to inadequate coverage of pξ , which causes occasional
underestimation of worst-case recourse costs and under-production in the first stage. However, this
effect is reversed in the low-dimensional case of |J | = 3 as the VAEs with higher bottleneck di-
mensions, which score lower on generative fidelity metrics (see Table 3), over-produce in the first
stage in anticipation of highly adversarial yet unrealistic demand realizations.


                                          |J |
                                                                                                      4


                                                                           Improvement over CCG (%)
 L        U         3            6                   9           12
                                                                                                      2
      Budg.     0.7% (1.0)   0.9% (1.0)          1.2% (1.5)   1.5% (1.1)
 1
      Ellips.   0.4% (0.9)   0.5% (0.9)             —            —                                    0
 2
      Budg.     0.7% (0.7)   1.2% (0.6)          1.5% (1.0)   1.7% (1.0)
                                                                                                      2
      Ellips.   0.4% (0.5)   0.7% (0.6)             —            —                                                        L=1
      Budg.     0.5% (0.7)   1.1% (0.8)          1.6% (0.8)   1.8% (1.0)
                                                                                                      4                   L=2
 4                                                                                                                        L=4
      Ellips.   0.2% (0.5)   0.6% (0.6)             —            —                                    6
                                                                                                          3   6       9   12
                                                                                                                  D
Figure 3: (Left): Average cost improvement with standard deviations for AGRO over CCG with budget
and ellipsoidal uncertainty sets. (Right): Box-plots showing relative improvement for AGRO over CCG with
budget uncertainty. The relative cost advantage of VAE-learned uncertainty sets over classical uncertainty sets
increases with the dimensionality of uncertainty.


4.2    Capacity Expansion Planning

We now consider the problem of robust capacity expansion planning for a regional power system
with historical renewable capacity factor and energy demand data. Capacity expansion models are a
centerpiece for long-term planning of energy infrastructure under supply, demand, and cost uncer-
tainties (Zhang et al., 2024; Roald et al., 2023). A number of works have adopted ARO formulations
for energy systems planning with a particular focus on ensuring system reliability under mass adop-
tion of renewable energy with intermittent and uncertain supply (Ruiz & Conejo, 2015; Amjady
et al., 2017; Minguez et al., 2017; Abdin et al., 2022). In models with high spatiotemporal resolu-
tions, supply and demand uncertainties are complex, high-dimensional, and nonunimodal, exhibiting
nonlinear correlations such as temporal autocorrelations and spatial dependencies. These patterns
cannot be accurately captured by classical uncertainty sets. As a result, tightening uncertainty repre-
sentations for robust capacity expansion planning has the potential to significantly lower investment
costs over conventional ARO methods while still maintaining low operational costs day-to-day.
Problem Description. We use AGRO to solve a two-stage adaptive robust generation and transmis-
sion expansion planning problem for the New England transmission system. The model we consider
most closely follows that of (Minguez et al., 2017) and has two stages: an initial investment stage
and a subsequent economic dispatch (i.e., recourse) stage. The objective function is a weighted
sum of investment costs plus annualized worst-case economic dispatch costs. We let N , T , and
P denote the set of buses, hourly operational periods, and renewable energy sources respectively;
here, |N | = 6, |T | = 24, and |P| = 3. Investment decisions for this problem include installed
capacities for (1) dispatchable, solar, onshore wind, and offshore wind power plants for all buses,
(2) battery storage at each bus, and (3) transmission capacity for all edges in N × N . The economic
dispatch stage occurs after the realization of demand and renewable capacity factors, ξ ∈ R|N ||T ||P| .
This stage determines optimal hourly generation, power flow, and storage decisions to minimize the
combined cost of load shedding and variable costs for dispatchable generation; these decisions are
subject to ramping, storage, and flow balance constraints. The full formulations for both stages are
presented in Appendix B.2.


                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Experimental Setup. After processing features (see Appendix B.2), we have a dataset with
N = 7300 samples and D = 349 distinct features. Eight experimental trials are performed for
AGRO with each trial having 6200 VAE training samples (split 80/20 for model training/validation),
100 Γ-calibration samples, and 1000 test samples (all sampled uniformly at random). Similarly to
Section 4.1, we evaluate costs by fixing solved investment decisions and computing the α-quantile
of economic dispatch costs over the test set. We consider a ball-box latent uncertainty set for AGRO,
which intersects the latent uncertainty set described in Section 3.1 with a box uncertainty set in the
latent space (i.e., mini hϕ (Ξi,: )j ≤ zj ≤ maxi hϕ (Ξi,: )j for j = 1, . . . , L). We compare AGRO
against a classical CCG algorithm using a budget-box uncertainty set, which is commonly used in
the power systems literature (Bertsimas et al., 2012; Ruiz & Conejo, 2015; Amjady et al., 2017;
Abdin et al., 2022). Here, we calibrate U similarly to Γ using 100 samples (see Section 3.1). We
do not report results obtained using an ellipsoidal uncertainty set as the corresponding CCG sub-
problem could not be solved to optimality within the time limit of 900 seconds. As was the case in
Section 4.1, we report results for three choices of the VAE bottleneck dimension: L ∈ {2, 4, 8}.

             Value-at-Risk   Upper Bound           Error              Total           Train       Subproblem
   CCG       11.3    (0.1)   15.3     —      1088%     (1935)    29183       —       —     —     1263    (937)
   L=2       14.9    (3.5)   11.2    (1.1)     14%      (52)      2162    (2128)    207    (5)   239     (796)
   L=4       10.4    (0.3)   12.8    (0.2)    114%      (64)      2299     (509)    203    (2)    267    (225)
   L=8       10.8    (0.3)   13.6    (0.5)    112%      (40)      3070     (618)    205    (1)   347     (253)

Table 1: AGRO and CCG cost and runtime performance estimates averaged over all trials (standard deviations
shown in parentheses). Given the solved first-stage decisions x∗ , Value-at-Risk denotes the sample-estimated
objective value, c⊤ x∗ + F̂ −1 (α; x), while Upper Bound denotes the CCG/AGRO upper bound, c⊤ x∗ + γ ∗
(both in units of $ billions). Error denotes the mean absolute percent error of worst-case recourse costs obtained
by the subproblem compared to an out-of-sample VaR estimate of recourse costs averaged over all iterations
and folds. Total, Train, and Subproblem respectively denote average total solve time (not including training),
average training time, and average subproblem runtime in seconds.

Costs and Runtime. Table 1 reports cost, runtime, and VaR approximation error results for our
AGRO and CCG implementations. For L = 4 and L = 8, AGRO obtains investment decisions that
yield lower total costs compared to CCG as evaluated over held-out samples. In particular, costs are
minimized by AGRO with L = 4, which yields an 8% average reduction in total costs over CCG.
For all L, the average total runtime for AGRO, which includes VAE training time, is also observed
to be substantially lower than that of CCG. This is largely owing to the computational difficulty of
solving the bilinear subproblem for CCG.
Approximation of VaR. To empirically compare the tightness of VAE-learned and classical uncer-
tainty sets with respect to approximating VaR, we compare the relative error of worst-case recourse
costs obtained by the adversarial subproblems (i.e., q(ξ i , x∗ )) with out-of-sample VaR estimates
(i.e., F̂ −1 (α; x∗ )) for all iterations. Table 1 shows that worst-case recourse costs obtained by
AGRO with L = 2 most closely approximate the true VaR. We visualize this phenomenon by
plotting worst-case recourse costs against VaR estimates obtained in all iterations in Figure 5 (see
Appendix B.2.1). Figure 5 shows that AGRO almost always overestimates VaR for L = 4 and
L = 8, which empirically suggests that the VAE-learned uncertainty sets provide a reliable ap-
proximation for the probabilistic constraint in equation 2. The VAEs trained with L = 2 – despite
yielding the lowest error in approximating VaR – achieve a much lower coverage of pξ than other
models (see Table 5 in Appendix B.2.1). As a result, the effective coverage of U is less than α, and
U is no longer a safe approximation for the chance constraint. Consequently, AGRO is unable to
produce sufficiently adversarial realizations, and by extension, achieve low planning costs.
Realism of Generated Contingencies. We visualize AGRO’s advantage over CCG in avoiding un-
realistic contingencies by plotting solved worst-case realizations for CCG and AGRO in Figure 4.
We observe that CCG generates highly unrealistic realizations in which capacity factors drop sharply
to zero before immediately rising to their nominal values. Importantly, weather-related correlations
between variables are not maintained; most notably, temporal autocorrelation (i.e., smoothness) and
spatial correlation of both load and capacity factors across the system. Accounting for these fea-
tures during investment planning is crucial for effectively leveraging the complementarities between
generation, storage, and transmission. On the other hand, AGRO is able to identify uncertainty
realizations that are simultaneously cost-maximizing and realistic when utilizing a sufficiently high-


                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


fidelity VAE (i.e., with L = 4). This can be observed from the realistic temporal autocorrelation and
spatial correlations demonstrated by the AGRO-generated realizations.

                  Load (MWh)                           Solar CF                       Offshore Wind CF                  Onshore Wind CF
20000                               1.0                                     1.0                               1.0
                                    0.8                                     0.8                               0.8
15000
                                    0.6                                     0.6                               0.6
10000                               0.4                                     0.4                               0.4
 5000                               0.2                                     0.2                               0.2
                                    0.0                                     0.0                               0.0
    0
        0     5     10    15   20         0      5     10    15   20              0   5    10    15      20         0   5   10    15      20
                     Hour                               Hour                                Hour                             Hour

                                                     (a) CCG Uncertainty Realization
                  Load (MWh)                           Solar CF                       Offshore Wind CF                  Onshore Wind CF
20000                               1.0                                     1.0                               1.0
                                    0.8                                     0.8                               0.8
15000
                                    0.6                                     0.6                               0.6
10000                               0.4                                     0.4                               0.4
 5000                               0.2                                     0.2                               0.2
                                    0.0                                     0.0                               0.0
    0
        0     5     10    15   20         0      5     10    15   20              0   5    10    15      20         0   5   10    15      20
                     Hour                               Hour                                Hour                             Hour

                                              (b) AGRO (L = 4) Uncertainty Realization

Figure 4: Comparison of worst-case uncertainty realizations as obtained by (a) CCG and (b) AGRO
with L = 4. Different colors are used to represent each of the six buses in the power system. A
random sample of 100 observations is shown in gray to represent the historical distribution of load
and capacity factors.

Bottleneck Dimension. As in the production-distribution study, we observe that the optimal bot-
tleneck dimension for the capacity expansion study (L = 4) does not necessarily yield the best
generative model performance metrics (see Table 5 in Appendix B.2.1). This stems from the con-
servative nature of uncertainty set-based approximations of chance constraints, which aim to cover
α probability mass rather than the region containing the least adversarial realizations, which would
provide the tightest approximation. VAEs with reduced fidelity or diversity performance mitigate re-
source over-commitment in the first stage by avoiding overly adversarial scenarios. However, overly
low fidelity or diversity (e.g., L = 2) leads AGRO to underestimate realistic contingencies, resulting
in systemic under-commitment and higher recourse costs.
The effectiveness of AGRO’s decision-making ultimately depends on the quality of the underlying
VAE as a generative model. To prevent systemic underestimation of recourse costs, it is essential
that one first select L large enough to ensure that generated samples are both diverse and realistic.
This can be assessed through visual inspection and validated using quantitative metrics such as
density and coverage. Reducing L to narrow the uncertainty set below α should only be considered
when enough data is available to provide robust out-of-sample estimates of recourse costs, ensuring
a reliable approximation of the chance constraint.



5           Conclusion
The increasing availability of data for large-scale system operations has fueled interest in data-driven
optimization for planning. This work introduces AGRO, a novel approach to two-stage ARO that
integrates a VAE within an optimization framework to generate realistic and adversarial represen-
tations of operational uncertainties. Building on the classical CCG algorithm, AGRO leverages
differentiable optimization techniques to identify cost-maximizing uncertainty realizations within a
VAE-learned uncertainty set. Empirical results demonstrate that AGRO outperforms standard ARO
methods by more tightly approximating value-at-risk constraints on recourse costs, achieving up to
a 1.8% reduction in total costs in a synthetic production-distribution problem and up to an 8% re-
duction in a regional power system expansion problem using historical energy supply and demand
data.


                                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


References
Adam F Abdin, Aakil Caunhye, Enrico Zio, and Michel-Alexandre Cardin. Optimizing generation
  expansion planning with operational uncertainty: A multistage adaptive robust approach. Applied
  Energy, 306:118032, 2022.
Akshay Agrawal, Brandon Amos, Shane Barratt, Stephen Boyd, Steven Diamond, and Zico Kolter.
  Differentiable convex optimization layers, 2019.
Nima Amjady, Ahmad Attarha, Shahab Dehghan, and Antonio J Conejo. Adaptive robust expansion
  planning for a distribution network with DERs. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 33(2):
  1698–1715, 2017.
Brandon Amos and J Zico Kolter. Optnet: Differentiable optimization as a layer in neural networks.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 136–145. PMLR, 2017.
Dimitris Bertsimas and Cheol Woo Kim. A machine learning approach to two-stage adaptive robust
  optimization. European Journal of Operational Research, 319(1):16–30, 2024. ISSN 0377-2217.
  doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2024.06.012. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
  com/science/article/pii/S0377221724004600.
Dimitris Bertsimas, Eugene Litvinov, Xu Andy Sun, Jinye Zhao, and Tongxin Zheng. Adaptive
  robust optimization for the security constrained unit commitment problem. IEEE transactions on
  power systems, 28(1):52–63, 2012.
Dimitris Bertsimas, Dick den Hertog, and Jean Pauphilet. Probabilistic guarantees in robust opti-
  mization. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 31(4):2893–2920, 2021. doi: 10.1137/21M1390967.
Sam Bond-Taylor, Adam Leach, Yang Long, and Chris G Willcocks. Deep generative modelling:
  A comparative review of vaes, gans, normalizing flows, energy-based and autoregressive models.
  IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 44(11):7327–7347, 2021.
Abhilash Reddy Chenreddy, Nymisha Bandi, and Erick Delage. Data-driven conditional robust op-
  timization. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 9525–9537. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2022.
Justin Dumouchelle, Esther Julien, Jannis Kurtz, and Elias B. Khalil. Neur2ro: Neural two-stage
  robust optimization, 2024.
Matteo Fischetti and Jason Jo. Deep neural networks and mixed integer linear optimization.
 Constraints, 23(3):296–309, 2018.
Hao Fu, Chunyuan Li, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Lawrence Carin.
  Cyclical annealing schedule: A simple approach to mitigating kl vanishing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1903.10145, 2019.
Marc Goerigk and Jannis Kurtz. Data-driven robust optimization using deep neural networks.
 Computers & Operations Research, 151:106087, 2023.
Jian Gong and Fengqi You. Optimal processing network design under uncertainty for producing
   fuels and value-added bioproducts from microalgae: two-stage adaptive robust mixed integer
   fractional programming model and computationally efficient solution algorithm. AIChE Journal,
   63(2):582–600, 2017.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks, 2014.
Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual, 2023.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 6840–6851. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L Jeff Hong, Zhiyuan Huang, and Henry Lam. Learning-based robust optimization: Procedures and
  statistical guarantees. Management Science, 67(6):3447–3467, 2021.
Anna Jacobson, Filippo Pecci, Nestor Sepulveda, Qingyu Xu, and Jesse Jenkins. A Computationally
  Efficient Benders Decomposition for Energy Systems Planning Problems with Detailed Opera-
  tions and Time-Coupling Constraints. INFORMS Journal on Optimization, 6(1):32–45, January
  2024. ISSN 2575-1492. doi: 10.1287/ijoo.2023.0005.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Daniel Kuhn, Wolfram Wiesemann, and Angelos Georghiou. Primal and dual linear decision rules
  in stochastic and robust optimization. Mathematical Programming, 130(1):177–209, 2011.
Henry Lam and Huajie Qian. Combating conservativeness in data-driven optimization under uncer-
  tainty: A solution path approach, 2019.
Roberto Minguez, Raquel Garcı́a-Bertrand, José M Arroyo, and Natalia Alguacil. On the solu-
  tion of large-scale robust transmission network expansion planning under uncertain demand and
  generation capacity. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 33(2):1242–1251, 2017.
Muhammad Ferjad Naeem, Seong Joon Oh, Youngjung Uh, Yunjey Choi, and Jaejun Yoo. Reliable
 fidelity and diversity metrics for generative models. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 7176–7185. PMLR, 2020.
George Papamakarios, Eric Nalisnick, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Balaji Lak-
  shminarayanan. Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling and inference. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(57):1–64, 2021.
Said Rahal, Zukui Li, and Dimitri J. Papageorgiou. Deep lifted decision rules for two-stage adaptive
  optimization problems. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 159:107661, 2022. ISSN 0098-
  1354. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2022.107661.
Albert Reuther, Jeremy Kepner, Chansup Byun, Siddharth Samsi, William Arcand, David Bestor,
  Bill Bergeron, Vijay Gadepally, Michael Houle, Matthew Hubbell, Michael Jones, Anna Klein,
  Lauren Milechin, Julia Mullen, Andrew Prout, Antonio Rosa, Charles Yee, and Peter Michaleas.
  Interactive supercomputing on 40,000 cores for machine learning and data analysis. In 2018 IEEE
  High Performance extreme Computing Conference (HPEC), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2018.
Line A Roald, David Pozo, Anthony Papavasiliou, Daniel K Molzahn, Jalal Kazempour, and An-
  tonio Conejo. Power systems optimization under uncertainty: A review of methods and applica-
  tions. Electric Power Systems Research, 214:108725, 2023.
C. Ruiz and A.J. Conejo. Robust transmission expansion planning. European Journal of Operational
  Research, 242(2):390–401, 2015. ISSN 0377-2217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2014.10.
  030.
Aurélie Thiele, Tara Terry, and Marina Epelman. Robust linear optimization with recourse. Rapport
  technique, pp. 4–37, 2009.
Theja Tulabandhula and Cynthia Rudin. Robust optimization using machine learning for uncertainty
  sets, 2014.
Shiwei Xie, Zhijian Hu, and Jueying Wang. Two-stage robust optimization for expansion planning
  of active distribution systems coupled with urban transportation networks. Applied Energy, 261:
  114412, 2020.
Bo Zeng and Long Zhao. Solving two-stage robust optimization problems using a column-and-
  constraint generation method. Operations Research Letters, 41(5):457–461, 2013. ISSN 0167-
  6377. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orl.2013.05.003.
Hongyu Zhang, Nicolò Mazzi, Ken McKinnon, Rodrigo Garcia Nava, and Asgeir Tomasgard. A
  stabilised Benders decomposition with adaptive oracles for large-scale stochastic programming
  with short-term and long-term uncertainty. Computers & Operations Research, pp. 106665, 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     Methodological Details

A.1    Uncertainty Sets
The box, budget, and ellipsoidal uncertainty sets are constructed in a data-driven setting as
                              n                              o
                      U box = ξ ∈ RD | ξ̂ min ≤ ξ ≤ ξ̂ max                                                      (6a)
                                  n         D
                                            X                            o
                        U budget = ξ ∈ RD |   Σ̂−1
                                                ii |ξi − µ̂i | ≤ Γbudget                                        (6b)
                                                                  i=1
                                   n                                           o
                        U ellipse = ξ ∈ RD | (ξ − µ̂)⊤ Σ̂−1 (ξ − µ̂) ≤ Γellipse .                               (6c)

Here, µ̂, Σ̂, ξ̂ min , and ξ̂ max denote the empirical mean, covariance, minimum value, and maximum
value of ξ observed from the dataset while the Γ parameters denote the uncertainty “budgets.”


A.2    Bilevel Formulation for AGRO
Letting π denote the dual variables of the recourse problem, the max-min problem 5 can be refor-
mulated as the following mixed-binary bilinear program:
           max d(ξ)⊤ y                                                                                          (7a)
            s.t. B(ξ)y ≥ b(ξ) − A(ξ)x∗ ,                                                                        (7b)
                   π ⊤ B(ξ) ≤ d(ξ),                                                                             (7c)
                   y, π ≥ 0,                                                                                    (7d)
                   π ⊤ (b(ξ) − A(ξ)x∗ ) = d(ξ)⊤ y,                                                              (7e)
                   ∥z∥2 ≤ Γ,                                                                                    (7f)
                   W (0) z + b(0) = z (1) − z̃ (1) ,                                                            (7g)
                         (ℓ) (ℓ)               (ℓ)          (ℓ+1)          (ℓ+1)
                   W           z          +b         =z             − z̃           ,             ℓ ∈ [K − 1]    (7h)
                         (K) (K)                 (K)
                   W                z      +b              = ξ,                                                  (7i)
                    (ℓ)                           (ℓ)
                   aj = 1                 =⇒     zj = 0,                               j ∈ [Dℓ ], ℓ ∈ [K − 1]    (7j)
                    (ℓ)                              (ℓ)
                   aj = 0 =⇒ z̃j                           = 0,                        j ∈ [Dℓ ], ℓ ∈ [K − 1]   (7k)
                       (ℓ)          (ℓ)
                   z         , z̃         ≥ 0,                                                       ℓ ∈ [K]     (7l)
                       (ℓ)                  Dℓ
                   a          ∈ {0, 1}           .                                               ℓ ∈ [K − 1]    (7m)
Here, constraints 7b and 7c respectively enforce primal and dual feasibility, constraint 7d enforces
nonnegativity of the primal and dual variables, and constraint 7e enforces strong duality. Together,
constraints 7b–7e provide sufficient conditions for optimality of the recourse problem. Constraint 7f
enforces z ∈ Z to bound the range of uncertainty realizations that are considered. Additionally, we
apply the main result of Fischetti & Jo (2018) to embed the mapping ξ = fθ (z) by introducing the
binary decision variables {a(ℓ) }ℓ∈[K−1] and real-valued decision variables {z (ℓ) , z̃ (ℓ) }ℓ∈[K] through
constraints 7g–7m. Here, Dℓ denotes the number of output units in layer ℓ while W (ℓ) ∈ RDℓ+1 ×Dℓ
and b(ℓ) ∈ RDℓ+1 denote the weight matrix and offset parameters of layer ℓ. Note that, for any
x ∈ X , problem 7 is feasible as a consequence of the primal feasibility (i.e., complete recourse) and
boundedness assumptions.


A.3    Fidelity and Diversity Metrics
We quantify performance of the VAEs as generative models for pξ using standard metrics for fidelity
(precision and density) and diversity (recall and coverage). Semantically, fidelity can be understood


                                                                        13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


as measuring the “realism” of generated samples while diversity can be understood as measuring the
breadth of generated samples. These metrics are formally defined by Naeem et al. (2020) as follows:
                                                 M
                                            1 X
                             precision =         1 (j)          (1)    (N )
                                            M j=1 ξ̂ ∈manifold(ξ ,...,ξ )
                                                      M   N
                                             1 XX
                               density =              1        (i)      (i)
                                            kM j=1 i=1 ξ̂j ∈B(ξ ,NNDk (ξ ))
                                                 N
                                            1 X
                                 recall =        1               (1)     (M )
                                            N i=1 ξi ∈manifold(ξ̂ ,...,ξ̂ )
                                                 N
                                            1 X
                             coverage =          1           (j)  (i)      (i) ,
                                            N i=1 ∃ j s.t. ξ̂ ∈B(ξ ,NNDk (ξ ))

where ξ and ξ̂ respectively denote real (N total) and generated samples (M total), 1 denotes the
indicator function, NNDk (ξ (i) ) denotes the distance from ξ (i) to its k-th nearest neighbor (excluding
itself) in the dataset {ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (N ) }, and manifolds are defined as
                                                                N
                                                                [
                          manifold(ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (N ) ) =         B(ξ (i) , NNDk (ξ (i) )).
                                                                i=1

Precision and density quantify the portion of generated samples that are “covered” by the real sam-
ples while recall and coverage quantify the portion of real samples that are “covered” by the gen-
erated samples. All results for both sets of experiments are obtained over the held-out test datasets
using k = 5 and with M = N = 1000.



A.4     AGRO Algorithm

Algorithm 2 AGRO Algorithm
Require: Decoder gθ , Confidence Level α, Step-size η, Initializations I, Convergence tolerance ϵ
Ensure: Optimal solution x∗
 1: Initialize Scenario set S ← ∅, Iteration counter i ← 1
 2: while not converged do
 3:     x∗ , γ ← arg minx∈X ,γ {f (x) + γ | f (ξ i , x) ≤ γ, ∀ξ i ∈ S}                 ▷ Solve main problem
 4:     for j = 1 to I do                                                     ▷ Solve adversarial subproblem
 5:          Sample z j ∼ ps
 6:          while not converged do
 7:             Decode ξ = gθ (z j )
                                                   ∗
 8:                          problem for f (ξ, x )
                Solve recourse
                                            ∗
 9:              z j ← ΠZ z j + η ∂f (ξ,x
                                      ∂ξ
                                            ) dξ
                                              dz j
10:          end while
11:     end for
12:     j ∗ ← arg maxj∈{1,...,I} f (gθ (z j ), x∗ )                                      ▷ Select worst-case realization
                         ∗
13:     Set ξ i ← gθ (z j )
               i    ∗
14:     if f (ξ , x ) ≤ γ then                                                                    ▷ Check convergence
15:          Terminate and return x∗
16:     else
17:          Update S ← S ∪ {ξ i }                                         ▷ Add worst-case realization to scenario set
18:          Increment i ← i + 1
19:     end if
20: end while
21: return x∗



                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     Experimental Details

B.1    Production-Distribution Problem
Formulation. We formulate the two-stage production-distribution problem as
                                      X
                                min       ci xi + max q(ξ, x)                                        (8a)
                                      x                      ξ∈U
                                              i∈I
                                      s.t. x ≥ 0,                                                    (8b)
where the recourse cost q(ξ, x) is given as the solution to the following linear program:
                                  XX                  X
               q(ξ, x) = min               d1ij yij
                                                 1
                                                    +    d2 yj2                                      (9a)
                              y
                                    i∈I j∈J               j∈J
                                    X
                                           1
                             s.t.         yij + yj2 ≥ ξj ,                       j∈J                 (9b)
                                    i∈I
                                    X
                                          yij ≤ pi xi ,                           i∈I                (9c)
                                    j∈J

                                    y 1 , y 2 ≥ 0.                                                   (9d)
This problem is adapted as a continuous relaxation (with respect to the first-stage decisions) of the
facility location problem introduced by Bertsimas & Kim (2024). Here, the first-stage decisions are
the real-valued decision variables xi determining the amount of items to produce at facility i at a unit
cost of ci for all i ∈ I. After the demands ξj for all delivery destinations j ∈ J are realized, items
are shipped from facilities to delivery destinations at a unit cost of dij for facility i and destination
j. These shipment quantities are captured for i ∈ I and j ∈ J by the continuous recourse decision
variables yij . An additional penalty is incurred for any unmet demand yj2 at destination j with unit
cost d2 . Constraints 9b define yj2 as unmet demand while constraints 9c ensure the total number of
items shipped from a facility i does not exceed its production, pi xi , where pi is the production factor
for facility i.
Generating Instances. In each trial, we randomly sample both mean and covariance parameters of
the Gaussian mixture pξ as well as parameters of the production-distribution problem, c, d and, p
(d′ is fixed to 5 in all iterations). To define the Gaussian mixture distribution pξ , we first sample the
mixing parameters ζ ∈ [0, 1]3 from a symmetric Dirichlet distribution, i.e., ζ ∼ Dir(1). For each
component k = 1, . . . , 3, we sample the population mean µk ∼ N (0, |J |I|J | ) and the population
covariance Σk from the Wishart distribution with |J | degrees of freedom and identity scale matrix
I|J | . To generate the problem parameters c ∈ R|I| , d ∈ R|I|×|J | and, p ∈ R|I| , we follow the
procedure described by Bertsimas & Kim (2024). Specifically, we sample d uniformly at random
from the interior of the ball B(d, 1.5) where di ∼ Unif(2, 22) for i ∈ I. We then sample pi ∼
Unif(8, 18) and ci ∼ Unif(2, 4) for i ∈ I.
Computational Details. Both the encoder and decoder of our VAE correspond to three-layer net-
works with ReLU activations and batch normalization between layers; all intermediate fully con-
nected layers have 32 hidden units. All VAE models are trained using the Adam optimizer with a
learning rate of 0.001. Additionally, we utilize a cyclical annealing schedule that varies the weight
of the KL-divergence term for the VAE training objective (Fu et al., 2019). All training is performed
on the MIT Supercloud system (Reuther et al., 2018) using an Intel Xeon Gold 6248 machine with
40 CPUs and two 32GB NVIDIA Volta V100 GPUs, which takes approximately 30 seconds for all
instances. All optimization is also performed on the MIT Supercloud system (Reuther et al., 2018)
using an Intel Xeon Platinum 8260 machine with 96 cores and using Gurobi 11 (Gurobi Optimiza-
tion, LLC, 2023) except when solving the AGRO subproblem, in which case results are obtained
using the Cvxpylayers package (Agrawal et al., 2019).
To solve the adversarial subproblem with AGRO, we perform 10 random initializations of z. For
each initialization, we perform normalized PGA with a learning rate of η = 0.1 until either (a) costs
obtained in successive PGA steps have converged within a tolerance of 0.01% or (b) 1000 PGA
steps have been performed. If the worst-case realization ξ obtained over all 10 initializations does


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


not exceed the lower bound obtained by the most recent iteration of the master problem (i.e., γ), we
perform additional initializations until either (a) a new worst-case realization is obtained or (b) 200
initializations have been performed (in which case, AGRO terminates).


B.1.1        Experimental Results


        |I|     |J |     Budget      Ellipsoid       AGRO (L = 1)           AGRO (L = 2)        AGRO (L = 4)
        4       3        1.13        1.13            11.93                  46.61               84.77
        8       6        7.1         371.18          13.8                   45.53               109.69
        12      9        250.09      —               16.29                  73.85               115.08
        16      12       1199.22     —               26.91                  76.59               113.4

      Table 2: Runtime results for production-distribution problem (not including VAE training).



                  |J| = 3                        |J| = 6                    |J| = 9                    |J| = 12
  L       Precision        Density    Precision       Density       Precision       Density    Precision     Density
  1       0.98             1.08       0.98            1.43          0.97            1.94       0.97          2.65
  2       0.98             1.05       0.95            1.22          0.93            1.56       0.93          2.1
  4       0.97             1.0        0.94            1.09          0.92            1.36       0.92          1.78

Table 3: Fidelity metrics for VAEs trained using the production-distribution problem data averaged
over all 50 instances.



                       |J| = 3                   |J| = 6                    |J| = 9                  |J| = 12
      L       Recall      Coverage        Recall    Coverage        Recall      Coverage      Recall     Coverage
      1       0.08        0.32            0.01      0.28            0.01        0.3           0.0        0.34
      2       0.78        0.83            0.32      0.66            0.15        0.65          0.08       0.67
      4       0.96        0.95            0.89      0.93            0.61        0.89          0.37       0.88

Table 4: Diversity metrics for VAEs trained using the production-distribution problem data averaged
over all 50 instances.


B.2       Capacity Expansion Model
The capacity expansion model is given by
          X            XX              X          X
   min        cd xdi +        cp xpi +   cb xbi +   cℓ xℓij + λ max q(ξ, x)                                         (10a)
      x                                                                                ξ∈U
               i∈N              i∈N p∈P            i∈N            (i,j)∈E
               X
      s.t.           xpi ≤ Γp                                                                           p∈P         (10b)
               i∈N
                         |N |
              xd ∈ Z≥0                                                                                              (10c)
              xd , xb , xℓ ≥ 0.                                                                                     (10d)
Here the first-stage bus-level decision variables include installed dispatchable generation capacity
(xdi ∈ Z+ ), installed renewable plant capacity (xpi ≥ 0) for renewable technologies p ∈ P, and
installed battery storage capacity (xbi ≥ 0). Additionally, we consider transmission capacity (xℓij ≥
0) as a first-stage decision variable for all edges (i, j) ∈ E. Importantly, installed renewable plant


                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


capacities obey a system-wide resource availability constraint. Finally, maxξ∈U q(ξ, x) denotes the
worst-case recourse cost (i.e., economic dispatch cost given by equation 11), which is incurred with
unit cost λ as part of the capacity expansion objective function. We “annualize” the worst-case
recourse cost by setting λ = 365. For a given investment decision x and uncertainty realization ξ,
the recourse cost is given by
        XX
   min           df yit
                      1
                        + ds yit
                              6
                                                                                               (11a)
    y
        t∈T i∈N
                   X                    X                                    X      p p
          1                   2                    2      3     4     d
    s.t. yit +               yjit −               yijt + yit + yit = ξit −         ξit xi      i ∈ N,t ∈ T      (11b)
                 j:(j,i)∈E            j:(i,j)∈E                              p∈P
         2
        yijt ≤ xℓij                                                                         (i, j) ∈ E, t ∈ T   (11c)
             2
        − yijt  ≤ xℓij                                                                      (i, j) ∈ E, t ∈ T   (11d)
         1
        yit ≤ νxdi                                                                             i ∈ N,t ∈ T      (11e)
         1     1
        yit − yi,t−1 ≤ κνxdi                                                                   i ∈ N,t ∈ T      (11f)
         f         1
        yi,t−1 − yit ≤ −κνxdi                                                                  i ∈ N,t ∈ T      (11g)
         5
        yit ≤ xbi                                                                              i ∈ N,t ∈ T      (11h)
         5     5        4
        yit − yi,t−1 + yi,t−1 =0                                                               i ∈ N,t ∈ T      (11i)
         3     6
        yit − yit ≤ 0                                                                          i ∈ N,t ∈ T      (11j)
         1   5    6
        y , y , y ≥ 0.                                                                                          (11k)
                                                                              1    2
Here, the total dispatchable generation at bus i in period t is denoted by yit  . yijt  denotes the inflow
                                               4
of power from bus i to bus j in hour t. yit denotes the discharge rate of the battery located at bus
                    5                                                               6
i in hour t while yit  denotes its total charge. Load shedding is denoted by yit      , which is assumed
                               3
to be the positive part of yit . ν denotes the nameplate capacity of the dispatchable plants while κ
and κ respectively denote the maximum ramp-up and ramp-down rates for dispatchable generation.
The objective function 11a minimizes the combined cost of fuel and a carbon tax for dispatchable
generation (with unit cost jointly denoted by cf ) as well as load shedding (with unit cost cs ). First-
stage decisions xdi , xpi , xbi , and xℓij parameterize the constraints of 11. Constraints 11b impose
flow conservation at each bus. Specifically, the constraint balances dispatchable generation, power
transmitted to/from other buses, nodal load shedding, and battery discharging with net load (i.e.,
demand minus total generation from renewables). Constraints 11c and 11d impose line limits on
power flows. Constraints 11e impose limits on total dispatchable generation while constraints 11f
and 11g limit ramping up and down of dispatchable generation. Constraints 11h limits the total state-
of-charge of batteries. Constraints 11i links battery discharging or charging (taken to be the negative
of discharging) rates to battery state-of-charge. Constraints 11j ensure that only the positive part of
load shedding incurs a cost. To simulate inter-day dynamics of storage and ramping, we implement
circular indexing, which links battery state-of-charge and dispatchable generation rates at the end of
the day with those at the beginning (Jacobson et al., 2024).
Data Processing. To process the data for the capacity expansion planning problem, we remove
components corresponding to solar capacity factors for nighttime hours and offshore wind capacity
factors for landlocked buses, both of which correspond to capacity factors of zero in all observa-
tions, which gives ξ ∈ R427 . In implementing CCG, we also remove redundant (i.e., perfectly
multicollinear) components so that the dataset of ξ observations has full column rank when defining
the uncertainty set. We then re-introduce the redundant components as affine transformations of the
retained components in the adversarial subproblem using equality constraints. Consequently, the ef-
fective dimensionality of U is 349 while the dimensionality of ξ is 427. For AGRO, we only remove
components that are constant (i.e., zero) and train the VAE on the original 427-dimensional dataset.
Computational Details. Both the encoder and decoder of our VAE correspond to three-layer net-
works with LeakyReLU activations and batch normalization between layers; each fully connected
layer has 64 hidden units. All VAE models are trained using the Adam optimizer with a learning
rate of 0.01. As in the case for the production-distribution problem, we utilize a cyclical annealing
schedule during training. All training is performed on the MIT Supercloud system (Reuther et al.,
2018) using an Intel Xeon Gold 6248 machine with 40 CPUs and one 32GB NVIDIA Volta V100


                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


GPUs. Training times range from approximately 190 to 250 seconds for all instances. All optimiza-
tion is also performed on the MIT Supercloud system (Reuther et al., 2018) using an Intel Xeon
Platinum 8260 machine with 96 cores and using Gurobi 11 (Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2023) ex-
cept when solving the AGRO subproblem, in which case results are obtained using the Cvxpylayers
package (Agrawal et al., 2019).
To solve the adversarial subproblem with AGRO, we perform 10 random initializations of z. For
each initialization, we perform normalized PGA with a learning rate of η = 0.03 until either (a)
costs obtained in successive PGA steps have converged within a tolerance of 0.01% or (b) 1000
PGA steps have been performed. If the worst-case realization ξ obtained over all 10 initializations
does not exceed the lower bound obtained by the most recent iteration of the master problem (i.e.,
γ), we perform additional initializations until either (a) a new worst-case realization is obtained or
(b) 30 initializations have been performed (in which case, AGRO terminates).


B.2.1                        Experimental Results


                      1010                                                         5.0 1e7                                                          1e9
                                                                                                                                                7
                                                                                   4.5
                      109                                                                                                                       6
Subproblem Estimate


                                                             Subproblem Estimate


                                                                                                                          Subproblem Estimate
                                                                                   4.0
                                                                                                                                                5
                      108                                                          3.5
                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                   3.0                                                                                            CCG
                                                                                                                                                3                                 L=2
                      107                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                2                                 L=4
                                                                                   2.0                                                                                            L=8
                      106                                                                                                                       1
                                107    108      109   1010                               2        3          4       5                                    2        4          6
                                  Sample Estimate                                               Sample Estimate   1e7                                         Sample Estimate       1e9

Figure 5: Comparison of sample-estimated VaR, F̂ −1 (α; x∗ ), and estimated worst-case costs ob-
tained from solving the adversarial subproblem, f (ξ i , x∗ ). Each point is obtained from one iteration
of AGRO/CCG. Points that are closer to the diagonal line indicate a more accurate estimate of VaR.
The middle and right-hand plots provide a zoomed-in view of two regions with a high concentration
of points. Subproblem estimates are almost always greater than sample estimates except in the case
of AGRO with L = 2 (blue).


                                                  L   Precision                              Density     Recall    Coverage
                                                  2    0.84                                  1.05        0.11      0.57
                                                  4    0.89                                  1.45        0.21      0.77
                                                  8    0.96                                  1.72        0.39      0.89

Table 5: Fidelity and diversity metrics for VAEs trained using the capacity expansion problem
dataset averaged over all eight trials.


                                                                                                    18
