Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


TAID: T EMPORALLY A DAPTIVE I NTERPOLATED D IS -
TILLATION FOR E FFICIENT K NOWLEDGE T RANSFER IN
L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Makoto Shing1 , Kou Misaki1 , Han Bao2 , Sho Yokoi345 , Takuya Akiba1
 1
   Sakana AI, 2 Kyoto University, 3 NINJAL, 4 Tohoku University, 5 RIKEN
 {mkshing,kou.misaki,takiba}@sakana.ai, bao@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp,
 yokoi@ninjal.ac.jp



                                            A BSTRACT

         Causal language models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities, but their
         size poses significant challenges for deployment in resource-constrained environ-
         ments. Knowledge distillation, a widely-used technique for transferring knowl-
         edge from a large teacher model to a small student model, presents a promising
         approach for model compression. A significant remaining issue lies in the major
         differences between teacher and student models, namely the substantial capacity
         gap, mode averaging, and mode collapse, which pose barriers during distillation.s
         To address these issues, we introduce Temporally Adaptive Interpolated Distil-
         lation (TAID), a novel knowledge distillation approach that dynamically interpo-
         lates student and teacher distributions through an adaptive intermediate distribu-
         tion, gradually shifting from the student’s initial distribution towards the teacher’s
         distribution. We provide a theoretical analysis demonstrating TAID’s ability to
         prevent mode collapse and empirically show its effectiveness in addressing the
         capacity gap while balancing mode averaging and mode collapse. Our com-
         prehensive experiments demonstrate TAID’s superior performance across various
         model sizes and architectures in both instruction tuning and pre-training scenar-
         ios. Furthermore, we showcase TAID’s practical impact by developing two state-
         of-the-art compact foundation models: TAID-LLM-1.5B for language tasks and
         TAID-VLM-2B for vision-language tasks. These results demonstrate TAID’s ef-
         fectiveness in creating high-performing and efficient models, advancing the devel-
         opment of more accessible AI technologies.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large language models are too large. Causal language models (LMs) are increasingly becoming
essential tools across various sectors (Malinka et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a; He
et al., 2024). Scaling data size, model size, and training steps has been the primary approach to
improve LM performance (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; OpenAI et al., 2024), leading
to rapid advancements in both proprietary and open-source LMs (Touvron et al., 2023; Abdin et al.,
2024; Yang et al., 2024). However, the success of large LMs creates challenges: they are too large
for edge devices (Qu et al., 2024; Thawakar et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024), have decoding times
too long for real-time applications (Wan et al., 2023; Leviathan et al., 2023; Miao et al., 2024), and
consume significant energy resources (Luccioni et al., 2023; Faiz et al., 2024). This paradox of scale
hinders the widespread deployment and use of LMs despite their potential and high demand.

Knowledge distillation offers a promising prescription. One promising approach to developing
compact yet high-performing models is knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton et al., 2015). KD aims
to transfer the knowledge, specifically the predicted distributions, from a well-trained, high-capacity
teacher model to a more compact student model, often achieving better performance than small
models trained solely (Buciluundefined et al., 2006; Ba & Caruana, 2014; Hinton et al., 2015). In the
context of compressing large LMs, KD is becoming a mainstream approach, with many specialized
KD methods actively being developed (Xu et al., 2024; Team et al., 2024; Muralidharan et al., 2024).


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Standard Knowledge Distillation      Ours: Temporally Adaptive Interpolated Distillation (TAID)
 Direct optimization of student       Adaptive gradual optimization of student
 towards xed teacher distribution     via time-dependent intermediate teacher distributions


    student                 teacher     student                                               teacher
                                                                       Time t



Figure 1: Comparison of standard KD and TAID. (Left) Standard KD methods typically employ
direct optimization towards a fixed teacher distribution. (Right) TAID creates a dynamic bridge
through adaptive, time-dependent intermediate teacher distributions (green dashed lines), enabling
       fi

gradual optimization of the student. This approach facilitates a flexible transition from the student’s
initial distribution towards the teacher’s distribution over time, effectively addressing the capacity
gap and balancing knowledge transfer across varying model sizes.


The formidable, unresolved challenge of teacher-student differences. Nevertheless, KD is not
a flawless method, and two significant issues remain, both stemming from the differences between
teacher models and the student models.
(i) Capacity gap — the substantial capacity gap between a large teacher model and compact student
model makes effective knowledge transfer more difficult (Mirzadeh et al., 2020; Cho & Hariha-
ran, 2019; Zhang et al., 2023b). As LMs continue to grow in size and complexity, this capacity
gap becomes increasingly pronounced, making it even more challenging to distill knowledge ef-
fectively. (ii) Mode averaging and mode collapse — due to the disparity in model capacity, KD
methods often struggle with mode-averaging and mode-collapse issues, where student models either
fail to oversmooth rich output distributions of a teacher model or become overly focused on specific
modes (Wen et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2024; Agarwal et al., 2024).

A new method to overcome the teacher-student difference. To overcome the fundamental issue
of differences between teacher and student models, we introduce Temporally Adaptive Interpolated
Distillation (TAID), a new approach to KD for LMs. TAID reduces the gap between teacher and
student model throughout the training process by dynamically introducing an intermediate teacher
that interpolates teacher and student models to provide a target distribution with a modest capabil-
ity (see Figure 1). This simple technique allows for learning a higher-quality student model than
with existing KD methods (Section 6), scales student’s performance with teacher’s size even un-
der large capacity gaps (Section 6.3.2), and suppresses mode-averaging and mode-collapse issues
theoretically and empirically (Section 4 and 6.3.3).
Our main contributions to this paper are as follows:
• We introduce TAID (Section 3), a new knowledge distillation method that reimagines the distilla-
  tion process as a dynamic, adaptive knowledge transfer from student to teacher distributions. This
  approach addresses common challenges in distilling large language models.
• We provide a theoretical analysis of TAID (Section 4) with a regression model as a proxy to the
  language modeling objective, demonstrating its ability to prevent mode collapse in the distillation
  process. This theoretical guarantee sets TAID apart from traditional self-distillation methods,
  which can suffer from mode collapse.
• We conduct extensive experiments (Section 6) across various model sizes and architectures,
  demonstrating TAID’s superiority in both instruction tuning and pre-training scenarios. Moreover,
  we experimentally reveal TAID’s robustness to capacity gaps (Section 6.3.2), and its ability to bal-
  ance between mode averaging and mode collapse, unlike existing KD methods (Section 6.3.3).
• We demonstrate TAID’s practical impact by developing two state-of-the-art compact models (Sec-
  tion 7): TAID-LLM-1.5B achieves the best performance for language models under 2B param-
  eters, while TAID-VLM-2B outperforms vision-language models up to 4B parameters, showcas-
  ing TAID’s effectiveness across different domains.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     P RELIMINARIES

Problem setting for language model distillation. A language model is defined as a probability
distribution p over token sequences y = (y1 , y2 , . . . , yS ) ∈ Y S , where Y is the vocabulary and S is
the sequence length. The distribution is obtained by applying the softmax function to logit values:
                                                                 <s
p(ys | y <s ) = softmax(logitp (ys | y <s )) = exp(logitp (ys |y ))/ y′ ∈Y exp(logitp (y′ |y<s )). The model
                                                                       P
                                                QS
satisfies the autoregressive property: p(y) = s=1 p(ys | y <s ) where y <s := (y1 , y2 , . . . , ys−1 ),
and p(ys | y <s ) = p(y1 ) for s = 1. In KD for language models, we aim to transfer knowledge from
a well-trained teacher model p to a parametric student model qθ . The objective is to find parameters
θ that minimize a distance measure J between their distributions.

Traditional knowledge distillation approaches. Hinton et al. (2015) introduced KD using the
Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence, which is formulated for language models as: JKL (p, qθ ) :=
                                              <s
                                         s |y
   PS P
S
 1
      s=1   ys ∈Y p(ys | y
                           <s
                              ) log qp(y
                                     θ (ys |y
                                                 )
                                              <s ) . However, KD based on the standard KL divergence

often suffers from the mode-averaging problem, where a student model attempts to aggressively
cover all modes of a teacher distribution despite being incapable, potentially resulting in a over-
smoothed and less accurate distribution (Wen et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2024). To address this, Wen
et al. (2023) proposed using the Reverse KL (RKL) divergence: JRKL (p, qθ ) := JKL (qθ , p). While
this approach mitigates the mode-averaging problem, it can lead to mode collapse, where the student
model focuses only on the dominant modes of the teacher distribution.

Curse of capacity gap. Mirzadeh et al. (2020), Cho & Hariharan (2019), and Zhang et al. (2023b)
reported a curse of capacity gap, where an excessively large model can negatively impact the per-
formance of the student model. This phenomenon poses a significant challenge in KD, particularly
for language models. As state-of-the-art language models continue to grow in size and complexity,
the capacity gap becomes increasingly critical in developing high-performing and compact student
models. Addressing the capacity gap is crucial for effectively transferring knowledge from large-
scale language models to more portable ones without sacrificing performance. Our experiments
(Section 6.3.2) provide empirical evidence of the capacity gap and demonstrate how our proposed
method addresses this challenge.


3     P ROPOSED METHOD : TAID

We introduce Temporally Adaptive Interpolated Distillation (TAID), a novel knowledge distillation
method for large language models. TAID uses a dynamic, time-dependent intermediate teacher
to bridge the gap between student and teacher models (see Figure 1). This approach facilitates
smoother knowledge transfer, addressing the capacity gap and balancing mode-averaging and mode-
collapse issues. We show how TAID mitigates these issues in Sections 6.3.2 and 6.3.3, respectively.

3.1   T EMPORALLY INTERPOLATED DISTRIBUTION

The key idea behind TAID is to employ a time-dependent intermediate teacher to bridge the gap
between student and teacher models. We formally define the intermediate distribution as follows:
Definition 3.1 (TAID Interpolated Distribution). For any input sequence y <s ∈ Y s−1 and any
output token ys ∈ Y, the TAID interpolated distribution pt is defined as:

             pt (ys |y <s ) := softmax (1 − t) · logitqθ′ (ys |y <s ) + t · logitp (ys |y <s )   (1)

where t ∈ [0, 1] is a time-dependent interpolation parameter, logitqθ′ represents a detached version
of the student logits (i.e., treated as a constant without being backpropagated), and logitp represents
the teacher logits.

The interpolation is performed at the logit level to preserve relative confidence between predictions.
The TAID objective function with the interpolation parameter t is defined as the KL divergence
between the intermediate distribution pt and the student distribution qθ :


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 3.2 (TAID Objective). The TAID objective function at time t is defined as:
                                                       S
                 (t)                                1X X                     pt (ys |y <s )
               JTAID (p, qθ ) := JKL (pt , qθ ) =         pt (ys |y <s ) log                .             (2)
                                                    S s=1                    qθ (ys |y <s )
                                                           ys ∈Y


We gradually increase the interpolation parameter t from 0 to 1 during training so that the intermedi-
ate distribution pt adaptively transitions from the student’s initial distribution towards the teacher’s
distribution. Refer to Section 3.2 for the scheduling of the interpolation parameter. The detached qθ′
in pt ensures that we only optimize the student model qθ in the denominator of the KL divergence,
effectively treating the intermediate distribution as a target.
The intermediate distribution provides a crucial advantage in addressing the capacity gap and mode-
averaging/collapse issues. By smoothly transitioning from the student’s initial distribution to the
teacher’s distribution, TAID facilitates a gradual transfer of knowledge. This approach effectively
mitigates issues associated with significant capacity gaps between teacher and student models. This
can be understood as follows: When t is small, the student model is encouraged to focus on its
own modes, reinforcing its unique characteristics. In this phase, TAID behaves similarly to self-
distillation (using the student model as the teacher), which amplifies generalization by sparsifying
the model (Mobahi et al., 2020). Thus, the student model tends to capture dominant features of the
student’s distribution. As t increases, the student gradually incorporates the teacher’s knowledge,
capturing more nuanced and rich signals from the teacher distribution. This balanced approach re-
sults in a student model that not only captures the essential knowledge from the teacher but also
maintains its ability to generalize effectively. Despite TAID’s relevance to self-distillation, the in-
terpolation parameter is essential to avoid mode collapse, which self-distillation cannot escape. We
will theoretically demonstrate it in Section 4.

3.2   A DAPTIVE INTERPOLATION PARAMETER UPDATE

While TAID demonstrates effectiveness even with a simple linear increase of the interpolation pa-
rameter t, we propose an adaptive update mechanism to achieve more efficient learning and im-
proved accuracy. The key motivation is to dynamically adjust t based on the student’s learning
progress. The adaptive update strategy is designed to aggressively increase t in the early stages
when the interpolated distribution pt is close to the student model qθ , as the model fitting is not chal-
lenging in this phase. As the student model approaches the teacher model, the increase in t becomes
more gradual, allowing for careful fitting to the more complex teacher distribution.
Our adaptive update strategy is based on the relative change in the objective function: δn :=
   (tn−1 )     (tn )      (tn−1 )                  (tn )
(JTAID     − JTAID   )/(JTAID     + ϵ), where JTAID      is the value of the TAID objective function at inter-
polation parameter tn , tn is the interpolation parameter at step n, and ϵ is a small constant to prevent
division by zero. We update tn using a momentum-based approach to smooth out short-term fluc-
tuations: mn = βmn−1 + (1 − β)δn , where β is the momentum coefficient. The interpolation
parameter is then updated as: tn ← min(1.0, max(tlinear , tn−1 + α · sigmoid(mn ) · (1 − tn−1 ))),
where α is the step size for t, and tlinear is a linear increase schedule as a lower bound for t. To allow
for flexible initialization, t is set to a start value tstart , which is a hyperparameter. The complete TAID
training procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1 in Appendix A.
This update mechanism allows for more aggressive increases in t during the early stages of train-
ing when the student is learning rapidly (high δt ), and more gradual increases as the student model
approaches the teacher’s complexity (low δt ). The sigmoid function bounds the update, ensuring
stable learning, while the max and min operations guarantee a monotonic increase within the pre-
defined range. A detailed analysis of how different α values affect the behavior of t and the learning
dynamics is presented in Section 6.3.1.


4     T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS

TAID distills from the intermediate distribution pt , partially containing the student model qθ as the
mixture component. This may apparently cause the collapse because student’s modes are amplified
repeatedly during the fitting recursion. Such a collapse phenomenon has been theoretically observed


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for self-distillation, where the teacher and student models are identical (Mobahi et al., 2020). We
aim to demonstrate that TAID avoids mode collapse, unlike self-distillation.
We borrow the analysis framework of Mobahi et al. (2020) to study least-square regression as a
proxy to language modeling. In each training step, the student model is updated by fitting to the
interpolated label (1 − t)yt + tyteacher , where yt and yteacher are the labels of the current student and
teacher models, respectively, and t is the interpolation parameter (being linearly increased) at the
current step. Here, we suppose the student model achieves ϵ-interpolation of the training signals so
that the regression loss is minimized near-perfectly in each time step.
Theorem 4.1 (Non-collapse Nature (Informally)). Suppose we run distillation for T steps in√total.
If the teacher model has sufficiently large signals so that the label is at least as large as Ω( T ϵ),
then the student model does not collapse for any time t.

Notably, self-distillation inevitably collapses for sufficiently large steps (Mobahi et al., 2020, Propo-
sition 4), corroborating the benefit of the intermediate distribution and its adaptive update. The
formal statement and more discussions can be found in Appendix B.

5    R ELATED WORKS
Improving objective functions. To address the mode-averaging and mode-collapse issues that
the traditional KL divergence-based methods (Section 2) face, various alternative objective func-
tions have been applied to knowledge distillation. Wen et al. (2023) applied the Total Varia-
  P Distance, formulated at the sequence level similar to Kim & Rush (2016): JTVD (p, qθ ) :=
tion
1
2    y |p(y) − qθ (y)|. Agarwal et al. (2024) utilized the Generalized Jensen–Shannon (JS) Diver-
gence: JGJSD (p, qθ ) := λJKD (p, r) + (1 − λ)JRKD (p, r), where r(y) = λp(y) + (1 − λ)qθ (y) and
λ ∈ [0, 1]. Additionally, Ko et al. (2024) employed the Skew KL Divergence: JSKD (p, qθ ) :=
JKL (p, r). They also defined the Skew Reverse KL Divergence as JSRKD (p, qθ ) := JKL (qθ , r).
These approaches aim to balance preserving teacher knowledge and allowing student generaliza-
tion. However, they typically use a fixed teacher distribution throughout distillation, potentially
hindering knowledge transfer when there is a significant capacity gap between teacher and student.
In contrast, our TAID method introduces a time-dependent intermediate distribution, gradually tran-
sitioning from the student’s initial distribution to the teacher’s, mitigating the capacity gap issue
and enabling more stable learning. While Skew KL divergence also adopts an intermediate distri-
bution, its approach differs significantly from TAID. Skew KL divergence uses a fixed intermediate
distribution and transfers the teacher’s knowledge to it, whereas TAID employs a time-dependent
intermediate distribution and transfers it to the student. This distinction, particularly the dynamic
nature of TAID’s intermediate distribution, makes TAID more suitable for adaptive updates of the
student model as the interpolation parameter changes over time (see Appendix C for a detailed com-
parison).

Utilizing student-generated outputs (SGOs). Recent research in KD for language models has
explored utilizing on-policy data sampled from teacher and student models during training (Gu
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b). Within this approach, some studies have specifically focused
on leveraging student-generated outputs (SGOs) (Agarwal et al., 2024; Ko et al., 2024). While
these methods show promise in improving distillation performance and addressing the distribution
mismatch between training and inference due to the autoregressive nature of LMs when training on
a fixed dataset (Pomerleau, 1991; Ross & Bagnell, 2010), they are computationally expensive for
large-scale models. TAID achieves superior performance without relying on on-policy data or SGOs,
offering improved computational efficiency for large-scale datasets and models (see Section 6.1).
Future work could explore combining TAID with on-policy approaches to potentially achieve even
better performance.

KD methods from image classification. KD has been extensively studied in image classification
tasks, with some logit-based methods being applicable to language model distillation. Notable ex-
amples include CTKD (Li et al., 2023b) and DKD (Zhao et al., 2022), which have shown remarkable
performance using standard KL divergence. CTKD shares a similar curriculum learning approach
with TAID, gradually increasing task difficulty. CTKD achieves this through a learnable temperature
parameter that modifies both student and teacher distributions. In contrast, TAID modifies only the


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Evaluating distillation methods for LLM instruction tuning. The MT-Bench scores after
training are listed, where higher scores indicate better conversational performance. For each of the
three teacher-student pairs, different distillation algorithms, including the proposed TAID method,
are compared. The highest score in each column is highlighted in bold.

                                 Teacher      Phi-3-mini (3.8B)     Llama-2 (6.7B)   StableLM Zephyr (2.8B)
    Method                       Student      TinyLlama (1.1B)    TinyLlama (1.1B)             Pythia (0.4B)
    SFT                                                   2.00               3.94                      2.57
    KL (Hinton et al., 2015)                              2.71               3.99                      2.74
    RKL (Wen et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2024)               3.48               3.92                      2.53
    TVD (Wen et al., 2023)                                3.27               3.64                      2.57
    Adaptive KL (Wu et al., 2024)                         3.27               3.77                      2.64
    GKD (Agarwal et al., 2024)                            2.24               3.82                      2.59
    DistiLLM (Ko et al., 2024)                            3.23               3.97                      2.97
    CTKD (Li et al., 2023b)                               1.78               2.84                      1.39
    DKD (Zhao et al., 2022)                               2.70               4.14                      2.90
    (Ours) TAID w/o adaptive update                       3.44               4.18                      2.88
    (Ours) TAID                                           4.05               4.27                      3.05



teacher distribution through interpolation, potentially preserving more of the student’s learned infor-
mation. DKD decomposes KL divergence into target and non-target class components, allowing for
better weight adjustment in tasks of varying difficulty. However, these image classification-based
methods are not sufficiently effective in language modeling due to the unique characteristics of the
language domain. We experimentally verified it in Section 6.3.4. TAID addresses these challenges
through its adaptive interpolation, while remaining flexible enough to be combined with methods
like DKD for simpler tasks.


6      E MPIRICAL ANALYSIS

We evaluate TAID across instruction tuning and pre-training scenarios, using various model sizes
and architectures. Our experiments compare TAID against state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating
its superior performance and efficiency, while providing insights into its behavior across different
capacity gaps and its ability to balance mode-averaging and mode-collapse issues.

6.1     I NSTRUCTION TUNING

Experimental setup. For the instruction-following task, we used the UltraChat 200k dataset (Ding
et al., 2023) for training.         Performance was assessed using MT-Bench (Zheng et al.,
2023), a benchmark designed to evaluate model’s instruction-following ability, with scor-
ing conducted by GPT-4.           For our experiments, we utilized three teacher-student pairs:
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct (Abdin et al., 2024) as teacher with TinyLlama (Zhang et al.,
2024a) as student, Llama-2-7b-chat (Touvron et al., 2023) as teacher with TinyLlama as
student, and StableLM Zephyr 3B (Team, 2023) as teacher with Pythia-410M (Biderman
et al., 2023) as student. To evaluate the pure effectiveness of our distillation method, we focused
solely on distillation using instruction data, unlike previous studies (Gu et al., 2024; Agarwal et al.,
2024; Ko et al., 2024) that often perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) before distillation or include
additional cross-entropy loss on pre-training corpora. Furthermore, to simulate a more practical sce-
nario, we used powerful teacher models trained on in-house data with open weights for distillation to
smaller student models. We compared TAID against prior works, including KL divergence (Hinton
et al., 2015), RKL (Wen et al., 2023), Total Variation Distance (TVD) (Wen et al., 2023), Adaptive
KL (Wu et al., 2024), as well as methods utilizing SGOs such as Generalized KD (GKD) (Agarwal
et al., 2024) and DistiLLM (Ko et al., 2024). Additionally, we included two methods originally
proposed for image classification tasks: CTKD (Li et al., 2023b) and DKD (Zhao et al., 2022), to
assess their effectiveness in language model distillation. We also included a supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) baseline to demonstrate the benefits of knowledge distillation. To isolate the impact of our
adaptive update mechanism, we evaluated TAID both with and without this feature, where TAID
without adaptive update uses a linear increase of the interpolation parameter with respect to the


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Evaluating distillation methods for LLM continued pre-training. The Open LLM
Leaderboard scores after training are listed, with higher scores indicating better performance. The
average score across the 6 tasks (Average column) is commonly used as an indicator of overall
language proficiency. The highest score in each column is highlighted in bold.

 Method                          ARC     HellaSwag   MMLU     TrustfulQA   Winogrande   GSM8K    Average
 SFT                             41.38       63.66    25.89        35.64        61.25     1.21     38.17
 KL (Hinton et al., 2015)        44.97       65.43    25.11        37.95        63.22     2.80     39.91
 TVD (Wen et al., 2023)          43.52       64.50    25.95        36.38        63.14     2.96     39.41
 Adaptive KL (Wu et al., 2024)   43.77       63.09    26.04        36.42        63.22     2.12     39.11
 GJS (Agarwal et al., 2024)      44.71       65.67    25.27        37.76        62.12     3.34     39.81
 Skew KL (Ko et al., 2024)       44.62       65.25    25.79        37.45        62.51     3.41     39.84
 Skew RKL (Ko et al., 2024)      44.11       64.80    26.07        36.76        62.83     3.03     39.60
 (Ours) TAID                     45.48       65.43    25.43        37.92        63.38     2.96     40.10


training steps. Detailed hyper-parameters and implementation specifics for TAID and all baseline
methods are provided in Appendix D.1.


Results. Table 1 presents the MT-Bench scores for all methods across the three different teacher-
student pairs. Our proposed TAID method consistently outperforms all baseline methods, including
those proposed for image classification (CTKD and DKD) and methods utilizing SGOs such as
GKD and DistiLLM. Notably, TAID achieves superior performance without relying on expensive
SGO sampling strategies, resulting in significantly faster training times—approximately 2 times
faster than DistiLLM and 10 times faster than GKD. This combination of superior performance and
computational efficiency, achieved without SGOs, makes TAID particularly attractive for real-world
applications where both model quality and training speed are crucial. An ablation study comparing
TAID with and without adaptive updates shows improvements ranging from 2.2% to 17.7% across
different teacher-student pairs, underlining the importance of our proposed adaptive mechanism.


6.2   P RE - TRAINING

Experimental setup. Due to the limited resources, we performed continued pre-training, initializ-
ing the student model with a pre-trained model and further refining it through additional pre-training
using distillation. We used the first 10% of the SmolLM-Corpus (Ben Allal et al., 2024) dataset,
amounting to approximately 20 billion tokens. We used Phi-3-medium-4k-instruct (Abdin
et al., 2024) as the teacher model and TinyLlama as the student model. Similar to our instruc-
tion tuning experiments, we focused solely on distillation without additional supervised fine-tuning
or pre-training losses. Due to the computational cost associated with sampling from the student
model in large-scale pre-training and the absence of prompts as in instruction-following tasks, we
adapted the baseline methods to use only their objective functions without SGOs. We compared
TAID against these modified baselines, including KL divergence, TVD, Adaptive KL, GJS (used in
GKD), and Skew KL/RKL (used in DistiLLM). To evaluate the pre-trained models, we followed the
Open LLM Leaderboard (Beeching et al., 2023) methodology, which is commonly used to assess the
underlying capabilities of models through few-shot evaluation. This methodology includes six di-
verse tasks, with evaluation settings and metrics adhering to the Open LLM Leaderboard standards.
Detailed hyperparameters and implementation specifics are provided in Appendix D.2.


Results. Table 2 presents the results of our pre-training experiments. Following the standard prac-
tice in the LLM community, we reported the average scores across diverse tasks. TAID achieves the
highest average score across all six tasks, outperforming all baseline methods. This superior average
performance demonstrates TAID’s effectiveness in transferring knowledge from the teacher to the
student model across a diverse range of tasks. While TAID shows the best overall performance, it
is worth noting that it achieves the highest scores on two individual tasks (ARC and Winogrande)
and competitive performance on the others. The consistently strong performance across tasks, cou-
pled with the highest average score, underscores TAID’s robustness and effectiveness in knowledge
distillation for large language models.


                                                      7
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                              67
                      1.0                                         1.5                KL
Interpolation Parameter
                                                                                                              52
                                                                                     TAID                       410M   1B      2.8B     6.9B


                                                                                              Test Accuracy (%)
                                                    Objective Value
                      0.8                                         1.4                                         22
                                                                                                              21
                                            =5e-3                 1.3
                                                                                                              20
                      0.6                   =1e-3                 1.2                                         19
                                                                                                                                    Teacher
                                            =5e-4                                                                                   TAID
                                                                  1.1                                         14                    KL
                                          linear                                                                                    RKL
                      0.4                                                                                     13410M
                            0     4000 8000 12000                       0   4000 8000 12000                            1B      2.8B      6.9B
                                      Steps                                    Steps                                   Teacher Size
      Figure 2: Analysis of TAID’s behavior and performance. (Left) Interpolation parameter t be-
      havior: Higher α values lead to faster initial growth compared to linear increase, allowing for more
      aggressive knowledge transfer in early stages when the capacity gap is small. (Middle) Objective
      value comparison: TAID exhibits a more stable objective value with lower variance compared to
      standard KL divergence throughout training, indicating a consistent learning difficulty that aligns
      with the student’s evolving capabilities. (Right) Performance across different teacher sizes: TAID
      shows monotonic improvement and outperforms other methods as teacher size increases, demon-
      strating its effectiveness in addressing the curse of capacity gap.


       6.3                  A NALYSIS

       6.3.1                    A NALYSIS OF INTERPOLATION PARAMETER AND TRAINING STABILITY

      We analyzed TAID’s interpolation parameter t and learning dynamics to validate its design. Fig-
      ure 2 (Left) shows how different learning rates α affect t’s behavior over time under the setting of
      Section 6.1, with tstart set to 0.4. We can confirm that t is smoothly increasing thanks to our adap-
      tive update mechanism. Higher α values lead to faster initial growth of t, enabling more aggressive
      early knowledge transfer, which is particularly beneficial when the capacity gap between student
      and teacher models is small.
      Figure 2 (Middle) compares the objective value of TAID (using the intermediate distribution) with
      the standard KL divergence between the teacher and student during training. TAID demonstrates
      a constant value with low variance throughout the training process, in contrast to the higher and
      more variable loss of standard KL. This stability in loss indicates that TAID’s adaptive interpolation
      mechanism keeps the learning task at a consistent level of difficulty, aligning with the student’s
      current capabilities. This controlled learning environment potentially leads to more efficient and
      stable knowledge transfer throughout the training process.

       6.3.2                    P ERFORMANCE ACROSS VARIOUS CAPACITY GAPS

      TAID’s design, which gradually transfers knowledge from the teacher model, is expected to address
      the curse of capacity gap described in Section 2. To evaluate this, we conducted an experiment
      using a fixed-size student model (70m) trained with teachers of varying capacities (410M to 6.9B)
      from the Pythia Suite (Biderman et al., 2023). Models were trained on a random 1B token subset of
      the SmolLM-Corpus for 1 epoch, due to computational cost constraints. We chose the LAMBADA
      dataset (Paperno et al., 2016) for evaluation, as it tests a model’s ability to predict the final word of
      a passage, directly assessing language modeling capability without relying on specific knowledge,
      making it suitable for comparing models with small-scale training.
      Figure 2 (Right) shows that TAID consistently outperforms both KL and RKL divergence methods
      across all teacher model sizes. Notably, TAID exhibits a consistent upward trend in performance
      as the teacher model size increases while KL and RKL methods show inconsistent performance
      trends. This inconsistency in KL and RKL methods aligns with the curse of capacity gap, where
      larger teacher models do not always lead to better student performance, described Section 2. TAID’s
      consistent improvement with larger teachers indicates its robustness in handling varying capacity
      gaps, making it particularly suitable for distilling knowledge from state-of-the-art large language
      models into more compact and deployable student models.


                                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6.3.3   BALANCING MODE AVERAGING AND MODE COLLAPSE
To demonstrate TAID’s effectiveness in balancing mode-averaging and mode-collapse issues, we an-
alyzed the distributions of student models trained using KL divergence, RKL divergence, and TAID.
We used the trained models of the Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct (teacher) and TinyLlama (stu-
dent) pair in Section 6.1, with distributions calculated from the UltraChat 200k train set.
Table 3 presents a summary of our analysis, showing the probability mass distribution for the head
and tail of the vocabulary as ranked by the teacher model. We observe that TAID consistently main-
tains probability masses between those of KL and RKL for both the head and tail of the distribution.
  In the head, TAID captures dominant vocabulary in the
teacher’s distribution more than KL, effectively avoiding the Table 3: Probability mass distribu-
mode-averaging issue. While RKL captures the dominant tion analysis. Head: sum of proba-
vocabulary more than TAID, it significantly fails to capture bilities for top-10 tokens. Tail: sum
low-frequent vocabulary in the tail of the teacher distribu- of probabilities for tokens in the 80–
                                                                               1
tion, which TAID captures reasonably, preventing the mode- 100th percentile.
collapse issue. These results indicate that TAID successfully
navigates the trade-off between mode averaging and mode col-      Method Head                 Tail
lapse, achieving a more balanced and faithful representation of
                                                                  KL         0.216 40.2 ×10−7
the teacher’s distribution across both common and rare tokens.
                                                                  RKL        0.227     8.1 ×10−7
This balanced approach contributes to TAID’s superior perfor-     TAID       0.218 39.0 ×10−7
mance in knowledge distillation tasks, as it more effectively
captures the full spectrum of the teacher’s knowledge while
maintaining a focused distribution.

6.3.4   C OMPARISON WITH IMAGE CLASSIFICATION TASKS
Our experiments revealed that KD methods developed for                   Entropy     Target-class Probability
image classification, such as CTKD (Li et al., 2023b) and                           1.0
DKD (Zhao et al., 2022), underperform in language model
                                                                                    0.8
distillation. We hypothesize that this is due to fundamen- 6
tal differences in the distributions between language model-                        0.6
ing tasks and image classification tasks. Figure 3 illustrates 4
the entropy of the distribution and the probabilities of ground-                    0.4
truth classes (target-class probabilities) for two representative 2
models: ResNet-56 (He et al., 2016) for image classification                        0.2
and GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) for language modeling.2 Im-
                                                                  0                 0.0
age classification typically involves predicting a one-hot dis- ResNet-56 GPT-2        ResNet-56 GPT-2
tribution with high target-class probability and low entropy.
In contrast, language modeling predicts a more diverse prob- Figure 3: Comparison between im-
ability distribution, resulting in lower target-class probabili- age classification and language mod-
ties and higher entropy. These characteristics lead to two key eling tasks.         Language modeling
challenges in language model distillation. First, there is an (GPT-2) exhibits significantly higher
increased susceptibility to mode collapse, as the model can entropy and lower target-class proba-
easily be pulled toward non-target modes. Second, language bilities compared to image classifica-
modeling poses a significant challenge for smaller models with tion (ResNet-56). These fundamental
                                                                  differences highlight the unique chal-
limited capacity: predicting extremely low-frequency classes. lenges in language model distillation.
This difficulty is compounded by a power law distribution of
word frequencies (Zipf’s law), resulting in a large number of
extremely low-frequency classes in the long tail of the distribution. To test this hypothesis and to
assess TAID’s flexibility, we evaluated TAID on multiple image classification tasks (results in Ap-
pendix D.3). While gains were modest on CIFAR-100, TAID consistently outperformed CTKD and
DKD on the more complex ImageNet task. This aligns with our observation that ImageNet (en-
tropy: 6.67, target-class probability: 0.00130) presents a more challenging distribution compared to
CIFAR-100 (entropy: 0.485, target-class probability: 0.613). These findings highlight the need for
distillation methods tailored to language modeling’s unique challenges. TAID’s strong performance
   1
    Typically, probabilities range from 10−1 to 10−2 for Head tokens and from 10−10 to 10−11 for Tail tokens.
   2
    For this analysis, we used the CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky, 2009) dataset for ResNet-56 and the OpenWeb-
Text (Gokaslan & Cohen, 2019) dataset for GPT-2.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Performance of TAID-LLM-1.5B,                    Table 5: Performance of TAID-VLM-2B, our
our new state-of-the-art LLM for models under             new state-of-the-art VLM for models up to 4B
2B parameters. See Table 9 for task breakdown.            parameters. See Table 10 for task breakdown.

 Model                              LightEval (↑)             Model                Open-VLM-LB (↑)
 Qwen2-1.5B (Yang et al., 2024)              46.19            PaliGemma (Beyer et al., 2024)      46.56
 Phi-1.5B (Li et al., 2023a)                 50.39            MiniCPM-V-2 (Yao et al., 2024)      47.93
 StableLM-2-1.6B (Bellagente et al., 2024)   51.24            Phi-3-Vision (Abdin et al., 2024)   53.60
 SmolLM-1.7B (Allal et al., 2024)            51.31            InternVL2-2B (Chen et al., 2024)    53.96
 TAID-LLM-1.5B                               52.27            TAID-VLM-2B                         56.43



across domains, particularly in complex tasks, demonstrates its potential as a versatile approach to
knowledge distillation. Future work could explore its application to other tasks involving long-tail
distributions or complex probability predictions beyond language modeling.

7       A PPLICATION TO STATE - OF - THE - ART MODEL DEVELOPMENT
Building upon our systematic evaluation of TAID, we further demonstrate its effectiveness in devel-
oping state-of-the-art models. We introduce two models: TAID-LLM-1.5B and TAID-VLM-2B,
which have achieved state-of-the-art performance in their respective size categories for large lan-
guage models (LLMs) and vision-language models (VLMs).

TAID-LLM-1.5B. We developed TAID-LLM-1.5B, a new 1.5B-parameter language model, us-
ing our TAID method. Following recent conventions in evaluating language models of this size (Al-
lal et al., 2024), we evaluated it using LightEval 3 , a comprehensive benchmark suite for small
language models. Table 4 shows that TAID-LLM-1.5B achieves the highest score, setting a new
state-of-the-art for models with fewer than 2 billion parameters. Detailed settings and results can be
found in Appendix E.1.

TAID-VLM-2B. To showcase TAID’s versatility, we developed TAID-VLM-2B, a new 2B-
parameter vision-language model. We evaluated it following the Open VLM Leaderboard proto-
col (OpenCompass Contributors, 2023)4 . As shown in Table 5, TAID-VLM-2B achieves the high-
est score among state-of-the-art vision-language models up to 4B parameters, even surpassing the
performance of larger models like Phi-3-Vision (4.2B parameters). This success highlights
TAID’s capability in transferring multimodal knowledge across significant capacity gaps. Detailed
settings and results can be found in Appendix E.2.

8       C ONCLUSION
We introduced Temporally Adaptive Interpolated Distillation (TAID), a novel knowledge distilla-
tion approach that effectively addresses the challenges of compressing large language models. Our
experiments demonstrated TAID’s superior performance across various model sizes and architec-
tures, consistently outperforming state-of-the-art methods. The development of TAID-LLM-1.5B
and TAID-VLM-2B, achieving state-of-the-art performance in their categories, underscores TAID’s
practical impact. TAID’s dynamic bridge mechanism effectively mitigates mode-averaging and
mode-collapse problems, leading to more stable and efficient training. These advantages contribute
to more accessible deployment of advanced language technologies in resource-constrained environ-
ments. Future research could extend TAID to other distance metrics, explore non-linear interpo-
lations, adapt it for multi-teacher distillation (Wan et al., 2024), and investigate its application in
other modalities and tasks beyond classification. In conclusion, TAID represents a significant ad-
vancement in knowledge distillation, offering both theoretical insights and practical benefits. As AI
evolves, techniques like TAID will be crucial in making these advancements more accessible and
deployable in real-world applications.
    3
        https://huggingface.co/blog/smollm
    4
        https://huggingface.co/spaces/opencompass/open_vlm_leaderboard


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Makoto Shing and Takuya Akiba initiated this project. Makoto Shing is the main contributor who
conceptualized and proposed the TAID method, designed and conducted all experiments, performed
theoretical analysis, implemented the main code, wrote the initial draft of the manuscript, and was
responsible for data analysis and interpretation of results. Consistently led and executed all as-
pects of the project from inception to completion. Kou Misaki contributed to data processing for the
TAID-LLM-1.5B model. Han Bao provided crucial feedback on theoretical interpretations and anal-
ysis. Sho Yokoi offered valuable insights and feedback, especially based on his expertise in Natural
Language Processing. Takuya Akiba served as the primary advisor throughout the project, offer-
ing guidance, technical insight, advice, and supervision from inception to completion. All authors
reviewed and edited the final manuscript.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Masanori Suganuma and Tianyu Zhao for providing valuable dis-
cussions and feedback while drafting the text. This work is based on results obtained from a project,
JPNP20017, subsidized by the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization
(NEDO). This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant No. 22H05106), JST FOREST
(Grant No. JPMJFR2331), and JST PRESTO (Grant No. JPMJPR24K6).

R EFERENCES
Marah Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany
 Awadalla, Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Jianmin Bao, et al. Phi-3 technical re-
 port: A highly capable language model locally on your phone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219,
 2024.
Rishabh Agarwal, Nino Vieillard, Yongchao Zhou, Piotr Stanczyk, Sabela Ramos, and Matthieu
  Geist. On-policy distillation of language models: Learning from self-generated mistakes. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Loubna Ben Allal, Anton Lozhkov, Elie Bakouch, Leandro von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. Smollm
  - blazingly fast and remarkably powerful, 2024.
Jimmy Ba and Rich Caruana. Do deep nets really need to be deep? In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling,
  C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems. Curran Associates, Inc., 2014.
Edward Beeching, Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, Sheon Han, Nathan Lambert,
  Nazneen Rajani, Omar Sanseviero, Lewis Tunstall, and Thomas Wolf.   Open llm
  leaderboard. https://huggingface.co/spaces/open-llm-leaderboard-old/
  open_llm_leaderboard, 2023.
Marco Bellagente, Jonathan Tow, Dakota Mahan, Duy Phung, Maksym Zhuravinskyi, Reshinth
 Adithyan, James Baicoianu, Ben Brooks, Nathan Cooper, Ashish Datta, et al. Stable lm 2 1.6 b
 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17834, 2024.
Loubna Ben Allal, Anton Lozhkov, Guilherme Penedo, Thomas Wolf, and Leandro von
  Werra.   Smollm-corpus, 2024.    URL https://huggingface.co/datasets/
  HuggingFaceTB/smollm-corpus.
Lucas Beyer, Andreas Steiner, André Susano Pinto, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiao Wang, Daniel Salz,
  Maxim Neumann, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Michael Tschannen, Emanuele Bugliarello, et al.
  Paligemma: A versatile 3b vlm for transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07726, 2024.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien,
  Eric Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, Usvsn Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff,
  et al. Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In An-
  dreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan
  Scarlett (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Cristian Buciluundefined, Rich Caruana, and Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil. Model compression. In
  Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
  Data Mining, pp. 535–541. Association for Computing Machinery, 2006.
Zhe Chen, Jiannan Wu, Wenhai Wang, Weijie Su, Guo Chen, Sen Xing, Muyan Zhong, Qinglong
  Zhang, Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, et al. Internvl: Scaling up vision foundation models and aligning
  for generic visual-linguistic tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 24185–24198, June 2024.
Jang Hyun Cho and Bharath Hariharan. On the efficacy of knowledge distillation. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition, pp. 248–255, 2009.
Ning Ding, Yulin Chen, Bokai Xu, Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, and
  Bowen Zhou. Enhancing chat language models by scaling high-quality instructional conversa-
  tions. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023.
Ahmad Faiz, Sotaro Kaneda, Ruhan Wang, Rita Osi, Prateek Sharma, and Fan Chen. LLMCarbon:
  Modeling the end-to-end carbon footprint of large language models. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2024.
Aaron Gokaslan and Vanya Cohen. Openwebtext corpus. http://Skylion007.github.io/
  OpenWebTextCorpus, 2019.
Yuxian Gu, Li Dong, Furu Wei, and Minlie Huang. MiniLLM: Knowledge distillation of large
  language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Kai He, Rui Mao, Qika Lin, Yucheng Ruan, Xiang Lan, Mengling Feng, and Erik Cambria. A survey
  of large language models for healthcare: from data, technology, and applications to accountability
  and ethics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05694, 2024.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. In
  NIPS Deep Learning and Representation Learning Workshop, 2015.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave,
  K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 30016–30030.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
Dongfu Jiang, Xuan He, Huaye Zeng, Cong Wei, Max Ku, and Qian Liu. Mantis: Interleaved
  multi-image instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01483, 2024.
Ying Jin, Jiaqi Wang, and Dahua Lin. Multi-level logit distillation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognitio, pp. 24276–24285, 2023.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Yoon Kim and Alexander M. Rush. Sequence-level knowledge distillation. In Jian Su, Kevin Duh,
  and Xavier Carreras (eds.), Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1317–1327.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2016.
Jongwoo Ko, Sungnyun Kim, Tianyi Chen, and Se-Young Yun. DistiLLM: Towards streamlined
  distillation for large language models. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller,
  Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, pp. 24872–24895. PMLR, 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Master’s thesis, Depart-
  ment of Computer Science, University of Toronto, 2009.
Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative
  decoding. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 19274–19286. PMLR, 2023.
Yuanzhi Li, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee.
  Textbooks are all you need ii: phi-1.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05463, 2023a.
Zheng Li, Xiang Li, Lingfeng Yang, Borui Zhao, Renjie Song, Lei Luo, Jun Li, and Jian Yang.
  Curriculum temperature for knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1504–1512, 2023b.
Zechun Liu, Changsheng Zhao, Forrest Iandola, Chen Lai, Yuandong Tian, Igor Fedorov, Yunyang
  Xiong, Ernie Chang, Yangyang Shi, Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi, et al. MobileLLM: Optimizing
  sub-billion parameter language models for on-device use cases. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2024.
Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Sylvain Viguier, and Anne-Laure Ligozat. Estimating the carbon foot-
  print of bloom, a 176b parameter language model. Journal of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  1–15, 2023.
Kamil Malinka, Martin Peresı́ni, Anton Firc, Ondrej Hujnák, and Filip Janus. On the educational
  impact of chatgpt: Is artificial intelligence ready to obtain a university degree? In Innovation and
  Technology in Computer Science Education V. 1, pp. 47–53, 2023.
Xupeng Miao, Gabriele Oliaro, Zhihao Zhang, Xinhao Cheng, Zeyu Wang, Zhengxin Zhang, Rae
  Ying Yee Wong, Alan Zhu, Lijie Yang, Xiaoxiang Shi, et al. Specinfer: Accelerating large lan-
  guage model serving with tree-based speculative inference and verification. In Proceedings of the
  29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
  Operating Systems, Volume 3, pp. 932–949, 2024.
Seyed Iman Mirzadeh, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Ang Li, Nir Levine, Akihiro Matsukawa, and Hassan
  Ghasemzadeh. Improved knowledge distillation via teacher assistant. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 5191–5198, 2020.
Hossein Mobahi, Mehrdad Farajtabar, and Peter Bartlett. Self-distillation amplifies regularization in
  Hilbert space. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3351–3361, 2020.
Saurav Muralidharan, Sharath Turuvekere Sreenivas, Raviraj Joshi, Marcin Chochowski, Mostofa
  Patwary, Mohammad Shoeybi, Bryan Catanzaro, Jan Kautz, and Pavlo Molchanov. Compact
  language models via pruning and knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14679, 2024.
OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
  cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2024.
OpenCompass Contributors. Opencompass: A universal evaluation platform for foundation models.
  https://github.com/open-compass/opencompass, 2023.
Denis Paperno, Germán Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou, Ngoc Quan Pham, Raffaella Bernardi,
  Sandro Pezzelle, Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and Raquel Fernández. The LAMBADA dataset:
  Word prediction requiring a broad discourse context. In Katrin Erk and Noah A. Smith (eds.),
  Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1525–1534. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics, 2016.
Dean A. Pomerleau. Efficient training of artificial neural networks for autonomous navigation.
  Neural Computation, 1991.
Guanqiao Qu, Qiyuan Chen, Wei Wei, Zheng Lin, and Xianhao Chen. Mobile edge intelligence for
  large language models: A contemporary survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.18921, 2024.
Qwen Team. Qwen2.5: A party of foundation models, September 2024. URL https://qwenlm.
 github.io/blog/qwen2.5/.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 2019.
Stephane Ross and Drew Bagnell. Efficient reductions for imitation learning. In Yee Whye Teh
  and Mike Titterington (eds.), Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 661–668. PMLR, 2010.
Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhu-
  patiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, et al. Gemma
  2: Improving open language models at a practical size. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00118, 2024.
Stability AI Language Team. Stablelm zephyr 3b, 2023. URL https://huggingface.co/
  stabilityai/stablelm-zephyr-3b.
Omkar Thawakar, Ashmal Vayani, Salman Khan, Hisham Cholakal, Rao M. Anwer, Michael Fels-
 berg, Tim Baldwin, and Eric P. Xing. Mobillama: Towards accurate and lightweight fully trans-
 parent gpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16840, 2024.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Fanqi Wan, Xinting Huang, Deng Cai, Xiaojun Quan, Wei Bi, and Shuming Shi. Knowledge fusion
  of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Zhongwei Wan, Xin Wang, Che Liu, Samiul Alam, Yu Zheng, et al. Efficient large language models:
  A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03863, 2023.
Yuqiao Wen, Zichao Li, Wenyu Du, and Lili Mou. f-divergence minimization for sequence-level
  knowledge distillation. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 10817–10834. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics, 2023.
Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim Dabravolski, Mark Dredze, Sebastian Gehrmann, Prab-
  hanjan Kambadur, and David Rosenberg. Bloomberggpt: A large language model for finance.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17564, 2023.
Taiqiang Wu, Chaofan Tao, Jiahao Wang, and Zhe Zhao. Rethinking kullback-leibler divergence in
  knowledge distillation for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02657, 2024.
Xiaohan Xu, Ming Li, Chongyang Tao, Tao Shen, Reynold Cheng, Jinyang Li, Can Xu, and
  Dacheng Tao. A survey on knowledge distillation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.13116, 2024.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li,
  Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen2 technical report. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.10671, 2024.
Yuan Yao, Tianyu Yu, Ao Zhang, Chongyi Wang, Junbo Cui, Hongji Zhu, Tianchi Cai, Haoyu Li,
  Weilin Zhao, Zhihui He, et al. Minicpm-v: A gpt-4v level mllm on your phone. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.01800, 2024.
Chaoning Zhang, Chenshuang Zhang, Chenghao Li, Yu Qiao, Sheng Zheng, Sumit Kumar Dam,
  Mengchun Zhang, Jung Uk Kim, Seong Tae Kim, Jinwoo Choi, et al. One small step for gen-
  erative ai, one giant leap for agi: A complete survey on chatgpt in aigc era. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.06488, 2023a.
Chen Zhang, Yang Yang, Jiahao Liu, Jingang Wang, Yunsen Xian, Benyou Wang, and Dawei Song.
  Lifting the curse of capacity gap in distilling language models. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-
  Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2023b.
Peiyuan Zhang, Guangtao Zeng, and Tianduo Wang. Tinyllama: An open-source small language
  model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02385, 2024a.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rongzhi Zhang, Jiaming Shen, Tianqi Liu, Haorui Wang, Zhen Qin, Feng Han, Jialu Liu, Simon
  Baumgartner, Michael Bendersky, and Chao Zhang. PLaD: Preference-based large language
  model distillation with pseudo-preference pairs. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek
  Srikumar (eds.), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 15623–15636. Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2024b.
Borui Zhao, Quan Cui, Renjie Song, Yiyu Qiu, and Jiajun Liang. Decoupled knowledge distillation.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  11953–11962, 2022.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, et al. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and
  chatbot arena. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets
  and Benchmarks Track, 2023.


A      TAID TRAINING ALGORITHM
Algorithm 1 provides a detailed description of the TAID training procedure, including the adap-
tive update mechanism for the interpolation parameter t. The TAID algorithm utilizes several key

Algorithm 1 TAID training algorithm
 1: Input: Learning rate η, learning rate of the interpolation parameter α, momentum coefficient
      β, total iterations N , start value tstart , end value tend
 2: Initialize student model parameters θ
                                       0 (t )
 3: Initialize t1 = tstart , m0 = 0, JTAID  =∞
 4: for each training iteration n = 1 to N do
 5:     Compute linear increase value: tlinear = tstart + (tend − tstart ) · n/N
 6:     Sample batch {(yj<s , yj )}B j=1 from dataset D
                              <s
 7:     Compute ptn (ys |y ) using Eq. (1)
                   n   (t )
 8:    Compute JTAID   using Eq. (2)
                                 (tn )
 9:    Update θ: θ ← θ − η∇θ JTAID
              (tn−1 )    (tn )      (tn−1 )
10:    δn = (JTAID    − JTAID  )/(JTAID     + ϵ)
11:    mn = βmn−1 + (1 − β)δn
12:    ∆t = α · sigmoid(mn ) · (1 − tn )
13:    tn+1 ← min(tend , max(tlinear , tn + ∆t))
14: end for

hyperparameters that control the behavior of the interpolation parameter t and the adaptive update
mechanism. We discuss the effects of these parameters below:

• α (learning rate of t): This parameter controls the speed of the adaptive update for t. Figure 2
  (Left) shows the behavior of t for different values of α, including a linear increase for comparison.
  As α increases, we observe that t grows more rapidly in the early stages when the student model
  is close to the initial interpolation distribution. This allows for more efficient learning when the
  task is relatively easy for the student.
• β (momentum coefficient): This parameter controls the smoothness of the adaptive update. A
  higher value of β results in more stable updates by reducing the impact of short-term fluctuations
  in the objective function. In our experiments, we found that a β value around 0.99 worked well
  across different scenarios.
• tstart (initial value of t): This parameter determines the starting point of the interpolation. It is
  particularly useful for skipping the initial stages of learning when the task is very easy for the
  student. The choice of tstart should be based on the intuitive gap between the initial student and
  teacher models. In our experiments, we found that values between 0.2 and 0.4 often yield good
  results, depending on the initial similarity between the student and teacher models.
• tend (maximum value of t): This parameter sets the upper limit for t, typically set to 1.0 to ensure
  that the final distribution matches the teacher model.


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The algorithm uses a linear increase schedule (tlinear ) as a lower bound for t, ensuring that t increases
at least linearly over the course of training. This approach maintains the adaptive nature of TAID
while guaranteeing a minimum rate of progression towards the teacher distribution.
In our experiments, TAID demonstrated robust performance across various tasks with minimal hy-
perparameter tuning. We usually used β = 0.99 and α = 5e−4, with tstart typically ranging between
0.2 and 0.4, depending on the initial student-teacher similarity. While these default values often
yield good results, practitioners may achieve further improvements by fine-tuning these parameters
for their specific tasks and model architectures, particularly in cases that differ significantly from
our experimental settings.

B        T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF MODE COLLAPSE

In this section, we formally study the mode-collapse behavior of TAID.

B.1       A NALYSIS MODEL

To study the collapse phenomenon, we leverage the analysis framework used by Mobahi et al.
(2020). We study the regression problem in the interpolation regime:5
                                                                  N
                                                              1 X
                            f ∗ := arg min R(f ) s.t.               (f (xi ) − yi )2 ≤ ϵ,                   (3)
                                     f ∈F                     N i=1

where D := {(xi , yi )}N i=1 is a finite training set with d-dimensional covariates xi ∈ X ⊆ R
                                                                                                 d

and one-dimensional outcome yi ∈ R, ϵ > 0 is a desired loss tolerance parameter, R(f ) is a
regularization functional, and F ⊆ RX is a hypothesis space. Since we are interested in a large
model regime, F is reasonably assumed to be encompassing all measurable functions. The mean-
squared loss is used in (3) instead of the KL divergence, which is convenient to obtain analytical
solutions later. The regularizer in the following form is considered:
                                          Z
                                R(f ) = u(x, x′ )f (x)f (x′ )dxdx′ ,                           (4)

where u is a symmetric kernel inducing R(f ) ≥ 0 with equality only when f = 0. The interpolation
problem (3) may collapse depending on the teacher signals. Let us stack labels into a vector:
                                            y := [y1 y2 . . . yN ]⊤ ∈ RN .
When ∥y∥2 ≤ N ϵ holds, the problem (3) has a trivial solution f = 0. Such a collapse may happen
particularly in the self-distillation paradigm because the teacher signals are (partially) given by our
hypothesis itself. Thus, it is crucial to investigate when and whether the non-collapse condition
∥y∥2 > N ϵ is satisfied to ensure that our hypothesis learns meaningful signals.

Variational problem. The Lagrangian variational problem of (3) is given as follows:
                                      N                      Z
                      ∗            1 X
                     fλ := arg min                      2
                                         (f (xi ) − yi ) + λ           u(x, x′ )f (x)f (x′ )dxdx′ ,
                             f ∈F  N i=1
                                                                                                            (5)
                               N
                           1 X ∗
                 where          (f (xi ) − yi )2 − ϵ = 0,
                           N i=1 λ

and λ−1 > 0 is the Lagrange multiplier. The solution to the variational problem (5) can be
analytically  written down. Let g be the Green function of the linear operator [Lf ](x) :=
  u(x, x′ )f (x′ )dx′ such that
R
                                Z
                                  u(x, x′ )g(x′ , x0 )dx′ = δ(x − x0 ),                 (6)

    5
        The interpolation regime must be distinguished from the time interpolation used in the proposed TAID.


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where δ(x) is the Dirac delta. Let G ∈ RN ×N and gx ∈ RN be
                          1                              1
                Gi,j :=     g(xi , xj ) and    gx,i :=     g(x, xi ) for all i, j ∈ [N ].
                          N                              N
Then, the analytical solution to (5) is given as follows (Mobahi et al., 2020, Proposition 1):

                                      fλ∗ (x) = gx⊤ (λI + G)−1 y.                                    (7)
If we diagonalize G (which is positive definite) as G = V⊤ DV, the prediction vector over the
training inputs x1 , . . . , xN is given as

                       f := [fλ∗ (x1 ) . . . fλ∗ (xN )]⊤ = V⊤ D(λI + D)−1 Vy.                        (8)
The solution (8) is essentially a nonlinear extension of the ridge estimator. Note that V ∈ RN ×N is
an orthogonal matrix and D = diag(d1 , . . . , dN ) has positive eigenvalues solely.
Importantly,
   P ∗ (7) is the          solution to the variational problem (5), which is parametrized by λ satisfying
 1                       2
N      i (fλ (xi ) − yi ) − ϵ = 0. Solving this in λ is hard because of its non-linearity, but Mobahi
et al. (2020, Eq. (24)) evaluate its upper and lower bound:
                                         √
                                       α Nϵ
                              λ=            √       for some α ∈ [dmin , dmax ],                      (9)
                                    ∥y∥ − N ϵ
where dmax := maxi di and dmin := mini di . Thus, the analytical solution (7) with this range of λ
is a solution to the original interpolation problem (3), too.

Remark on connection to language modeling. The interpolation formulation (3) is based on the
standard (one-dimensional) regression problem, which obviously deviates from the language model-
ing problem introduced in (2). Nonetheless, we believe that this formulation is not only beneficial for
our transparent understanding owing to its simplicity but also has a connection to multi-categorical
distributions. In distributional modeling, a student model qθ outputs a probability distribution over
Y, and falls into mode collapse when qθ has only few numbers of non-zero probabilities, that
is, {c ∈ Y | qθ (y = c) > 0} ≪ |Y|. To deal with the multi-categorical outputs, we can extend the
one-dimensional problem (3) as follows:
                                                                N
                                                           1 X
                ∀c ∈ Y,     fc∗ := arg min R(fc ) s.t.           (fc (xi ) − yi,c )2 ≤ ϵ,
                                    fc ∈F                  N i=1
                                                                    P
where teacher signal yi,c is given in the one-hot format such that c∈Y yi,c = 1 and yi,c ∈ {0, 1}
for all c ∈ Y. We can follow the subsequent analysis straightforwardly. In this multi-categorical
problem, a model (fc )c∈Y is regarded as falling into mode collapse if fc = 0 for many c ∈ Y.
This is measured by the teacher signal condition ∥yc ∥2 ≤ N ϵ for each c, where yc ∈ {0, 1}N is
the stacked labels for class c. Thus, studying (3) is directly relevant to mode collapse in language
modeling.

B.2   F ORMAL THEORETICAL STATEMENT

To study TAID in a fashion of the interpolation problem (3), we consider the following learning
procedure listed in Algorithm 2. Here, the input signals y0 are deemed as the well-trained teacher—
we can deem y1 as the well-trained teacher, but the resulting distillation dynamics would not change
much.
Theorem B.1. Let κ := dmax /dmin (≥ 1) be the condition number of G. The prediction vector
yt+1 does not collapse, namely yt+1 = 0 cannot be a solution to the interpolation problem (3), if
for some γ ∈ [0, 1], either of the following holds:

                                    1                   γ           1
                     t < min            (r0 − γ) + o(1), T    or      T < t,                (10)
                                 γ+κ                    r0         r0
                    √
where r0 := ∥y0 ∥/ N ϵ > 1 and o(1) is an asymptotic term in the large r0 limit.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 TAID learning procedure for least-square regression
Input: T number of iterations, y0 ∈ RN input signals
 1: t ← 0
 2: while t < T do
 3:    ỹt ← (1 − Tt )yt + Tt y0                                 ▷ Compose intermediate teacher
               √                √
 4:    λt ← αt N ϵ/(∥ỹt ∥ − N ϵ)                              ▷ Choose an appropriate λt by (9)
 5:    yt+1 ← V⊤ D(λt I + D)−1 Vỹt       ▷ Solve the variational problem with teacher ỹt and λt
 6:    t←t+1
 7: end while


To make the asymptotics in r0 work well, we need to ensure sufficiently strong initial signals ∥y0 ∥
and/or near-interpolation (small ϵ). The first bound in (10) is non-vacuous when T = Ω(r0 ). Though
it is a rather strong requirement, the asymptotic term becomes negligible numerically with a moder-
ate magnitude of r0 (like 5 to 10).
To see how TAID benefits from the intermediate teacher, compare the non-collapse condition (10)
with that of self-distillation (Mobahi et al., 2020, Proposition 4):


                                                     r0 − 1
                                              t≤            .                                       (11)
                                                        κ


We have two observations. First, TAID is beneficial in the latter phase of recursion (namely, step t
closer to T ), where self-distillation can never escape from collapse eventually. This is an intuitive
feature of TAID because the intermediate teacher partly consists strong signals y0 that does not de-
pend on learned student predictors. Second, TAID is worse in the early phase of recursion (namely,
step t closer to 1) than self-distillation by a constant factor. Specifically, TAID and self-distillation
have critical steps of collapse t = O(r0 /(γ + κ)) and t = O(r0 /κ), respectively. To ensure that
TAID learns meaningful features in the early phase, γ should be reasonably bounded away from 0,
leading to a worse critical point than self-distillation. This is a price that TAID has to pay for the
stabilization in the latter phase.
By setting γ = 1 in (10), we get a more interpretable corollary, which is the formal version of
Theorem 4.1.

Corollary B.1.1. If initialization ∥y0 ∥ satisfies


                                         1 + 1 + 4T (1 + κ) √
                                            p
                              ∥y0 ∥ = Ω                       Nϵ ,
                                                2


the prediction vector yt+1 does not collapse for any t.



B.3   P ROOF

Proof of Theorem B.1. Subsequently, we use the change-of-variable√zt := Vyt , where the norm is
preserved ∥zt ∥ = ∥yt ∥. We also write z̃t := Vỹt and rt := ∥z̃t ∥/ N ϵ for convenience. At each
time t, the non-collapse criterion is given by ∥z̃t ∥2 > N ϵ( ⇐⇒ rt > 1): if it holds, the next update
in Line 5 would not collapse. Let At := D(λt I + D)−1 . We first show the second case, namely, the


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


prediction avoids collapse when r10 T < t. Then, z̃t is recursively expanded.

           t          t
z̃t =       1−  zt + z0
           T         T

           t                    t
   = 1−         At−1 z̃t−1 + z0                                                                (12)
           T                   T

           t                   t−1              t−1            t
   = 1−         At−1 1 −               zt−1 +          z0 + z0
           T                      T               T            T

           t           t−1                              t t−1              t
   = 1−           1−            At−1 zt−1 + 1 −                   At−1 + I z0
           T            T                              T      T            T
   = ...
     " t                # " t−1        #           " −1
                                               t−1 τY                 #         " τ      #
       Y         t−τ           Y              X                  t−s      t−τ Y                t
   =        1−             ·        A τ z0 +                1−                       At−s z0 + z0
      τ =0
                   T          τ =0            τ =1 s=0
                                                                  T         T    s=1
                                                                                               T
     (                       " t−1     # t−1                                 " τ      #      )
                T!             Y           X (t − τ ) · (T − t + τ − 1)! Y                 t
   =                                Aτ +                                          At−s + I z0
       T t+1 · (T − t − 1)! τ =0           τ =1
                                                    T τ +1 · (T − t − 1)!     s=1
                                                                                           T
   =: At z0 .

To evaluate At , we first look at Aτ for τ ∈ [0, t − 1]. Since Aτ is a diagonal matrix, its k-th element
of Aτ can be expressed as follows:
                                                                                   −1
                                                      −1 ≤           1/κ
                                                                        √      + 1     ≤1

                  dk                 ατ /dk
    (Aτ )k =              =           √         +1               ∥z̃τ ∥/ N ϵ−1      −1         ,    (13)
               λτ + dk         ∥z̃τ ∥/ N ϵ − 1            ≥
                                                                       κ
                                                                        √      + 1     ≥  0
                                                                 ∥z̃ ∥/ N ϵ−1
                                                                  τ



where ατ is given in (9). The last inequalities can be formally shown by induction in τ ∈ [0, t − 1].
Thus, the minimum singular value of At is evaluated as follows:

σmin (At )
                               " t−1    # t−1                              " τ      #      !
                   T!            Y         X (t − τ ) · (T − t + τ − 1)! Y              t
 = σmin                              Aτ +                                       At−s + I
          T t+1 · (T − t − 1)! τ =0        τ =1
                                                 T τ +1 · (T − t − 1)!      s=1
                                                                                        T
                              " t−1    #!        t−1
                                                                                 " τ
                                                                                           #!
                   T!           Y                X    (t − τ ) · (T − t + τ − 1)! Y
 = σmin                             Aτ    + σmin                                      At−s
         T t+1 · (T − t − 1)! τ =0               τ =1
                                                          T τ +1 · (T − t − 1)!   s=1

             t
   + σmin      I
            T

          t
 ≥ σmin     I
          T
    t
 = ,
   T
where the second identity holds because all matrices evaluated are diagonal. This implies
                                                         t        t
                            ∥z˜t ∥ ≥ σmin (At )∥z0 ∥ ≥     ∥z0 ∥ = ∥z̃0 ∥.
                                                         T        T
                                                                                √
The last              0 = z̃0 . Thus, the non-collapse criterion ∥z̃t ∥ >
     √ equality uses z√                                                             N ϵ holds as long as
t > ( N ϵ/∥z̃0 ∥)T = ( N ϵ/∥y0 ∥)T .
Next, supposing t is small enough such that t ≤ rγ0 T with γ ∈ (0, 1), we show that the prediction
avoids collapse when t < ( 12 + o(1))(r0 − γ). To see the non-collapse criterion rt > 1, we first


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


derive a lower bound of rt :

                                   (12)           t             z̃t−1        t z̃0
                             rt =          1−         At−1 √            + √
                                                 T                 Nϵ       T      Nϵ

                                 (a)          t               z̃t−1          t      z̃
                                 ≥ 1−                 At−1 √             −         √0
                                             T                   Nϵ          T       Nϵ

                                              t                                  t
                                 ≥ 1−               σmin (At−1 )rt−1 − r0
                                             T                                  T

                                              γ
                                 ≥ 1−               σmin (At−1 )rt−1 − γ
                                             r0

                                 (13)           γ         rt−1
                                  ≥ 1−                                  −γ
                                               r0 rt−1κ −1 + 1

                                 (b)          γ
                                 ≥ 1−               (β0 rt−1 − β1 ) − γ,
                                              r0
where (a) is due to the “reverse” triangle inequality and (b) is due to Mobahi et al. (2020, Eq. (137))
(which is essentially a linear lower bound of a convex function in r0 ) with
                           (r0 − 1)2 + κ(2r0 − 1)                                       r02 κ
                    β0 :=                           2
                                                                 and β1 :=                        .
                                  (r0 − 1 + κ)                                     (r0 − 1 + κ)2
By recursively lower bounding rt , we obtain the following bound:
                                                                t
                                         γ                  γ        t
                    t            1 − r0 β 1 1 − r0 β 0 − 1
                                                                                                    β̄ t − 1

              γ
rt ≥    1−         β0 r0 −                                                     − γ =: β̄0t r0 − β̄1 0        − γ =: rt ,
              r0                             1 − rγ0 β0 − 1                                         β̄0 − 1

where β̄0 := 1 − rγ0 β0 and β̄1 := 1 − rγ0 β1 . To derive the non-collapse condition, we solve
rt = 1 to derive the critical t, which is equivalent to

                                                log (1+γ)(1−       β̄0 )+β̄1
                                                        β̄1 +r0 (1−β̄0 )
                                          t=                                   .
                                                          log β̄0
By simple algebra,

                                    γ[r02 +(κ−2)r0 −(κ−1)]+(κr02 +κ(κ−1)r0 )
                   log γ 2 [r +2(κ−1)− κ−1 ]+γ(κ−1)(κ+2−r − 1 )+κ(κ−1+r2 )
                              0               r0                        0   r0              0
               t=
                                  log 1−1 γ + log                      1
                                                                     κ(κ−1)
                                                  r0                  1− (r −1+κ)2
                                                                          0

                           γ 2 [r0 +2(κ−1)− κ−1
                                             r  ]+γ(κ−1)(κ+2−r0 − r1 )+κ(κ−1+r02 )
                      1−                          0
                                      γ[r02 +(κ−2)r0 −(κ−1)]+(κr02 +κ(κ−1)r0 )
                                                                               0

                  ≥               h                   i
                                        1                             1
                                      1− rγ   −1 +                κ(κ−1)      −1
                                          0                   1− (r −1+κ)2
                                                                  0

                      κ(κ−1)(r0 −1)+γ(r02 +(2κ−3)r0 −(κ−1)(κ+3)+ κ−1
                                                                  r  )−γ 2 [r0 +2(κ−1)− κ−1
                                                                                         r  ]
                                                                                   0                 0
                                          γ[r02 +(κ−2)r0 −(κ−1)]+[κr02 +κ(κ−1)r0 ]
                  =                                  1            1
                                                   r0     + (r0 −1+κ)2
                                                    γ −1               −1
                                                              κ(κ−1)
                                                                                       γ(κ−1)(1+γ)
                      γr02 +[2κ−3−γ+κ(κ−1)]r0 −(κ−1)[κ+γ(κ+3+2γ)]+                         r0
                                   (γ+κ)r02 +[γ(κ−2)+(κ−1)]κr0 −γ(κ−1)
                  =                   γr02 +(2γ+κ)(κ−1)r0 −(κ+1)(κ−1)γ
                                          (r0 −γ)[r02 +2(κ−1)r0 −(κ−1)]



where the inequality is due to 1 − x1 ≤ log x ≤ x − 1. The last lower bound can be asymptotically
(in large r0 ) expressed as follows:
                                            γ+o(1)
                                          γ+κ+o(1)                 1
                                t≥          γ+o(1)
                                                              =       (r0 − γ) + o(1).
                                                                  γ+κ
                                       (r0 −γ)(1+o(1))


                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Performance comparison between TAID and Skew KL across different teacher sizes.
TAID shows consistent improvement with larger teachers, while Skew KL’s performance degrades.

                             Method      410M       1B      2.8B     6.9B
                             TAID        20.82     21.17    21.70    22.01
                             SKL         18.65     18.50    18.28    18.20


                                                            1
Thus, the non-collapse condition in the second case is t < γ+κ (r0 − γ) + o(1).

Proof of Corollary B.1.1. By the non-collapse criterion (10) with γ = 1,
                                     1                   1
                                        (r0 − 1) + o(1) ≥ T
                                    1+κ                  r0
suffices for yt not being collapsed for any t. By solving this quadratic inequality, we can verify the
statement.

C     D ETAILED C OMPARISON WITH S KEW KL

We provide a detailed comparison between TAID and Skew KL to highlight their fundamental differ-
ences, focusing on two key aspects: the direction of knowledge flow and the nature of interpolation
design.
The first key difference lies in the direction of knowledge flow, which can be understood through
their objective functions. The TAID objective is formulated as JTAID (p, qθ ) = JKL (pt , qθ ), while the
Skew KL objective takes the form JSKD (p, qθ ) = JKL (p, r), where r(y) = λp(y) + (1 − λ)qθ (y)
and λ ∈ [0, 1]. In TAID, the interpolated distribution pt teaches the student model qθ , creating a
direct path for knowledge transfer from the interpolated distribution to the student. Conversely, in
Skew KL, the teacher p teaches the interpolated distribution r, establishing an indirect path where
the student’s knowledge is mixed into the target distribution.
The second fundamental difference is in the design of the interpolation mechanism. TAID employs
a time-dependent parameter t that gradually changes during training, enabling adaptive knowledge
transfer that evolves with the student’s learning progress. In contrast, Skew KL uses a fixed inter-
polation parameter λ throughout the training process, maintaining a constant mixing ratio between
teacher and student distributions.
Our empirical study validates the benefits of these design choices, particularly in handling the ca-
pacity gap between teacher and student models. Table 6 shows the performance comparison across
different teacher sizes, demonstrating that TAID achieves consistent improvement as teacher size
increases from 410M to 6.9B parameters, while Skew KL’s performance degrades with larger teach-
ers.

D     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

D.1   I NSTRUCTION TUNING EXPERIMENTS

For our instruction tuning experiments, we utilized the UltraChat 200k dataset. We preprocessed
the dataset by removing samples exceeding a maximum length of 2048 tokens, resulting in approx-
imately 150k training samples and 2k validation samples.
All models were trained for 5 epochs using a batch size of 64. We employed the AdamW optimizer
with a learning rate of 1e−4 and a cosine learning rate scheduler. To select the best checkpoint for
evaluation, we calculated the ROUGE-L score on the validation set after each epoch and chose the
checkpoint with the highest score.
For our proposed TAID method, we used a momentum coefficient (β) of 0.99 across all experiments.
The learning rate of t (α) was set to 5e−4. The initial value of t (tstart ) was set to 0.4 for the


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Top-1 accuracies (%) on the CIFAR-100 dataset. Results for different teacher-student
pairs are shown.

               Teacher      ResNet56    ResNet110    ResNet32×4    WRN-40-2    WRN-40-2     VGG13
 Method        Student      ResNet20     ResNet32     ResNet8×4    WRN-16-2    WRN-40-1      VGG8
 KL (Hinton et al., 2015)       70.66        73.08         73.33       74.92        73.54    72.93
 CTKD (Li et al., 2023b)        71.19        73.52         73.39       75.45        73.93    73.52
 DKD (Zhao et al., 2022)        71.97        74.11         76.32       76.24        74.81    74.68
 MLKD (Jin et al., 2023)        72.19       74.11         77.08       76.63        75.35    75.18
 (Ours) TAID                   72.25         73.51         74.85       75.81        74.51    74.38



Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct pair and 0.2 for the other two pairs. The final value of t (tend ) was
set to 1.0 for all experiments.
Regarding baseline methods, we implemented GKD using Generalized Jensen-Shannon Divergence
(GJSD) with λ = 0.1 as the objective function and a student data fraction of 0.5. For DistiLLM,
we used Skew KL divergence with λ = 0.1 and an initial student data fraction of 0.0. We selected
the better performing skew divergence between Skew Forward KL and Skew Reverse KL based on
the best ROUGE-L score. Following the original DistiLLM paper, we calculated the validation loss
twice per epoch, totaling 10 times, to leverage the Adaptive SGO scheduler. For Adaptive KL, our
implementation was used since no official implementation was available. For CTKD and DKD, we
followed their settings used in the training on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009).
In terms of computational efficiency, we observed significant differences in training times among
the different methods. TAID completed its training in approximately 0.7 hours per epoch on our
hardware setup using 8 NVIDIA H100 GPUs. In comparison, DistiLLM required about 2 hours per
epoch, while GKD took approximately 9.8 hours per epoch under the same conditions. These differ-
ences in training time are primarily attributed to the computational complexity of methods utilizing
SGOs. TAID’s ability to achieve competitive performance without relying on SGOs contributes to
its faster training times.


D.2    P RE - TRAINING E XPERIMENTS

For our pre-training experiments, we used the first 10% of the SmolLM-Corpus (Ben Allal et al.,
2024) dataset, which amounted to approximately 20 billion tokens.
The pre-training was conducted for 1 epoch using a distributed setup with 80 NVIDIA H100 GPUs,
each processing a batch size of 8, resulting in an effective batch size of 640. We used the AdamW
optimizer with a learning rate of 1e−4 and a cosine learning rate scheduler.
The TAID-specific parameters for the pre-training experiments were kept consistent with those used
in the Phi-3- mini-4k-instruct pair in the instruction tuning experiments. Also, the base-
line methods in the pre-training experiments were implemented similarly to the instruction tuning
experiments, with adjustments made to exclude SGOs due to the computational constraints of large-
scale pre-training. Specifically, for methods like DistiLLM, we only used the core divergence com-
ponents without the SGO-based additions.


D.3    I MAGE CLASSIFICATION RESULTS

To explore TAID’s applicability beyond language models, we conducted experiments on image clas-
sification tasks using the CIFAR-100 and ImageNet datasets.


D.4    CIFAR-100 RESULTS

We evaluated TAID on the CIFAR-100 dataset, which consists of 100 classes. Table 7 presents the
top-1 accuracies achieved by TAID and other knowledge distillation methods on various teacher-
student model pairs.


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Top-1 accuracies (%) on the ImageNet validation set. Results for different teacher-
student pairs are shown.

                                      Teacher      ResNet34     ResNet50
                        Method        Student      ResNet18        MN-V1
                        KD (Hinton et al., 2015)        71.03        70.50
                        CTKD (Li et al., 2023b)         71.38        71.16
                        DKD (Zhao et al., 2022)         71.70        72.05
                        MLKD (Jin et al., 2023)         71.90        73.01
                        (Ours) TAID                     72.10        72.71


As shown in Table 7, TAID performs competitively on CIFAR-100, consistently outperforming
KL divergence across all model pairs. However, the gains are modest compared to state-of-the-art
methods specifically designed for image classification, such as MLKD.
Interestingly, based on the analysis of DKD, we can interpret that for simpler tasks like CIFAR-100,
where the teacher’s target class probabilities are close to 1, the weight of the NCKD component
in DKD becomes small. This suggests that combining TAID with DKD could potentially lead to
further performance improvements, leveraging the strengths of both approaches in handling different
aspects of the distillation process.

D.5    I MAGE N ET RESULTS

To assess TAID’s performance on a larger-scale image classification task, we conducted experi-
ments on the ImageNet dataset, which contains 1000 classes. Table 8 presents the top-1 accuracies
achieved by TAID and other methods on ImageNet.
On ImageNet, TAID shows more pronounced improvements, consistently outperforming CTKD and
DKD across both teacher-student pairs. For the ResNet34-ResNet18 pair, TAID achieves the highest
accuracy among all methods. For the ResNet50-MobileNet-V1 pair, TAID performs competitively,
outperforming CTKD and DKD, and achieving results close to MLKD.
These results on ImageNet demonstrate that TAID’s performance improves relative to other methods
as the task complexity increases. With its larger number of classes and more diverse images, Ima-
geNet presents a more challenging scenario where TAID’s adaptive interpolation mechanism shows
more significant gains. This aligns with our observations in the main text that TAID’s strengths are
particularly evident in tasks with higher complexity and entropy.


E     M ODEL DETAILS

E.1   TAID-LLM-1.5B

For the development of TAID-LLM-1.5B, we utilized the full SmolLM-Corpus dataset. The train-
ing process consisted of 2 epochs, employing the AdamW optimizer with a cosine learning rate
scheduler. We set the initial learning rate to 1e−5.
In this experiment, we used Qwen2-72B-Instruct as the teacher model and
Qwen2-1.5B-Instruct as the student model. For the TAID-specific parameters, we
used a momentum coefficient (β) of 0.99 and a learning rate of t (α) of 5e−5. The initial value of t
(tstart ) was set to 0.4, and the final value (tend ) was set to 1.0.
To enhance training efficiency, we pre-computed the probabilities from the teacher model. Further-
more, to manage storage costs effectively, we only utilized the top 50 probabilities. This approach
allowed us to balance computational resources and model performance, enabling efficient knowl-
edge transfer from the large teacher model to the smaller student model.
Table 9 presents the detailed results for TAID-LLM-1.5B and other state-of-the-art small language
models across various tasks as evaluated using the LightEval benchmark suite (Allal et al., 2024).

                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Performance of TAID-LLM-1.5B, our new state-of-the-art LLM for models under 2B
parameters.

 Model                                            MMLU         TriviaQA         ARC     PIQA       Hellaswag    OBQA       Winogrande       Average
 Qwen2-1.5B (Yang et al., 2024)                      37.91              1.38   48.12     75.30         63.87      36.80            59.98        46.19
 Qwen2.5-1.5B (Qwen Team, 2024)                      41.15              0.68   58.41     76.01         66.40      40.00            59.35        48.86
 Phi-1.5B (Li et al., 2023a)                         35.92              6.06   60.53     75.62         60.72      46.00            67.88        50.39
 StableLM-2-1.6B (Bellagente et al., 2024)           36.21             29.59   53.57     76.77         66.60      37.20            58.72        51.24
 SmolLM-1.7B (Allal et al., 2024)                    39.97             22.56   59.95     76.06         62.91      42.80            54.91        51.31
 TAID-LLM-1.5B                                       39.96             22.96   58.14     77.37         67.15      41.40            58.88        52.27


Table 10: Performance of TAID-VLM-2B, our new state-of-the-art VLM for models up to 4B
parameters.
 Model                                       MMBench V11     MMStar     MMMU VAL       MathVista   OCRBench    AI2D   HallusionBench   MMVet    Average
 PaliGemma-3B-mix-448 (Beyer et al., 2024)           65.6       48.3            34.9        28.7        61.4   68.3             32.2     33.1      46.6
 MiniCPM-V-2 (Yao et al., 2024)                      65.8       39.1            38.2        39.8        60.5   62.9             36.1     41.0      47.9
 Phi-3-Vision (Abdin et al., 2024)                   65.2       47.7            46.1        44.6        63.7   78.4             39.0     44.1      53.6
 InternVL2-2B (Chen et al., 2024)                    69.6       49.8            36.3        46.0        78.1   74.1             38.0     39.7      54.0
 TAID-VLM-2B                                         70.7       49.5            35.1        51.6        78.6   74.0             56.8     35.1      56.4


LightEval is designed to comprehensively assess the capabilities of small language models through a
series of seven zero-shot tasks. Note that the scores in Table 4 denotes the average scores in Table 9.
As shown in Table 9, TAID-LLM-1.5B achieves competitive or superior performance across all
tasks, with particularly strong results in PIQA and Hellaswag. This demonstrates the effectiveness
of our distillation approach in creating a compact model that maintains high performance across a
diverse range of language tasks.

E.2      TAID-VLM-2B

For TAID-VLM-2B, we trained on the Mantis-Instruct dataset (Jiang et al., 2024). The training
process spanned 3 epochs, using the AdamW optimizer with a cosine learning rate scheduler. The
initial learning rate was set to 1e−6.
In this vision-language model distillation task, we employed InternVL2-8B (Chen et al., 2024)
as the teacher model and InternVL2-2B as the student model. The TAID-specific parameters
remained largely consistent with those used for TAID-LLM-1.5B, with a momentum coefficient
(β) of 0.99 and tstart of 0.4. However, we adjusted the learning rate of t to 5e−4 to accommodate
the characteristics of vision-language model training. The tend value was maintained at 1.0.
Table 10 presents the detailed results for TAID-VLM-2B and other state-of-the-art small vision-
language models across various tasks. Note that the scores in Table 5 denotes the average scores in
Table 10.
As shown in Table 10, TAID-VLM-2B achieves competitive or superior performance across most
tasks, with particularly strong results in MMStar, and HallusionBench. This demonstrates the ef-
fectiveness of our distillation approach in creating a compact vision-language model that maintains
high performance across a diverse range of multimodal tasks.


                                                                               24
