Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACCELERATING NEURAL NETWORK TRAINING :
A N ANALYSIS OF THE A LGO P ERF COMPETITION
 Priya Kasimbeg1˚ Frank Schneider2˚ Runa Eschenhagen3 Juhan Bae4,5
 Chandramouli Shama Sastry4,6 Mark Saroufim7 Boyuan Feng7 Less Wright7
 Edward Z. Yang7 Zachary Nado1 Sourabh Medapati1
 Philipp Hennig2 Mike Rabbat7 George E. Dahl1:
 1
   Google DeepMind 2 University of Tübingen 3 University of Cambridge
 4
   Vector Institute 5 University of Toronto 6 Dalhousie University 7 Meta



                                                 A BSTRACT

            The goal of the A LGO P ERF : T RAINING A LGORITHMS competition is to evaluate
            practical speed-ups in neural network training achieved solely by improving the
            underlying training algorithms. In the external tuning ruleset, submissions must
            provide workload-agnostic hyperparameter search spaces, while in the self-tuning
            ruleset they must be completely hyperparameter-free. In both rulesets, submissions
            are compared on time-to-result across multiple deep learning workloads, training
            on fixed hardware. This paper presents the inaugural A LGO P ERF competition’s
            results, which drew 18 diverse submissions from 10 teams. Our investigation
            reveals several key findings: (1) The winning submission in the external tuning
            ruleset, using D ISTRIBUTED S HAMPOO, demonstrates the effectiveness of non-
            diagonal preconditioning over popular methods like A DAM, even when compared
            on wall-clock runtime. (2) The winning submission in the self-tuning ruleset,
            based on the S CHEDULE F REE A DAM W algorithm, demonstrates a new level of
            effectiveness for completely hyperparameter-free training algorithms. (3) The top-
            scoring submissions were surprisingly robust to workload changes. We also discuss
            the engineering challenges encountered in ensuring a fair comparison between
            different training algorithms. These results highlight both the significant progress
            so far, and the considerable room for further improvements.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Deep neural networks are powerful models that excel in tasks such as image recognition, natural lan-
guage processing, and speech recognition. However, training these models often requires significant
computational resources as well as careful (and sometimes brittle) training recipes, including meticu-
lous hyperparameter tuning. A big practical issue in the usability of training algorithms, for instance,
is that many choices are still left to the practitioner. How should the learning rate be tuned? In what
range? Using what schedule? These are very crucial decisions that can make or break the training
process and, critically, determine which methods perform best. Despite training algorithms being
such a fundamental part of the deep learning pipeline, the community has been unable to identify
which training methods are the state of the art. Previous empirical comparisons have suffered from a
number of issues, e.g., weak baselines, not fully accounting for hyperparameter tuning, or failing to
properly control for potential confounding factors like model architecture changes. Dahl et al. (2023)
proposed the A LGO P ERF : T RAINING A LGORITHMS benchmark (Section 2) to measure speed-ups in
neural net training due to algorithmic improvements, while addressing the aforementioned issues.
This competitive, time-to-result benchmark uses multiple realistic deep learning workloads on fixed
hardware, allowing submitters to innovate solely on the training algorithms. It allows submissions
under two different hyperparameter tuning rulesets: an external tuning ruleset that scores submissions
based on the best result from a handful of hyperparameter configurations, and a self-tuning ruleset
without hyperparameters that counts any time a submission spends tuning as part of the training time.
    ˚
        Equal contributions.
    :
        Corresponding author gdahl@google.com.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In this paper, we present the results of the inaugural A LGO P ERF : T RAINING A LGORITHMS com-
petition, a competition open to the entire machine learning community, based on the A LGO P ERF
benchmark proposed in Dahl et al. (2023). Our analysis of « 4000 training runs reveals several key
findings on accelerating neural net training through improved training algorithms:
• The winning submission in the external tuning ruleset, based on D ISTRIBUTED S HAMPOO (Anil
  et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2023), demonstrates that non-diagonal preconditioning methods can
  outperform currently popular diagonal methods, such as A DAM (Kingma & Ba, 2015), in terms
  of wall-clock training time. Across eight deep learning workloads, this submission achieved on
  average a «28% faster model training compared to the baseline, which used NADAM W (Dozat,
  2016; Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) (Section 3).
• In the self-tuning ruleset, the winning submission based on S CHEDULE F REE A DAM W (Defazio
  et al., 2024) was the only entry surpassing the baseline, providing «8% faster average training. It
  was also «10% faster than the external tuning baseline across the seven base benchmark workloads
  both algorithms trained successfully, without any hyperparameters or parallel tuning (Section 3).1
  This result establishes a new state-of-the-art for hyperparameter-free training algorithms and
  highlights the exciting potential of fully automated neural network training.
• The top-scoring submissions are characterized by their consistent performance across workloads,
  including robustness to minor workload modifications, e.g. changes to activation functions or
  normalization layers (Table 3). This suggests that, at least in a competitive evaluation context,
  achieving consistent performance across workloads is a major challenge for training algorithms
  operating under restricted runtime and tuning budgets.
Building the training harness and software for the A LGO P ERF : T RAINING A LGORITHMS competition
to enable fair and meaningful comparisons between training algorithms, especially across the deep
learning frameworks JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018) and P Y T ORCH (Paszke et al., 2019), required
substantial engineering effort. Section 4 discusses these engineering challenges, while Section 5
highlights lessons learned as well as opportunities to improve future iterations of the benchmark.

2       S UMMARY OF BENCHMARKING METHODOLOGY
The A LGO P ERF : T RAINING A LGORITHMS benchmark evaluates the effectiveness of training
algorithms by measuring how quickly they can achieve specific evaluation metric goal values across
various realistic deep learning workloads. These per-workload, time-to-result measurements are
performed on a fixed hardware configuration, and account for all required workload-specific tuning.
The final benchmark score aggregates across workloads to identify more efficient general-purpose
training algorithms for deep learning. Below, we briefly summarize the A LGO P ERF benchmark by
explaining key terms. For a more detailed discussion of the benchmark’s motivation, description, and
justification see Dahl et al. (2023) and the competition rules2 & documentation3 . For the A LGO P ERF
competition, we solicited submissions from the entire machine learning community, and made
several modifications to the benchmark as it was initially proposed by Dahl et al. (2023), which are
summarized in Appendix A.2.
Workloads. The benchmark features multiple neural network training tasks, called workloads, each
consisting of a dataset, model, loss function, target metric, validation target and runtime budget. The
submissions’ objective is to train these workloads as quickly as possible; if the target is not reached
within the runtime budget, the run receives an infinite score. Designed to reflect real-world deep
learning training scenarios, the workloads cover several key domains. The benchmark includes two
types of workloads: fixed base workloads (Table 2) directly affect the benchmark score, and held-out
workload variants (Table 3) discourage submissions to overfit the benchmark’s fixed workloads
and ensure robustness to natural workload changes. While held-out workloads do not contribute
directly to the benchmark score, failure to train a held-out workload quickly enough will invalidate
the submission’s score for the corresponding fixed base workload.
Submissions. Submitted training algorithms must adhere to the fixed A LGO P ERF API (Dahl et al.,
2023, Sec. 4.2) and are limited to four submission functions: (1) update_params is responsible for
    1
      Note, the two speed-ups for S CHEDULE F REE A DAM W are computed across different sets of workloads.
    2
      github.com/mlcommons/algorithmic-efficiency/[...]/COMPETITION_RULES.md
    3
      github.com/mlcommons/algorithmic-efficiency/[...]/DOCUMENTATION.md


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


modifying the network’s parameters during training and typically involves optimization algorithms,
such as SGD, A DAM, or a custom method. (2) init_optimizer_state allows the creating of
the training algorithm’s internal state, e.g. to define learning rate schedules. (3) data_selection
allows control of how batches are constructed, to use techniques such as curriculum learning or data
echoing (Choi et al., 2020). (4) get_batch_size defines a batch size for each workload, e.g.,
participants can predetermine the largest batch size fitting in the competition hardware’s memory.
For the external tuning ruleset (see below), participants can also provide a workload-agnostic search
space for hyperparameters. This limited API isolates training speed-ups resulting from improvements
to the training algorithm itself, rather than pipeline optimizations or model changes. The API also
ensures that submissions can be applied to generic deep learning workloads by being fully specified
without any workload-specific behavior (apart from the batch size).
Tuning rulesets. Submissions compete under two distinct rulesets governing hyperparameter tuning.
The external tuning ruleset simulates hyperparameter tuning with limited parallel resources. In this
ruleset, hyperparameters are tuned using five independent trials, with hyperparameter configurations
sampled via quasirandom search (Bousquet et al., 2017) from the submission’s defined search space,4
and are scored based on the runtime of the trial that achieves the validation target the fastest. To
produce a more consistent final score, the tuning process is repeated five times across five different
tuning studies, where each study receives a different random seed for the workload’s model and data
initialization. The final workload score used in the benchmark’s scoring procedure is the median of
the best training time from each of the five studies. The self-tuning ruleset simulates fully automated
hyperparameter tuning during training on a single machine. This includes submissions that use the
same hyperparameters across all workloads (e.g. A DAM W with defaults for all hyperparameters
including regularization) or those that perform inner-loop tuning during the training run. Anticipating
that they may require more time to reach the target, self-tuning submissions have three times the
runtime budget of external-tuning submissions (see Table 2). Similar to the external tuning ruleset,
five studies are conducted (although each self-tuning study consists of a single trial), and the median
runtime across all studies determines the workload score.
Benchmark score. A submission’s benchmark score is based on its individual workload scores
relative to those of other submissions, aggregated using performance profiles (Dolan & Moré, 2002;
Dahl et al., 2023, Sec. 4.5). A performance profile plots the fraction of workloads where a submission
trains successfully (achieves the target performance) within a factor of τ of the time required by
the per-workload fastest submission, for different values of 1 ď τ ď τmax (see Figures 1 and 3). For
instance, the height of submission s’s performance profile at τ “ 1.5 is the fraction of workloads
where s trains successfully and within 1.5ˆ the wall-clock time the best competitor requires on that
workload. The final scalar benchmark scores (Figures 1a and 1c) are the normalized area under the
performance profiles, with 1.0 corresponding to a submission that was faster than all competitors on
all workloads.
Computational costs. To score all competition submissions, we conducted 3850 and 420 runs in
the external tuning and self-tuning ruleset respectively. On average, scoring an external submission
required « 3469 hours, and « 1847 hours for a self-tuning submission, totaling « 49,240 hours on
the competition hardware (8ˆNVIDIA V100 GPUs) (see Appendix A.3).


3    R ESULTS

The two A LGO P ERF : T RAINING A LGORITHMS competition leaderboards (Figure 1) rank submis-
sions in each tuning ruleset by their benchmark score.5 Although five submissions outperformed the
baseline (Table 4) in the external tuning ruleset, only the winning submission was competitive in
the self-tuning ruleset. The remaining self-tuning submissions (Table 5) scored significantly lower
than the self-tuning baseline, highlighting the challenge of fully automatic training algorithms that
must pay the training time cost of any workload-specific hyperparameter tuning. Although there
is at least one submission that could successfully train each workload, no submission reached the
   4
     Submissions can alternatively provide a list of five hyperparameter configurations that will be sampled
without replacement.
   5
     Note that the external-tuning baseline is different from the self-tuning baseline; each was tuned and
specialized specifically for its ruleset. Similarly, there are two distinct S CHEDULE F REE A DAM W submissions,
one for each ruleset. We specify which one we are referring to if the context does not make it clear.


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Submission                 Line    Score

   P Y T ORCH D ISTRIBUTED     6      0.7784                             100%


                                               Percentage of Workloads
   S HAMPOO
   S CHEDULE F REE A DAM W     l      0.7077
                                                                         75%
   G ENERALIZED A DAM          l      0.6383
   C YCLIC LR                  t      0.6301
                                                                         50%
   NADAM P                     ©      0.5909
   BASELINE                           0.5707
   A MOS                              0.4918                             25%
                               6
   CASPR A DAPTIVE             H      0.4722
   LAWA Q UEUE                 ©      0.3699                              0%
   LAWA EMA                    t      0.3384                                    1.0       1.5     2.0      2.5     3.0         3.5   4.0
   S CHEDULE F REE P RODIGY           0                                                                     τ
      (a) External tuning leaderboard                                               (b) External tuning performance profiles

                                                                         100%


                                               Percentage of Workloads
   Submission                 Line    Score
                                                                         75%
   S CHEDULE F REE A DAM W     l      0.8542
   BASELINE                           0.8194
                                                                         50%
   NADAM W S EQUENTIAL         ©      0.3308
   S INV 6 75                  6      0.1420
                                                                         25%
   S INV 6                     t      0.0903
   A DAM G                     H      0
                                                                          0%
                                                                                1.0       1.5     2.0      2.5     3.0         3.5   4.0
                                                                                                            τ
        (c) Self-tuning leaderboard                                                   (d) Self-tuning performance profiles

Figure 1: A LGO P ERF competition leaderboard & performance profiles for all submissions
to the external (top) and self-tuning (bottom) ruleset. The leaderboards (a, c) are ranked by the
submissions’ benchmark scores, rounded to four significant digits. Higher scores indicate faster
training. Note, scores are not comparable between rulesets. In the performance profiles (b, d), each
line represents a submission. A step at τ indicates that, for one workload, this submission reaches the
target within τ times the runtime of the fastest submission for that workload and ruleset.


target on every workload (Figure 1; see Section 3.1 for more details). This result simultaneously
demonstrates the benchmark’s feasibility and its difficulty as well as the significant potential for
future improvement in training algorithms. There were strong submissions in both P Y T ORCH & JAX,
suggesting that, within the benchmark’s codebase, workload implementations in both frameworks
are, at least to some degree, sufficiently similar in speed and memory usage (see Section 4).

3.1    P ER - WORKLOAD RUNTIMES

Table 1 provides a detailed overview of the submissions’ runtimes across all workloads, normalized
by the external tuning runtime budget. Workloads with runtimes deemed infinite for scoring purposes
are marked in gray, with corresponding symbols explaining the reason (see the caption of Table 1).
The winning submissions in both rulesets excelled by reliably training most workloads rather than
being the fastest on every one. For example, P Y T ORCH D ISTRIBUTED S HAMPOO was the fastest on
“only” 2 of the 8 base workloads, while S CHEDULE F REE A DAM W led in 4 of 8 in the self-tuning
ruleset. We also observed substantial variations in workload runtimes, even among competitive
methods. P Y T ORCH D ISTRIBUTED S HAMPOO, for instance, took over twice as long on WMT as
the fastest submission. This indicates that there is still ample potential to improve training algorithms.
In the self-tuning ruleset, if the winning submission successfully trained a workload, it did so within
the external tuning runtime budget. This suggests that future benchmarks could significantly reduce
the self-tuning runtime budget to save computational costs, perhaps matching the external tuning one.
R ES N ET workload. The R ES N ET workload is notable, since only one submission, G ENERALIZED
A DAM, could reliably train it to the target performance within the given budget. This may be


                                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Normalized submission runtimes across all workloads. All runtimes are normalized
using the external tuning runtime budget, with the fastest submission per workload in each ruleset
highlighted in bold. Workload runtimes considered infinite for scoring are marked in gray, with a
(suffix) symbol explaining the reason. inf denotes that a submission did not reach the workload
target within the allowed runtime budget. NaN indicates an error (such as running out of memory)
before any evaluation occurred. A † indicates that a held-out score is ignored due to the submission
not reaching the target on the corresponding base workload, while a ‡ indicates that a base workload
score is ignored because the submission did not successfully train the associated held-out workload.
Runs that are not within 4ˆ the fastest (valid) workload runtime are marked with *.

                                                   (a) External tuning ruleset

                     C RITEO 1TB         FAST MRI         R ES N ET        VIT    C ONFORMER     D EEP        OGBG                WMT
                                                                                                 S PEECH

                     Base     H.O.      Base    H.O.     Base   H.O.       Base   Base   H.O.    Base      Base    H.O.    Base     H.O.

 A MOS               inf      inf       0.33    0.49     inf    0.55   †
                                                                           0.65   0.71   0.57    0.57      0.60*   0.89*   0.68     0.37
 BASELINE            0.94     0.08      0.23    0.51     inf    0.94†      0.91   0.90   0.83    0.65      0.42‡   0.68*   0.86     0.35
 CASPR               NaN      NaN       0.13    0.15     inf    inf        0.58   inf    0.59†   0.75      0.12    0.12    0.67‡    NaN
 A DAPTIVE
 C YCLIC LR          0.67     0.08      0.25    0.44     inf    inf        0.81   0.94   0.92    0.70      0.38‡   0.51*   0.49     0.35
 G ENERALIZED        0.83     0.05      0.18    0.39     0.97   0.88       0.84   inf    0.83†   0.68      0.31‡   0.64*   0.63     0.33
 A DAM
 LAWA EMA            0.69     0.09      0.29    0.57     inf    inf        0.80   inf    inf     inf       0.57*   0.73*   0.89     0.39
 LAWA Q UEUE         inf      0.14†     0.22    0.55     inf    inf        0.66   inf    inf     inf       0.25    0.24    0.56     0.22
 NADAM P             0.80     0.07      0.22    0.49     inf    0.90†      0.88   0.94   0.85    0.60      0.43‡   0.74*   0.80     0.47
 S CHEDULE F REE     0.67     0.05      0.13    0.41     inf    inf        0.57   0.92   0.57    0.78      0.29‡   0.61*   0.33     0.12
 A DAM W
 S CHEDULE F REE     NaN      NaN       0.21‡   0.65*    inf    inf        inf    inf    inf     inf       0.61*   inf     inf      0.40†
 P RODIGY
 P Y T ORCH          0.65     0.03      0.15    0.22     inf    0.93†      0.43   0.78   0.68    0.62      0.18    0.19    0.80     0.25
 D ISTR . S HAMPOO


                                                        (b) Self-tuning ruleset

                      C RITEO 1TB         FAST MRI         R ES N ET       VIT    C ONFORMER     D EEP       OGBG             WMT
                                                                                                 S PEECH

                      Base      H.O.     Base   H.O.     Base   H.O.       Base   Base   H.O.    Base      Base    H.O.    Base    H.O.

  A DAM G             inf       inf      inf    inf      inf    inf        inf    inf    inf     inf       inf     inf     inf     inf
  BASELINE            0.75      0.07     0.22   0.51     inf    inf        0.95   0.94   0.92    0.65      0.46    0.69    0.84    0.59
  NADAM W             2.96‡     0.57*    0.27   0.44     inf    inf        1.58   inf    1.16†   1.45      0.55    0.96    2.36‡   1.57*
  S EQUENTIAL
  S CHEDULE F REE     0.75      0.25     0.15   0.58     inf    inf        0.68   0.97   0.61    0.88      0.32    0.56    0.94    0.21
  A DAM W
  S INV 6             NaN       NaN      0.49   0.87     inf    inf        inf    inf    1.82†   2.47      1.35*   inf     2.32    0.46
  S INV 6 75          NaN       NaN      0.45   0.80     inf    inf        inf    inf    2.55†   2.21      1.50*   inf     1.82    0.44


surprising, as the R ES N ET target threshold was derived using the same procedure as all other
workloads. The hyperparameter search space used for target-setting (see Dahl et al., 2023) may have
been more suitable for this workload given its well-studied nature. Although only one submission
achieved a finite R ES N ET workload score (recall a finite workload score requires at least 3 out of the
5 repetition studies to train successfully), several others met the target in at least one study. NADAM P,
P Y T ORCH D ISTR . S HAMPOO, and the BASELINE hit the target at least once but were not consistent,
with the remaining studies falling just short (Figure 2). These results support using the median across
multiple studies to determine a submission’s workload score, ensuring robustness against stochasticity.
Across all workloads, including held-out ones, at least one submission reliably reached the target,
demonstrating that none of the workloads were impossible to handle, rather it was difficult for a
submission to do well on all of them simultaneously.
Speed-up comparisons. In addition to benchmark scores, we compute raw speed-ups between
submissions. For relative training speed-ups, we focus on the fixed base workloads and impute
infinite workload scores with the ruleset’s runtime budget, i.e. assuming the submission would have


                                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


achieved the target just after the (artificial) cut-off. This is a best-case assumption for submissions that
do not train successfully (and thus a worst-case assumption for speed-ups over those submissions),
which may be reasonable in some cases (e.g. Figure 2) but can significantly underestimate actual
training times in others. For speed-up calculations, we do not enforce the held-out workload rules that
would invalidate workload runtimes when the corresponding held-out workload was not successfully
trained. Table 6 lists the average speed-ups over the baseline across all eight base workloads.
P Y T ORCH D ISTRIBUTED S HAMPOO provides significantly accelerated training than the external
tuning BASELINE, with an average speed-up of « 28%. It was also « 2% and 19% faster compared
to the second- and third-place submissions, respectively. In the self-tuning ruleset, S CHEDULE F REE
A DAM W provides « 8% faster hyperparameter-free training than the self-tuning baseline. While
speed-up metrics offer a more intuitive measure, they are less meaningful overall, as the penalty for
missing a target is relatively weak. For instance, CASPR A DAPTIVE achieved a finite workload
score on only four out of eight workloads, but ranked third in average speed-up.

3.2   C OMPARISON ACROSS HYPERPARAMETER TUNING RULESETS

To compare submissions across rulesets, we evaluated the first-place self-tuning submission as an
external tuning submission. This quantifies the performance gap between rulesets and estimates
the expected slowdown from the lack of parallel hyperparameter tuning. The self-tuning winner,
the (self-tuning) S CHEDULE F REE A DAM W submission, would have scored a 0.4804 under the
external tuning ruleset, ranking hypothetically eighth, without affecting the scores of other external
tuning submissions. Although there is a notable gap compared to its external tuning counterpart, it
is surprisingly competitive in this ruleset, given its lack of parallel tuning. Across the seven base
workloads both submissions trained successfully, P Y T ORCH D ISTRIBUTED S HAMPOO, the winner of
the external tuning ruleset, is « 24% faster than (self-tuning) S CHEDULE F REE A DAM W. However,
(self-tuning) S CHEDULE F REE A DAM W is « 10% faster than the (external tuning) BASELINE across
the seven base workloads both trained successfully. In other words, (self-tuning) S CHEDULE F REE
A DAM W reduced training time by 10% compared to the baseline, using only a single machine
instead of five in parallel exploring different hyperparameter configurations. Although there is still
a meaningful gap between the rulesets, the encouraging results of (self-tuning) S CHEDULE F REE
A DAM W suggest that even without any free workload-specific tuning, it might be possible to create
training algorithms that are surprisingly effective.

3.3   RULE CHANGE COUNTERFACTUALS

In order to better understand the effects of the specific A LGO P ERF benchmark rules, we can consider
how the results would have changed with different rules.
Different ways of determining whether a submission receives a finite runtime score. There are
a variety of mechanisms in the rules whereby a submission can fail to receive a finite runtime score
on a given workload, and they triggered relatively frequently in the competition. In the external
tuning ruleset, out of 154 workload-submission combinations (including both fixed base and held-out
workloads), 33 (« 21%)were classified as infs due to a submission not reaching the target (31 out of
84 or « 37% for the self-tuning ruleset), while 5 (« 3%) and 4 (« 5%), respectively, were classified as
NaNs (error before first evaluation). Additionally, 8 held-out workload scores (« 12%) in the external
tuning ruleset were ignored due to failure to reach the target on the base workload, while the reverse
occurred for 7 base workload scores (« 8%). In the self-tuning ruleset, 3 held-out scores (« 8%) and 2
base scores (« 4%) were excluded for the same reasons. Finally, 11 scores (« 7%) in the external and
4 scores (« 5%) in the self-tuning ruleset exceeded the four-times-the-fastest-valid-runtime threshold
and were thus classified as infinite. This is most notable for OGBG, where the fast training times
of CASPR A DAPTIVE invalidated a significant number of workload scores. Ultimately, requiring
training algorithms to be robust to workload variations through the held-out workloads did provide a
non-trivial constraint, though the held-out workload targets were not so stringent the effect was that
large. Only considering submissions to train a workload successfully when no other submission could
train more than four times faster, primarily affected workloads where the overall runtime budget was
the most generous (in hindsight). This rule might become redundant if runtime budgets for future
iterations are tightened based on the top-performing submissions. In Figure 3 (Appendix A.5), we
investigate the sensitivity of benchmark scores and rankings to changes in τmax , the upper limit of the
performance profile.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Scoring on a subset of workloads. How would the competition results change if we considered only
a subset of the benchmark’s workloads? Figure 4 shows the performance profiles and benchmark
scores when ignoring all held-out workloads. With the exception of CASPR A DAPTIVE and
A MOS, which switch positions, held-out workloads have little impact on the leaderboard. However,
quantifying the full effect of held-out workloads is challenging. Their presence may have discouraged
submissions overfitting to the fixed workloads. While held-out workloads offer some value, their
costs likely outweigh their benefits (Section 5). These costs include the additional compute and,
perhaps more importantly, the significant human effort involved in designing and implementing them.
Dahl et al. (2023) envisioned A LGO P ERF’s qualification set as a cheaper way to evaluate training
algorithms, allowing for better allocation of compute resources to the more promising submissions.
For the competition, we had enough compute to fully score all submitted training algorithms and did
not use the qualification set (for a description of all changes between the benchmark and competition
see Appendix A.2). Figure 5 shows the submissions’ score when using only the qualification
set (which also excludes held-out workloads). While the qualification set helps to identify under-
performing submissions, rankings can change substantially compared to the full set. We can also
assess how scores shift when removing individual workloads. Table 7 presents the benchmark scores
and rankings when each workload is excluded. The rankings remain largely stable, with the winning
submissions unchanged in all but one case, indicating that the competition results are robust to the
precise selection of workloads, as long as there is a large and diverse enough set.


4   E NGINEERING CHALLENGES

Scoring submissions based on wall-clock time, especially in a multi-framework setting, introduces
non-trivial engineering challenges. Requiring competing submissions to make use of shared workload
implementations and timing code is an essential requirement for meaningful timing measurements,
but also introduces a host of issues. Even for standard algorithms, seemingly minor implementation
details can have a dramatic effect on time-per-step or how quickly the loss decreases per step. As much
as possible, potential confounding factors for training algorithm comparisons should be removed,
while still allowing realistic participation. Perhaps the biggest point of tension between controlling
measurements and remaining relevant to current practice is due to supporting multiple frameworks.
Submissions in JAX & P Y T ORCH have to be compared on a level playing field, despite framework-
specific differences in optimization and execution paradigms. To ensure as fair a comparison as
possible between algorithms implemented in JAX & P Y T ORCH, the workload implementations in
each framework should be functionally equivalent, high-quality, and realistically performant:
Functional equivalence: workload implementations should perform mathematically identical com-
putations across frameworks and use identical implementation strategies. Given the same input (batch,
model parameters, random initialization), the outputs of the forward and backward passes should be
the same (within numerical precision) regardless of whether the workload is implemented in JAX
or P Y T ORCH. All parts of the computation not controlled by the submission code (everything from
forward & backward passes to weight initialization to timing & logging) should be semantically
identical and also be parallelized in the same way on the same devices. This guarantees that any
observed performance differences are truly due to algorithmic improvements within the submissions,
and not variations in the underlying computations.
Performant in both time and memory: workload implementations shouldn’t saddle training algo-
rithm submissions with time or memory overheads that skilled engineers would easily avoid outside
the context of the competition. Although achieving identical execution times (and memory usage
patterns) across frameworks when run on identical competition hardware is not required in principle
(and is nearly impossible), in practice since both JAX & P Y T ORCH are mature frameworks and
the competition workloads are standard deep learning benchmark problems, any large discrepancy
between time or space efficiency across workload implementations in different frameworks is cause
for concern. Hypothetically, different frameworks can make different techniques easier or harder
to express or make achieving certain memory or runtime requirements more or less difficult. How-
ever, only when the workload implementations in both frameworks are as efficient as is realistically
possible can one begin to ask how the constraints of the frameworks themselves are playing a role.
Implementations should realistically capture how the frameworks are used by practitioners while also
being as efficient as possible.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Addressing these challenges led to the identification and subsequent implementation of various
improvements and best practices. Our experience should be useful for researchers attempting to make
similar reproducible measurements with as few confounding factors as possible.

4.1     F UNCTIONAL EQUIVALENCE OF JAX & P Y T ORCH IMPLEMENTATIONS

Framework-specific defaults. JAX & P Y T ORCH provide basic primitives for implementing various
components in neural networks. Creating functionally equivalent workloads requires considerable
care around framework specific features and defaults. For example, JAX’s default Gelu activation
function calculates the cumulative density function of the Gaussian with a Tanh approximation,
whereas in P Y T ORCH the exact computation is used. Similarly, for layer normalization, the default
values for ε differ between the frameworks. Even more insidious, the weights of linear layers in
JAX are initialized with lecun_normal, while similar weights in P Y T ORCH are initialized with
kaiming_uniform. Moreover, P Y T ORCH does not supply a lecun_normal initialization,
necessitating a manual implementation.
Data pre-processing and augmentation. Differences in data pre-processing and augmentation
strategies can result in data pipelines that are not comparable. To mitigate these types of differences,
the same T ENSOR F LOW (Abadi et al., 2015) dataset pipelines were used across frameworks where
possible (C RITEO 1TB, FAST MRI, L IBRI S PEECH, OGBG, and WMT). However, the I MAGE N ET
V I T and R ES N ET workloads in P Y T ORCH use a custom implementation to match the T ENSOR F LOW
random augmentation strategy in the JAX workload.

4.2     P ERFORMANCE OF JAX & P Y T ORCH IMPLEMENTATIONS

Data pipelines. Differences in the data parallelism implementations may also lead to additional
overhead for P Y T ORCH workloads. To match JAX’s data parallel paradigm, the P Y T ORCH workloads
are implemented with DistributedDataParallel (DDP). DDP requires one P YTHON process
per device, which in a naive implementation would lead to replication of T ENSOR F LOW data pipeline
tasks in each process and potentially use too much RAM and an undesirable number of threads. To
mitigate this issue, T ENSOR F LOW data pipeline operations are only run in one P YTHON process
and batches are broadcasted to the remaining processes. This choice results in a small additional
communication overhead for each batch in the P Y T ORCH workloads.
Custom CUDA kernels. The wall-clock time of two functionally equivalent computations can
significantly differ due to differences in the underlying GPU implementations. One example for this
is the torch.lstm implementation. In P Y T ORCH, the LSTM implementation uses a custom CUDA
kernel that results in a 2ˆ smaller wall-clock time on the L IBRI S PEECH D EEP S PEECH workload
compared to the JAX version. This uncovered the opportunity to generate a similar CUDA kernel in
the JAX LSTM layer implementation. Using the updated faster JAX LSTM layer implementation
significantly sped up the end-to-end wall clock times for the D EEP S PEECH workload. 6
Adopting P Y T ORCH 2.0 features Achieving realistically performant workload implementations re-
quires adopting novel features and best practices in both frameworks. Without these, the performance
gaps between P Y T ORCH & JAX could be as large as 60%. Over the course of the development of
the competition, the performance of P Y T ORCH workload implementations significantly improved as
a result of migrating from P Y T ORCH to P Y T ORCH 2.0 (see Appendix A.6).
P Y T ORCH 2.0 (Ansel et al., 2024), released in Dec 2022, introduced two major extensions that
represent a major departure from P Y T ORCH’s (Paszke et al., 2019) original eager programming
model, where every line of code would dispatch to a CUDA kernel. Specifically, P Y T ORCH 2.0
introduced TorchDynamo, a Python level JIT compiler that enables graph compilation of P Y T ORCH
programs, and TorchInductor, a compiler backend which translates P Y T ORCH programs into
Triton (Tillet et al., 2019) kernels for GPU and C++ for CPUs. The main adjustments that had to be
made to adopt to P Y T ORCH 2.0 and close the speed gap to JAX were related to torch.compile:

• Avoiding graph breaks. When TorchDynamo encounters unsupported functionality, it creates
  a graph break, splitting the model. To maximize performance, graph breaks should be prevented
  and models compiled with torch.compile(model, fullgraph=True).
   6
       https://github.com/google/jax/pull/13319


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• Compiling the loss function, not just the model.            Most of the tutorials surround-
  ing torch.compile implied that it is only to be applied to the model by running
  torch.compile(model). However, compiling loss functions had a dramatic impact on
  performance for several workloads. 7
• Overhead reduction mode. For models where overhead reduction is crucial it is rec-
  ommended to use CUDA graphs. This can be enabled via torch.compile(model,
  mode="reduce-overhead") for the cost of a small memory overhead.
• Combining DDP and torch.compile: The compiler also needs to compose with the other
  subsystems, e.g., there are subtle differences between ddp(torch.compile(model)) and
  torch.compile(ddp(model)). With the latter, the compiler will also trace collectives
  which may result in further performance optimizations.

Memory allocator settings Older CUDA versions are more likely to cause OOM errors in P Y-
T ORCH. Setting torch.cuda.memory._set_allocator_settings(’expandable_-
segments:True’) can fix OOMs caused by memory fragmentation. 8
Making adjustments to use modern features and adopting best practices for P Y T ORCH & JAX helped
achieve realistically performant workload implementations in both frameworks and significantly
reduced the time gap in between the JAX & P Y T ORCH workload implementations. While perfor-
mance differences still exist, they are mostly within tolerance (12%) and are balanced such that
neither framework has an overwhelming advantage. Measurements of the performances gaps between
P Y T ORCH & JAX workloads and improvements can be found in Appendix A.6.

5       L ESSONS LEARNED
The improved training algorithms developed for the competition delivered significant speedups in
neural network training. The winning submissions achieved 28% and 8% faster model training
compared to their respective baselines. The winning submission in the external tuning ruleset, based
on D ISTRIBUTED S HAMPOO, demonstrates that non-diagonal preconditioning methods can improve
runtime over currently popular methods like A DAM. And yet, despite these significant strides made
in accelerating neural network training, there is ample room left for algorithmic improvement.
No single submission dominated across all workloads; instead, five different submissions achieved
the best performance on at least one of the eight base workloads.
These algorithmic advances can only be realized reliably by careful benchmarking and en-
gineering efforts ensuring fair and meaningful comparisons. Comparisons on multiple deep
learning workloads are required to isolate a robust signal of a submission’s performance. Seemingly
intuitive aggregate metrics, like average speedup, fail to fully capture pertinent aspects of a training
algorithm’s practical usefulness. Precise engineering work is required to ensure that training algo-
rithms are compared fairly. In Section 4, we identified implementation details that dramatically affect
the runtime across virtually all training algorithms, and numerous potentially confounding factors that
must be accounted for in algorithmic comparisons, in particular across deep learning frameworks.
The competition also underscores the inherent link between hyperparameter tuning and training
algorithm performance. To meaningfully compare training algorithms, measurements must
properly account for workload-specific hyperparameter tuning and training algorithms must
be fully-specified without leaving free parameters for the user to set. A complete training algo-
rithm specification includes a formal specification of a training algorithm’s hyperparameter defaults
and/or search space, and should include regularization choices. The varying performance of many
submissions across workloads suggests that hyperparameter tuning remains a significant challenge;
the top-scoring submissions mostly distinguished themselves by their reliable training across a large
variety of workloads. Despite promising advances in hyperparameter-free algorithms (as seen in the
self-tuning ruleset), fully-automatic neural network training remains a serious challenge. In light of
our results, future publications of training algorithms should include clear hyperparameter (search
space) recommendations and be paired with a recommended tuning protocol, ideally one that is
sensitive to a user-supplied tuning budget. Although a radical change from the current practice of
published training algorithms that aren’t runnable without setting various hyperparameters, publishing
    7
        https://github.com/mlcommons/algorithmic-efficiency/pull/597
    8
        https://github.com/mlcommons/algorithmic-efficiency/issues/497


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


families of update rules and abdicating responsibility for tuning entirely to the user only adds to the
community’s confusion on what to actually use.

5.1   M ETHODOLOGICAL LESSONS

In our competition, the A LGO P ERF : T RAINING A LGORITHMS benchmark has proven to be quite
effective in differentiating algorithms and measuring progress in neural network training, but it results
in quite an involved experimental protocol with substantial costs. Most of its features, e.g. (integrated)
performance profiles, were useful in order to generate nuanced and robust insights. However, based on
our experience, we propose the following modifications to the A LGO P ERF benchmark going forward:
(1) Removing held-out workloads. Eliminating the held-out workloads would drastically simplify
the evaluation process and reduce the benchmark’s runtime substantially. Though held-out workloads
have the potential to deter overfitting to the base workloads, they require substantial computational,
logistical (they can’t be generated until submissions are frozen), and engineering effort. Replacing
the six held-out workloads with one or two additional base workloads would provide similar benefits,
while reducing runtime and allowing additional, practically-relevant workloads to be included, such as
autoregressive language models or diffusion models. (2) Reducing the runtime budgets to reduce
costs, especially for the self-tuning ruleset. The submissions have demonstrated that, for many
workloads, significantly less training time is needed. Matching the self-tuning budget to the current
external tuning budget, and potentially reducing the external tuning budget further, would maintain
meaningful comparisons while lowering overall costs. (3) Reducing the number of studies from 5
to 3 would cuts compute costs by an additional 40%. These repetitions with different random seeds
ensure robust insights rather than random noise due to the stochastic training process. However,
our results indicate fewer studies are sufficient for statistical fidelity. Additionally, a modernized
hardware setup with a better cost-to-performance ratio could further reduce costs.

6     C ONCLUSION
An inescapable limitation of empirical comparisons of (training) algorithms (see also Choi et al.,
2019; Sivaprasad et al., 2020; Schmidt et al., 2021) is that one can only directly measure the behavior
of specific implementations, not the abstract algorithmic ideas they express. The A LGO P ERF :
T RAINING A LGORITHMS competition embraces this constraint by evaluating submissions that fully
specify everything necessary to apply them to any generic learning problem, including all necessary
workload-specific hyperparameter tuning. The competition conditions provide a realistic simulation
of applying a generic training algorithm to a new problem, with some important caveats. First and
foremost, the maximum runtime budgets and evaluation metric targets for each workload provide a
lot of information about what training horizon is appropriate and what validation error is achievable,
unlike in a novel learning task where such information isn’t available. Second, by scoring on time
to reach particular validation error goals and not using results on separate per-workload test sets,
the competition conditions do not capture the challenges of train/test skew or distribution shift.
Additionally, while this competition reveals how well training algorithms perform, deeper analysis,
such as Kunstner et al. (2024), is needed to explain why.
Nevertheless, despite its limitations, the A LGO P ERF : T RAINING A LGORITHMS competition has
produced insights about the current training algorithm landscape. In particular, the competition results
have validated two exciting directions for improvements: non-diagonal preconditioning (P Y T ORCH
D ISTRIBUTED S HAMPOO) and hyperparameter reduction strategies (S CHEDULE F REE A DAM W).
These insights are only possible because they are the result of an open and competitive process. This
is in contrast to existing works that, due to the lack of a suitable existing benchmark, have each
been forced to introduce their own training algorithm evaluation protocols. As a result, much of
existing research on training algorithms has focused on isolating and improving individual ideas and
components, but hasn’t always produced complete and usable training algorithms that incorporate
viable hyperparameter tuning protocols, as would be necessary to perform well in competition.
Our end goal is not the specific insights generated by the inaugural round of comparisons, as
interesting as they might be. Ideally, competitions like A LGO P ERF will affect training algorithms
research in two main ways. First, they should provide a sieve to filter the most useful ideas out of the
literature by separating truly practical methods from interesting ideas that aren’t yet useful. Second,
they should provide a valuable signal to guide the design process for new training algorithms.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FS was supported by funds from the Cyber Valley Research Fund. PH and FS gratefully acknowledge
co-funding by the European Union (ERC, ANUBIS, 101123955), and by the DFG through Project HE
7114/5-1 in SPP2298/1; PH is a member of the Machine Learning Cluster of Excellence, funded by the
DFG under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC number 2064/1 – Project number 390727645; PH
and FS also acknowledge the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) through
the Tübingen AI Center (FKZ:01IS18039A); and funds from the Ministry of Science, Research and
Arts of the State of Baden-Württemberg.

R EFERENCES
Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S.
 Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew
 Harp, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath
 Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dandelion Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray, Chris Olah,
 Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent
 Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg,
 Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on
 heterogeneous systems, 2015. URL https://www.tensorflow.org/. Software available
 from tensorflow.org.
Rohan Anil, Vineet Gupta, Tomer Koren, Kevin Regan, and Yoram Singer. Scalable Second Order
  Optimization for Deep Learning, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.09018.
Jason Ansel, Edward Yang, Horace He, Natalia Gimelshein, Animesh Jain, Michael Voznesensky, Bin
  Bao, Peter Bell, David Berard, Evgeni Burovski, Geeta Chauhan, Anjali Chourdia, Will Constable,
  Alban Desmaison, Zachary DeVito, Elias Ellison, Will Feng, Jiong Gong, Michael Gschwind,
  Brian Hirsh, Sherlock Huang, Kshiteej Kalambarkar, Laurent Kirsch, Michael Lazos, Mario
  Lezcano, Yanbo Liang, Jason Liang, Yinghai Lu, C. K. Luk, Bert Maher, Yunjie Pan, Christian
  Puhrsch, Matthias Reso, Mark Saroufim, Marcos Yukio Siraichi, Helen Suk, Shunting Zhang,
  Michael Suo, Phil Tillet, Xu Zhao, Eikan Wang, Keren Zhou, Richard Zou, Xiaodong Wang, Ajit
  Mathews, William Wen, Gregory Chanan, Peng Wu, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch 2: Faster
  Machine Learning Through Dynamic Python Bytecode Transformation and Graph Compilation. In
  Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
  Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2, ASPLOS ’24, pp. 929–947, New York, NY, USA,
  2024.
Olivier Bousquet, Sylvain Gelly, Karol Kurach, Olivier Teytaud, and Damien Vincent. Critical Hyper-
  Parameters: No Random, No Cry, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03200.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal Maclau-
  rin, and Skye Wanderman-Milne. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs,
  2018. URL http://github.com/google/jax.
Dami Choi, Christopher J. Shallue, Zachary Nado, Jaehoon Lee, Chris J. Maddison, and George E.
  Dahl. On Empirical Comparisons of Optimizers for Deep Learning, 2019. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/1910.05446.
Dami Choi, Alexandre Passos, Christopher J. Shallue, and George E. Dahl. Faster Neural Network
  Training with Data Echoing, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.05550.
George E. Dahl, Frank Schneider, Zachary Nado, Naman Agarwal, Chandramouli Shama Sastry,
  Philipp Hennig, Sourabh Medapati, Runa Eschenhagen, Priya Kasimbeg, Daniel Suo, Juhan Bae,
  Justin Gilmer, Abel L. Peirson, Bilal Khan, Rohan Anil, Mike Rabbat, Shankar Krishnan, Daniel
  Snider, Ehsan Amid, Kongtao Chen, Chris J. Maddison, Rakshith Vasudev, Michal Badura, Ankush
  Garg, and Peter Mattson. Benchmarking Neural Network Training Algorithms, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.07179.
Aaron Defazio, Xingyu Yang, Harsh Mehta, Konstantin Mishchenko, Ahmed Khaled, and Ashok
  Cutkosky. The Road Less Scheduled, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15682.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Elizabeth D. Dolan and Jorge J. Moré. Benchmarking optimization software with performance
  profiles. Mathematical Programming, 2002.
Timothy Dozat. Incorporating Nesterov Momentum into Adam. In 4th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR, 2016.
Sai Surya Duvvuri, Fnu Devvrit, Rohan Anil, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Inderjit S. Dhillon. Combining
  Axes Preconditioners through Kronecker Approximation for Deep Learning. In 12th International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2024.
Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Timur Garipov, Dmitry Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson.
  Averaging Weights Leads to Wider Optima and Better Generalization. In Ricardo Silva, Amir
  Globerson, and Amir Globerson (eds.), 34th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence
  2018, UAI 2018, 34th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence 2018, UAI 2018, pp.
  876–885. Association For Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (AUAI), 2018.
Jean Kaddour. Stop Wasting My Time! Saving Days of ImageNet and BERT Training with Latest
  Weight Averaging. In Has it Trained Yet? NeurIPS 2022 Workshop, 2022.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In 3rd Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2015.
Frederik Kunstner, Robin Yadav, Alan Milligan, Mark Schmidt, and Alberto Bietti. Heavy-tailed class
  imbalance and why Adam outperforms gradient descent on language models. In NeurIPS 2024
  Workshop on Mathematics of Modern Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=msW3fL8J1D.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: Stochastic Gradient Descent with Warm Restarts. In 5th
   International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2017.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In 7th International
   Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2019.
Konstantin Mishchenko and Aaron Defazio. Prodigy: An Expeditiously Adaptive Parameter-Free
  Learner. In 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024.
Yijiang Pang, Shuyang Yu, Bao Hoang, and Jiayu Zhou. Towards Stability of Parameter-free
  Optimization, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.04376.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
 Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance
  Deep Learning Library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, NeurIPS, 2019.
Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A Stochastic Approximation Method. The Annals of Mathemati-
  cal Statistics, 1951.
Robin M. Schmidt, Frank Schneider, and Philipp Hennig. Descending through a Crowded Valley -
  Benchmarking Deep Learning Optimizers. In 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML, 2021.
Hao-Jun Michael Shi, Tsung-Hsien Lee, Shintaro Iwasaki, Jose Gallego-Posada, Zhijing Li, Kaushik
  Rangadurai, Dheevatsa Mudigere, and Michael Rabbat. A Distributed Data-Parallel PyTorch
  Implementation of the Distributed Shampoo Optimizer for Training Neural Networks At-Scale,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.06497.
Prabhu T. Sivaprasad, Florian Mai, Thijs Vogels, Martin Jaggi, and Francois Fleuret. Optimizer
  Benchmarking Needs to Account for Hyperparameter Tuning. In 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, ICML, 2020.
Leslie N. Smith. Cyclical Learning Rates for Training Neural Networks. In 2017 IEEE Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 464–472, 2017.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ran Tian and Ankur P. Parikh. Amos: An Adam-style Optimizer with Adaptive Weight Decay
  towards Model-Oriented Scale, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.11693.
Philippe Tillet, H. T. Kung, and David Cox. Triton: an intermediate language and compiler for tiled
  neural network computations. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop
  on Machine Learning and Programming Languages, MAPL 2019, pp. 10–19, New York, NY,
  USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      A PPENDIX
A.1    A LGO P ERF DETAILS

In this section, we provide additional details about the A LGO P ERF : T RAINING A LGORITHMS
benchmark (Dahl et al., 2023) and our competition based on it. Tables 2 and 3 summarize the fixed
base and held-out workloads of the A LGO P ERF benchmark as they are used in the competition.

Table 2: Summary of fixed base workloads in the A LGO P ERF benchmark. Losses include cross-
entropy (CE), mean absolute error (L1), and Connectionist Temporal Classification loss (CTC).
Additional evaluation metrics are structural similarity index measure (SSIM), (word) error rate (ER
& WER), mean average precision (mAP), and bilingual evaluation understudy score (BLEU). Note:
Some workloads have minor changes (see Appendix A.2) to the runtime budgets and validation
targets compared to the A LGO P ERF benchmark publication (Dahl et al., 2023). The runtime budget
is that of the external tuning ruleset, the self-tuning ruleset allows 3ˆ longer training.

                                                                                     Validation   Runtime
Task                           Dataset          Model             Loss      Metric    Target      Budget
Clickthrough rate              C RITEO 1TB      DLRM SMALL        CE        CE        0.123735      7703
prediction
MRI reconstruction             FAST MRI         U-N ET            L1        SSIM      0.7344        8859
Image                          I MAGE N ET      R ES N ET-50      CE        ER        0.22569      63,008
classification                                  VIT               CE        ER        0.22691      77,520
Speech                         L IBRI S PEECH   C ONFORMER        CTC       WER       0.085884     61,068
recognition                                     D EEP S PEECH     CTC       WER       0.119936     55,506
Molecular property             OGBG             GNN               CE        mAP       0.28098      18,477
prediction
Translation                    WMT              T RANSFORMER      CE        BLEU     30.8491       48,151


Table 3: Summary of held-out workloads sampled for this iteration of the A LGO P ERF competi-
tion. One held-out workload was sampled from the random workload variants (see (Dahl et al., 2023,
Table 11)) for each dataset used in the fixed workloads. Note, for the I MAGE N ET and L IBRI S PEECH
datasets only a single held-out workload was sampled, according to the modified competition rules
(see Appendix A.2). The loss function and performance metrics are identical to the corresponding
fixed base workload (Table 2).

                                                                                     Validation   Runtime
Task                                 Dataset          Variant                         Target      Budget
Clickthrough rate prediction         C RITEO 1TB      E MBED I NIT S CALE             0.129657      7703
MRI reconstruction                   FAST MRI         TAN H                           0.717840      8859
Image classification                 I MAGE N ET      R ES N ET BN I NIT S CALE       0.23474      63,008
Speech recognition                   L IBRI S PEECH   C ONFORMER L AYER N ORM         0.09731      61,068
Molecular property prediction        OGBG             A LTERED L AYERS                0.269446     18,477
Translation                          WMT              GLU & TAN H                    29.5779       48,151


A.2    M ODIFICATIONS TO THE A LGO P ERF BENCHMARK FOR THIS COMPETITION

For the purposes of this competition, we made several modifications to the benchmark from how
it was initially proposed by Dahl et al. (2023), mainly to reduce the competition’s overall compute
costs. All modifications were done before the competition’s submission deadline. Most notably,
the number of tuning trials in the external tuning ruleset was reduced from 20 to 5. This change
significantly lowers the computational cost of the competition while also mitigating the risk of
submissions overfitting to the benchmark’s workload selection. To further reduce computational


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


costs, we also decreased the runtime budgets for both L IBRI S PEECH workloads significantly—from
101, 780 to 61, 068 seconds and from 92, 509 to 55, 506 seconds—with only a slight impact on
target performance (the WER changed from 0.078477 to 0.085884 and from 0.1162 to 0.119936).
Additionally, small bug fixes led to slight changes in two other workload targets: the target loss on
C RITEO 1TB increased from 0.123649 to 0.123735, and the target SSIM on FAST MRI decreased
from 0.7344 to 0.723653. Furthermore, only a single held-out workload was sampled for each
dataset, not each workload. This means that for both the I MAGE N ET and L IBRI S PEECH datasets,
only one, instead of two, held-out workloads were sampled from the combined set of workload
variants, further reducing the competition’s overall runtime significantly.
Finally, we decided to use only the validation targets, excluding the test set targets. Including both
validation and test set targets, as proposed by Dahl et al. (2023), complicates the evaluation process
by involving the practitioner’s task of selecting hyperparameters for an unknown test set based on
validation performance. We chose to omit this aspect of the training process in the current iteration of
the benchmark.

A.3    C OMPUTATIONAL COSTS

The A LGO P ERF benchmark requires a substantial number of training runs and thus significant
computational resources to yield meaningful results. To evaluate a single submission, it needs to be
evaluated on eight fixed—and six held-out—workloads. For each workload, five repetition studies
are performed, and in the external tuning ruleset, each study comprises five tuning trials. In this
iteration of the competition, we conducted 3850 runs in the external tuning ruleset (due to eleven
training algorithms evaluated on 14 workloads, with 5¨5 trials) and 420 runs in the self-tuning ruleset
(six training algorithms evaluated five times on 14 workloads, with a runtime budget 3ˆ larger). The
actual computational cost of these 4000+ training runs varies significantly based on the performance
of the submission. Training can terminate early if the validation (and test targets)9 are met or if
errors occur, such as out-of-memory (OOM) issues. The runtime budget in Table 2 reflects only
the compute time spent by the submissions themselves, excluding time for free evaluations or other
operations outside the submission functions. It is thus not an upper bound on the total computational
cost. On average, we required approximately 1847 h to fully run a self-tuning submission and 3469 h
per external tuning submission, amounting to a total of roughly 49,240 h on the competition hardware
(8ˆNVIDIA V100 GPUs). This is considerably less than what is reported in Dahl et al. (2023,
Table 15), primarily due to fewer tuning trials and a reduced runtime budget for certain workloads
(see Appendix A.2), as well as early termination of some submissions. In theory, the number of
required runs could be reduced, for example, by skipping a held-out workload if a submission fails
the corresponding fixed workload. However, this would limit the ability to parallelize different runs
and reduce opportunities for further analysis beyond calculating benchmark scores.

A.4    S UBMISSION DETAILS

In this section, we provide details on the submissions received in this iteration of the competition.
Table 4 lists the submissions to the external tuning ruleset, while Table 5 details submissions received
for the self-tuning ruleset. Notably, no submission in this iteration significantly modified the data_-
selection function, indicating a potential area for future exploration.

A.5    A DDITIONAL COMPETITION RESULTS

In this section, we provide additional analysis of the A LGO P ERF competition results. In Figure 2, we
investigate submissions could achieve the target performance on the R ES N ET workload at least once,
but not reliable enough to receive a finite score. Table 6 compares the training time speed-ups of all
submission relative to the BASELINE in their respective ruleset. We investigated the sensitivity of
leaderboard rankings and benchmark scores to changes in τmax , the upper limit of the performance
profile and integration for the benchmark score. As shown in Figure 3, rankings remain relatively
stable for most submissions across different τmax values. With Figures 4 and 5 and Table 7 we explore
how hypothetical rules changes would affect the competition results.

   9
     Although we decided not to use test targets for the purpose of our competition, we wanted to log when
submissions reached the test targets for potential future analysis.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Table 4: External tuning submissions. Details of all submissions to the external tuning ruleset.

Submission Authors                 Institutions Framework Description

P Y T ORCH Hao-Jun Shi,            Meta         P Y T ORCH   Based on the Distributed Shampoo algorithm
D ISTR .    Tsung-Hsien Lee,       Platforms                 of Anil et al. (2020) with an implementation
S UBMISSION Anna Cai, Shintaro                               tailored to leverage PyTorch performance
            Iwasaki, Wenyin                                  optimizations. See Shi et al. (2023) for
            Fu, Yuchen Hao,                                  details. The submission uses a list of five
            Mike Rabbat                                      hyperparameter settings.
S CHEDULE Alice Yang, Aaron        Meta AI,     P Y T ORCH   A externally tuned version of S CHEDULE
F REE       Defazio, Konstantin    Samsung                   F REE A DAM W (Defazio et al., 2024) with a
A DAM W     Mishchenko             AI                        list of five hyperparameter configurations.
G ENERAL - George Dahl,            Google       JAX          Submission with an A DAM-style update rule,
IZED        Sourabh Medapati,                                tuning over the use of Nesterov acceleration
A DAM       Zack Nado, Rohan                                 and preconditioning. Essentially tuning over
            Anil, Shankar                                    A DAM W (Kingma & Ba, 2015), NADAM W,
            Krishnan, Naman                                  and SGD (Robbins & Monro, 1951) with or
            Agarwal, Priya                                   without momentum.
            Kasimbeg, Vlad
            Feinberg
C YCLIC     Niccolò Ajroldi,       MPI-IS,      P Y T ORCH   Revisits the work of Loshchilov & Hutter
LR          Antonio Orvieto,       ELLIS                     (2017) and Smith (2017), coupling
            Jonas Geiping          Institute                 NADAM W (Dozat, 2016; Loshchilov &
                                   Tübingen                  Hutter, 2019) with a cyclic learning rate
                                                             scheduler. Each cycle involves a linear
                                                             warmup phase for the LR, followed by
                                                             cosine annealing.
NADAM P     George Dahl,           Google       JAX          Uses NADAM W with an extra tunable
            Sourabh Medapati,                                hyperparameter p enabling pth root of
            Zack Nado, Rohan                                 denominator inside NADAM W update rule
            Anil, Shankar                                    instead of the default of 2.
            Krishnan, Naman
            Agarwal, Priya
            Kasimbeg, Vlad
            Feinberg
BASELINE                                        JAX          Baseline using NADAM W (Dozat, 2016;
                                                             Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) and a linear
                                                             learning rate warmup followed by a cosine
                                                             decay (Dahl et al., 2023).
A MOS       Ran Tian               Google       JAX          Submission based on the A MOS optimizer
                                                             (Tian & Parikh, 2022) with a list of five
                                                             hyperparameter settings.
CASPR       Sai Surya Duvvuri,     UT Austin,   JAX          A submission based on (Duvvuri et al.,
A DAPTIVE   Inderjit S. Dhillon,   UCLA,                     2024) with a list of five hyperparameter
            Cho-Jui Hsieh          Google                    configurations.
LAWA        Niccolò Ajroldi,       MPI-IS,      P Y T ORCH   Employs Latest Weight Averaging (Izmailov
Q UEUE      Antonio Orvieto,       ELLIS                     et al., 2018; Kaddour, 2022) on top of
            Jonas Geiping          Institute                 NADAM W (Dozat, 2016; Loshchilov &
                                   Tübingen                  Hutter, 2019), maintaining a queue of
                                                             previous model weights. The queue is
                                                             periodically updated during training and
                                                             passed to the competition API for evaluation.
LAWA        Niccolò Ajroldi,       MPI-IS,      P Y T ORCH   Similar to LAWA Q UEUE but maintaining
EMA         Antonio Orvieto,       ELLIS                     an exponential moving average of the model
            Jonas Geiping          Institute                 weights, which is updated periodically
                                   Tübingen                  during training and returned to the
                                                             competition API for evaluation.
S CHEDULE Alice Yang, Aaron Meta AI,            P Y T ORCH   Combining Schedule-free (Defazio et al.,
F REE     Defazio, Konstantin Samsung                        2024) with the P RODIGY optimizer
P RODIGY  Mishchenko          AI                             (Mishchenko & Defazio, 2024).



                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Study 0, Trial 1
                0.77
                               Study 1, Trial 1
                               Study 2, Trial 1
                0.76           Study 3, Trial 1
     Accuracy


                               Study 4, Trial 1
                0.75


                0.74


                0.73
                       50000            52000          54000        56000           58000   60000   62000

                                                               (a) BASELINE


                0.77


                0.76
     Accuracy


                0.75                                                  Study 0, Trial 2
                                                                      Study 1, Trial 2
                                                                      Study 2, Trial 2
                0.74
                                                                      Study 3, Trial 2
                                                                      Study 4, Trial 2
                0.73
                       50000            52000          54000        56000           58000   60000   62000

                                                               (b) NADAM P


                0.77           Study 0, Trial 5
                               Study 1, Trial 3
                               Study 2, Trial 5
                0.76
     Accuracy


                               Study 3, Trial 5
                               Study 4, Trial 3
                0.75


                0.74


                0.73
                       50000            52000          54000        56000           58000   60000   62000
                                                                 Runtime in seconds
                                                  (c) P Y T ORCH D ISTRIBUTED S HAMPOO

Figure 2: Validation accuracy vs. runtime on the R ES N ET workload. The BASELINE (Figure 2a),
NADAM P (Figure 2b), and P Y T ORCH D ISTRIBUTED S HAMPOO (Figure 2c) all reach the validation
target on the R ES N ET workload for at least one study but not reliably enough to get a finite score.
Shown are the best trials from each of the five studies, where “best” is either the fastest trial to achieve
the target performance or the trial whose best performance is closest to the target. Trials that reach
the target are marked with a solid line, while studies that do not reach the target are indicated with
a dashed line. The gray dashed horizontal and vertical lines indicate the target performance and
runtime budget respectively. Additionally, both A MOS and C YCLIC LR came close but missed the
target in all studies.


                                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      0.8

                      0.7

                      0.6
    Benchmark Score


                      0.5

                      0.4

                      0.3

                      0.2

                      0.1

                      0.0

                            1.5             2.0               2.5              3.0           3.5                 4.0
                                                                      τmax
                              PyTorch Distr. Shampoo            NadamP                   Lawa Queue
                              Schedule Free AdamW               Baseline                 Lawa EMA
                              Generalized Adam                  Amos                     Schedule Free Prodigy
                              Cyclic LR                         CASPR Adaptive

                                                       (a) External tuning ruleset



                      0.8


                      0.6
    Benchmark Score


                      0.4


                      0.2


                      0.0

                            1.5             2.0               2.5              3.0           3.5                 4.0
                                                                      τmax
                                   Schedule Free AdamW               NadamW Sequential             Sinv6
                                   Baseline                          Sinv6 75                      AdamG

                                                         (b) Self-tuning ruleset

Figure 3: Benchmark score as a function of τmax . The upper limit of the performance profile and
upper integration limit for the benchmark score, τmax , determines which workload scores are treated
as finite and influences the penalty for infinite scores. We observe that rankings remain stable for
most submissions across different values of τmax .


                                                                    18
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          100%
                                                                                                              PyTorch Distr. Shampoo (0.7784)
                                                                                                              Schedule Free AdamW (0.7740)
Percentage of Workloads


                          75%                                                                                 Generalized Adam (0.6944)
                                                                                                              Cyclic LR (0.6648)

                          50%
                                                                                                              NadamP (0.6067)
                                                                                                              Baseline (0.5915)
                                                                                                              CASPR Adaptive (0.5549)
                          25%
                                                                                                              Amos (0.4918)
                                                                                                              Lawa Queue (0.3699)
                           0%                                                                                 Lawa EMA (0.3384)
                                 1.0         1.5        2.0        2.5        3.0         3.5        4.0
                                                                                                              Schedule Free Prodigy (0.0966)
                                                                    τ

                                       (a) Performance profiles for the external tuning ruleset ignoring held-out workloads

                          100%
Percentage of Workloads


                          75%
                                                                                                                Schedule Free AdamW (0.8542)
                                                                                                                Baseline (0.8194)
                          50%
                                                                                                                NadamW Sequential (0.3826)
                                                                                                                Sinv6 75 (0.1420)

                          25%                                                                                   Sinv6 (0.0903)
                                                                                                                AdamG (0.0000)

                           0%

                                 1.0         1.5        2.0        2.5        3.0         3.5        4.0
                                                                    τ

                                         (b) Performance profiles for the self-tuning ruleset ignoring held-out workloads

 Figure 4: Performance profiles of all A LGO P ERF submissions when ignoring held-out work-
 loads. Structurally the same as Figure 1 but here we ignore all benchmark rules involving the held-out
 workloads.


                                                                               19
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          100%
                                                                                                                Schedule Free AdamW (0.8418)
                                                                                                                PyTorch Distr. Shampoo (0.7845)
Percentage of Workloads


                                                                                                                Cyclic LR (0.7054)
                          67%
                                                                                                                Generalized Adam (0.6886)
                                                                                                                CASPR Adaptive (0.5539)
                                                                                                                NadamP (0.5269)
                          33%                                                                                   Baseline (0.5000)
                                                                                                                Lawa EMA (0.4747)
                                                                                                                Lawa Queue (0.4680)
                           0%                                                                                   Amos (0.2172)
                                 1.0          1.5        2.0         2.5        3.0        3.5         4.0
                                                                                                                Schedule Free Prodigy (0.0000)
                                                                     τ

                                       (a) Performance profiles for the external tuning ruleset on the qualification workloads

                          100%
Percentage of Workloads


                          67%                                                                                    Schedule Free AdamW (0.9848)
                                                                                                                 Baseline (0.9529)
                                                                                                                 NadamW Sequential (0.3956)
                                                                                                                 Sinv6 75 (0.2037)
                          33%
                                                                                                                 Sinv6 (0.1364)
                                                                                                                 AdamG (0.0000)

                           0%

                                 1.0          1.5        2.0         2.5        3.0        3.5         4.0
                                                                     τ

                                         (b) Performance profiles for the self-tuning ruleset on the qualification workloads

 Figure 5: Performance profiles of all A LGO P ERF submissions on the qualification workloads.
 Structurally the same as Figure 1 and Figure 4 but only considering the three workloads that are part
 of the qualification set, i.e. C RITEO 1TB, WMT, and OGBG. In the qualification set, no held-out
 workloads are used.


                                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Table 5: Self-tuning submissions. Details of all submissions to the external tuning ruleset.

Submission    Authors              Institutions Framework Description

S CHEDULE     Alice Yang, Aaron Meta AI,          P Y T ORCH   A self-tuning version of S CHEDULE F REE
F REE         Defazio, Konstantin Samsung                      A DAM W (Defazio et al., 2024) using a
A DAM W       Mishchenko          AI                           single hyperparameter configuration.
BASELINE                                          JAX          Baseline using NADAM W, a linear learning
                                                               rate warmup followed by a cosine decay, and
                                                               a single hyperparameter point (Dahl et al.,
                                                               2023).
NADAM W     George Dahl,           Google         JAX          Uses NADAM W update rule and runs 3 fixed
S EQUENTIAL Sourabh Medapati,                                  hyperparameter points sequentially. The
            Zack Nado, Rohan                                   intention was for these to be the top 3
            Anil, Shankar                                      hyperparameter points found at one third
            Krishnan, Naman                                    the self-tuning ruleset step budgets.
            Agarwal, Priya
            Kasimbeg, Vlad
            Feinberg
S INV 6 75  Abhinav Moudgil        Mila,          JAX          A submission for a task-invariant learned
                                   Concordia                   optimizer meta-trained on small tasks. Uses
                                   University                  75% of the number of steps as target in
                                                               learned optimizer initialization.
S INV 6       Abhinav Moudgil      Mila,          JAX          A submission for a task-invariant learned
                                   Concordia                   optimizer meta-trained on small tasks.
                                   University
A DAM G       Yijiang Pang         Michigan       P Y T ORCH   A submission based on the A DAM G
                                   State                       optimizer (Pang et al., 2024).
                                   University


Table 6: Speed-ups vs. the baseline. To compute the speed-up over the baseline, we first compute
the geometric mean of the workload runtimes relative to the runtimes of the baseline. Only fixed
base workloads are considered. If a submission did not reach the target on a workload, its runtime is
imputed with the runtime budget, i.e. assuming that the submission would have reached the target
just after the cut-off. This is the best-case assumption for the submissions. We do not set runtimes
to infinity, e.g. because the corresponding held-out workload was not trained successfully. The
geometric mean is then expressed as a relative speed-up over the baseline, with positive numbers
representing faster training.

                 (a) External tuning                                    (b) Self-tuning

    Submission                         Speed-up          Submission                        Speed-up
    P Y T ORCH D ISTR . S HAMPOO        27.87%           S CHEDULE F REE A DAM W               7.76%
    S CHEDULE F REE A DAM W             26.60%           BASELINE                              0.00%
    CASPR A DAPTIVE                     24.33%           NADAM W S EQUENTIAL                 −92.44%
    G ENERALIZED A DAM                  10.89%           S INV 6 75                         −157.67%
    C YCLIC LR                          10.67%           S INV 6                            −168.63%
    LAWA Q UEUE                          7.98%           A DAM G                            −294.16%
    NADAM P                              3.37%
    A MOS                                1.46%
    BASELINE                             0.00%
    LAWA EMA                            −9.17%
    S CHEDULE F REE P RODIGY           −15.68%


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Submission benchmark scores and ranking when removing individual workloads.
Shown are the benchmark scores (S.) and leaderboard rankings (R.) of all external tuning (Table 7a)
and self-tuning (Table 7b) submissions, when dropping specific workloads. For example, the last
column reports the rankings of the submissions if we consider all workloads (including held-out
workloads) except the WMT workloads. The “Full” columns show the scores and ranks when
considering all workloads.

                                                  (a) External tuning ruleset

                          Full       C RITEO     FAST MRI      R ES N ET      VIT        C ON -      D EEP        OGBG       WMT
                                     1TB                                                 FORMER      S PEECH

                      Score   Rank    S.    R.    S.      R.    S.     R.    S.     R.    S.    R.    S.    R.    S.    R.    S.    R.

P Y T ORCH D ISTR .   0.78    1      0.75   1    0.75     1    0.89    1    0.75    1    0.75   1    0.75   1    0.77   2    0.81   1
S HAMPOO
S CHEDULE F REE       0.71    2      0.67   2    0.67     2    0.81    2    0.68    2    0.68   3    0.68   2    0.81   1    0.67   2
A DAM W
G ENERALIZED          0.64    3      0.60   3    0.61     4    0.59    6    0.63    3    0.73   2    0.59   3    0.73   3    0.63   3
A DAM
C YCLIC LR            0.63    4      0.58   4    0.62     3    0.72    3    0.62    4    0.59   4    0.59   4    0.72   4    0.60   4
NADAM P               0.59    5      0.54   6    0.57     5    0.68    4    0.58    5    0.55   5    0.53   5    0.68   5    0.60   5
BASELINE              0.57    6      0.53   8    0.55     6    0.65    5    0.56    6    0.52   7    0.52   6    0.65   6    0.58   6
A MOS                 0.49    7      0.56   5    0.50     7    0.56    7    0.44    7    0.42   9    0.42   8    0.56   7    0.47   8
CASPR                 0.47    8      0.54   7    0.40     8    0.54    8    0.41    8    0.54   6    0.41   9    0.40   8    0.54   7
A DAPTIVE
LAWA Q UEUE           0.37    9      0.42   9    0.32     9    0.42    9    0.31    9    0.42   8    0.42   7    0.33   10   0.31   10
LAWA EMA              0.34    10     0.25   10   0.31     10   0.39    10   0.28    10   0.39   10   0.39   10   0.39   9    0.32   9
S CHEDULE F REE       0.00    11     0.00   11   0.00     11   0.00    11   0.00    11   0.00   11   0.00   11   0.00   11   0.00   11
P RODIGY


                                                        (b) Self-tuning ruleset

                          Full       C RITEO     FAST MRI      R ES N ET      VIT        C ON -      D EEP        OGBG        WMT
                                     1TB                                                 FORMER      S PEECH

                      Score   Rank    S.    R.    S.      R.    S.     R.    S.     R.    S.    R.    S.    R.    S.    R.    S.    R.

S CHEDULE F REE       0.85    1      0.83   1    0.83     1    0.98    1    0.83    1    0.83   1    0.85   1    0.83   1    0.84   1
A DAM W
BASELINE              0.82    2      0.79   2    0.82     2    0.94    2    0.81    2    0.79   2    0.79   2    0.81   2    0.79   2
NADAM W               0.33    3      0.38   3    0.27     3    0.38    3    0.30    3    0.38   3    0.29   3    0.27   3    0.38   3
S EQUENTIAL
S INV 6 75            0.14    4      0.16   4    0.12     4    0.16    4    0.16    4    0.16   4    0.13   4    0.16   4    0.08   4
S INV 6               0.09    5      0.10   5    0.07     5    0.10    5    0.10    5    0.10   5    0.09   5    0.10   5    0.04   5
A DAM G               0.00    6      0.00   6    0.00     6    0.00    6    0.00    6    0.00   6    0.00   6    0.00   6    0.00   6


                                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.6   A LGO P ERF WORKLOAD WALL - CLOCK TIME COMPARISON BETWEEN JAX & P Y T ORCH

To measure the wall-clock time performance of JAX & P Y T ORCH workload implementations, we
estimate the submission times for an A DAM W baseline training algorithm to train to target for each
of the workloads on the 8ˆNVIDIA V100 GPUs competition system. The workloads support the
same training batch sizes for this A DAM W baseline across frameworks.
The submission time accumulates the wall-clock times of the update_params and the data_-
selection calls and excludes any time spent on logging and checkpointing (which is disabled
during scoring runs anyway). During the first few steps of training, there may be some additional
overhead in these calls resulting from cache warm-ups and compilation costs of the model and update
code. An accurate estimate would be based on enough steps that any especially slow initial steps
play only a small role in the average step time. We found that running for 20% of the step hint
allowed us to estimate the equilibrium step time well. We then calculated the full submission time by
extrapolating the submission time over the 20% step hint to the full step hint.
We initially performed this measurement when the workloads were complete in the sense that they
were functionally equivalent. After upgrading the JAX & P Y T ORCH packages, changing the CUDA
driver versions for the hardware configuration, and implementing various improvements and best
practices, we then repeated the measurement to capture the final state of the workloads performance
across frameworks. The projected submission times of the JAX & P Y T ORCH workload are presented
in Table 8.
Table 8: Projected submission times for A DAM W baseline on JAX & P Y T ORCH workloads
before and after workload performance adjustments. All submission times are in minutes. A pos-
itive difference indicates that our JAX implementation is faster than our P Y T ORCH implementation.

                    Workload           JAX             P Y T ORCH    Difference
                                    Before After Before After Before After
                    C RITEO 1TB      127    136         213    122   68% −10%
                    FAST MRI         148    145         163    163   10% 12%
                    R ES N ET       1047   1063        1174   1135   12%   7%
                    VIT             1290   1378        1260   1253   −2% −9%
                    C ONFORMER      1689   1445        1755   1407    4% −3%
                    D EEP S PEECH   1047    875        1229    967   17% 10%
                    OGBG             306    399         398    445   30% 12%
                    WMT              804    782         972    792   21%   1%


                                                  23
