Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I MPUTATION FOR PREDICTION : BEWARE OF DIMINISHING
RETURNS .

 Marine Le Morvan                                      Gaël Varoquaux
 Soda, Inria Saclay                                    Soda, Inria Saclay
 marine.le-morvan@inria.fr                             gael.varoquaux@inria.fr



                                            A BSTRACT

         Missing values are prevalent across various fields, posing challenges for training
         and deploying predictive models. In this context, imputation is a common practice,
         driven by the hope that accurate imputations will enhance predictions. However,
         recent theoretical and empirical studies indicate that simple constant imputation
         can be consistent and competitive. This empirical study aims at clarifying if
         and when investing in advanced imputation methods yields significantly better
         predictions. Relating imputation and predictive accuracies across combinations of
         imputation and predictive models on 19 datasets, we show that imputation accuracy
         matters less i) when using expressive models, ii) when incorporating missingness
         indicators as complementary inputs, iii) matters much more for generated linear
         outcomes than for real-data outcomes. Interestingly, we also show that the use of
         the missingness indicator is beneficial to the prediction performance, even in MCAR
         scenarios. Overall, on real-data with powerful models, improving imputation only
         has a minor effect on prediction performance. Thus, investing in better imputations
         for improved predictions often offers limited benefits.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Databases are often riddled with missing values due to faulty measurements, unanswered question-
naire items or unreported data. This is typical of large health databases such as the UK Biobank
(Sudlow et al., 2015), the National Health Interview Survey (Blewett et al., 2019) and others (Perez-
Lebel et al., 2022). Statistical analysis with missing values has been widely studied, particularly to
estimate parameters such as means and variances (Little & Rubin, 2019). However, how to best deal
with missing values for prediction has been less studied. Since most machine learning models do
not natively handle missing values, common practice is to impute missing values before training a
model on the completed data, often with the expectation that “good” imputation improves predictions.
Considerable efforts have been dedicated to improving imputation techniques, utilizing Generative
Adversarial Networks (Yoon et al., 2018), Variational AutoEncoders (Mattei & Frellsen, 2019), opti-
mal transport (Muzellec et al., 2020) or AutoML-enhanced iterative conditional imputation (Jarrett
et al., 2022) among others. Most of these studies concentrate on imputation accuracy without assess-
ing performance on subsequent tasks. However, theoretical arguments suggest that good imputation
is not needed for good prediction (Le Morvan et al., 2021; Josse et al., 2019). These arguments are
asymptotic and whether they hold in typical cases is debatable. To address the discrepancy between
this theory and the emphasis on imputation efforts, there is a critical need for empirical studies to
determine whether better imputations actually lead to better predictions.
Theory does establish that in some scenarios, better imputations imply better predictions. For instance
with a linearly-generated outcome, the optimal prediction is a linear model of the optimally-imputed
data (Le Morvan et al., 2021). Thus, when using a linear model for prediction, better imputations
generally lead to better predictions. However, theoretical results suggest that in very high-dimensional
settings (Ayme et al., 2023) or in small dimensions with uncorrelated features (Ayme et al., 2024),
simple constant imputations can be sufficient for linear models. Beyond linear models, empirical
studies on real data have shown the competitiveness of simple imputations –such as the mean–
(Paterakis et al., 2024; Perez-Lebel et al., 2022; Shadbahr et al., 2023; Luengo et al., 2012) aligning
with theoretical arguments. However, their findings may be driven by “predictive” missingness


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(Missing Not At Random data Little & Rubin, 2019; Josse et al., 2019), for which most imputation
methods are invalid.
Drawing robust and broadly applicable conclusions from existing empirical research is challenging,
as several key experimental factors can influence conclusions. One critical factor is the missingness
mechanism, which falls into three categories: MCAR (Missing Completely At Random), MAR
(Missing At Random), and MNAR (Missing Not At Random). MCAR is the simplest case, where
missing entries occur with a fixed probability, independent of observed or unobserved data. In
MAR, missingness depends solely on observed variables, whereas in MNAR, it is related to the
unobserved values themselves, making it informative. Naturally occurring missing values are
generally assumed to be MNAR. However, most imputation algorithms are not valid in MNAR
scenarios, questioning the utility of advanced imputation algorithms in such cases. MCAR allows
for higher quality imputations but their benefit for downstream performance needs to be evaluated.
Beyond the missingness mechanism, other influential factors include (i) the missing rate - low
proportions of missing values may have a limited impact on predictive performance; (ii) the use of
missingness indicators - concatenating a binary indicator for missing values to the original sample is
a common practice for prediction, as implemented in scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011); (iii) the
choice of downstream model - more flexible models may better compensate for poor imputation; and
(iv) the proportion of categorical features - for categorical features, the most effective approach is
often to treat missing values as a separate category, bypassing imputation altogether.
To draw actionable conclusions taking into account these potentially influential factors, we quantify
the change in predictive performance resulting from a gain in imputation accuracy across controlled
experimental settings. First, we focus on MCAR as a best-case scenario since it allows for high-
quality imputations that are most likely to improve downstream performance. If only limited gains
are observed under these ideal conditions, the benefits in general scenarios are likely smaller. Thus
we aim to establish an upper bound on the potential benefits of imputation. Results under MNAR
conditions are nonetheless included (subsection 4.4 and Appendix L) and confirm that imputation
provides less benefits in such cases. Following a similar rationale, we focus on numerical features,
where imputation quality is most likely to affect downstream performances, as missing categorical
values are better handled as a separate category. As for the remaining factors, we vary the choice
of downstream prediction model, the use of the missingness indicator, as well as the missing rate to
condition our conclusions on the exprimental setting. Rather than identifying the “best” imputation
and prediction pipeline, our goal is to rigorously assess the impact of imputation quality on predictive
performance.
Section 2 introduces related work, covering both benchmarks for prediction with missing values and
available theory. Section 3 details our experimental procedures, specifically the methods examined.
Section 4 presents our findings, relating gains in imputation to prediction performance. Finally,
section 5 summarizes the lessons learned.


2    R ELATED WORK

Benchmarks. Several benchmark studies have investigated imputation in a prediction context
(Paterakis et al., 2024; Jäger et al., 2021; Ramosaj et al., 2022; Woźnica & Biecek, 2020; Perez-Lebel
et al., 2022; Poulos & Valle, 2018; Shadbahr et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024; Luengo et al., 2012;
Bertsimas et al., 2024). However, drawing definitive conclusions from most studies is challenging
due to various limitations in scope and experimental choices. For example, Bertsimas et al. (2018);
Li et al. (2024) trained imputation methods using both the training and test sets, rather than applying
the imputation learned on the training set to the test set, which is not possible with many imputation
packages. This approach creates data leakage. Woźnica & Biecek (2020) trained imputers separately
on the train and test sets, which creates an “imputation shift” —a situation where the imputation
patterns between the train and test sets differ, causing inconsistencies in the data used for model
training versus model evaluation. Jäger et al. (2021) discards and imputes values in a single column
of the test set, chosen at random and fixed throughout the experiments. Yet as they note, conclusions
can change drastically depending on the importance of the to-be-imputed column for the prediction
task or its correlation with other features. Some studies (Poulos & Valle, 2018; Ramosaj et al., 2022)
use a small number of datasets (resp. 2 and 5 datasets from the UCI machine learning repository
respectively), thus limiting the significance of their conclusions. Woźnica & Biecek (2020) do


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


not perform hyperparameter tuning for the prediction models, while Ramosaj et al. (2022) tunes
hyperparameters on the complete data, though it is unclear whether the best hyperparameters on
complete data are also the best on incomplete data. Furthermore, some benchmarks focus on specific
types of downstream prediction models, such as linear models (Jäger et al., 2021), AutoML models
(Paterakis et al., 2024) or Support Vector Machines (Li et al., 2024), meaning their conclusions should
not be generalized to all types of downstream models. Finally, only Perez-Lebel et al. (2022) and
Paterakis et al. (2024) evaluate the use of the missingness indicator as complementary input features.
Among the benchmarks with largest scope, Paterakis et al. (2024) recommend mean/mode imputation
with the indicator as the default option in AutoML settings, both for native and simulated missingness.
It is among the top-performing approaches, never statistically significantly outperformed, and is also
the most cost-effective. They also show that using the missingness indicator as input improves perfor-
mances slightly but significantly for most imputation methods on naturally-occurring missingness.
Perez-Lebel et al. (2022) focus on predictive modeling for large health databases, which contain many
missing values. They compare various imputation strategies (mean, median, k-nearest neighbors
imputation, MICE) combined with gradient-boosted trees (GBTs) for prediction, as well as GBTs
with native handling of missing values. Similarly to Paterakis et al. (2024), they find that appending
the indicator to the imputed data significantly improves performances, which may reflect MNAR data.
While they recommend resorting to the native handling of missing values as it is relatively cheap,
their results further indicate that no method is significantly better than using the mean as imputation
method together with the indicator. Shadbahr et al. (2023) also find that the best imputations do not
necessarily result in the best downstream performances. Using an analysis of variance, they show that
the choice of imputation method has a significant but small effect on the classification performance.
Whether better imputation leads to better prediction may vary depending on factors like the choice of
downstream model, the missingness rate, or the characteristics of the datasets. Yet, many studies seek
a definitive conclusion across diverse settings. Only Paterakis et al. (2024) conducted a meta-analysis,
but it did not determine when more advanced imputation strategies are beneficial compared to mean
or mode imputations. Identifying scenarios in which better imputations are more likely to improve
predictions is however of strong practical interest.

Theoretical insights. Previous works have addressed this question from a theoretical point of view.
Le Morvan et al. (2021) showed that for all missingness mechanisms and almost all deterministic
imputation functions, universally consistent algorithms trained on imputed data asymptotically
achieve optimal performances in prediction. This is in particular true for simple imputations such
as the mean (Josse et al., 2019), thereby providing rationale to favor simple imputations over more
accurate ones. Essentially, optimal prediction models can be built on mean-imputed data by modeling
the mean as a special value encoding for missingness. Ayme et al. (2023) also provide theoretical
support for the use of simple imputations, as they advocate for the use of zero imputation in high-
dimensional settings. They show that, for a linear regression problem and MCAR missingness,
learning on zero-imputed data instead of complete data incurs an imputation bias that goes to zero
when the dimension increases. This holds given certain assumptions on the covariance matrix, which
intuitively impose some redundancy among variables. Finally, Van Ness et al. (2023) prove that in
MCAR settings, the best linear predictor assigns zero weights to the missingness indicator, whereas
these weights are non-zero in MNAR settings. Their theoretical results imply that the missingness
indicator neither degrades nor enhances performances asymptotically in MCAR.


3    E XPERIMENTAL SETUP.

Imputation methods. We chose four imputation models to cover a wide range of imputation
qualities, in order to facilitate the estimation of effects and correlations between imputation and
prediction accuracies.
mean - each missing value is imputed with the mean of the observed values in a given variable. It
   provides a useful baseline for assessing the effectiveness of advanced techniques.
iterativeBR - each feature is imputed based on the other features in a round-robin fashion using a
   Bayesian ridge regressor. This method is related to mice (Van Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn,
   2011) as it also relies on a fully conditional specification (Van Buuren, 2018). It is implemented in
   scikit-learn’s IterativeImputer (Pedregosa et al., 2011).


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


missforest (Stekhoven & Bühlmann, 2012) - operates in a manner analogous to iterativeBR,
  wherein it imputes one feature using all others and iteratively enhances the imputation by se-
  quentially addressing each feature multiple times. The key distinction lies in its utilization
  of a random forest for imputation rather than a linear model. We used scikit-learn’s
  IterativeImputer with RandomForestRegressor as estimators. Default parameters
  for Missforest were set to n_estimators=30 and max_depth=15 for the random forests
  (the higher the better) to keep a reasonable computational budget. Note that in HyperImpute
  (Jarrett et al., 2022), random forests are more limited: 10 trees and a maximum depth of 4.
condexp - uses the conditional expectation formula of a multivariate normal distribution to impute
  the missing entries given the observed ones. The mean and covariance matrix of the multivariate
  normal distribution are estimated with (pairwise) available-case estimates (Little & Rubin, 2019,
  section 3.4), i.e., the (i, j)th entry of the covariance matrix is estimated solely from samples where
  both variables i and j are observed. This approach offers computational advantages over more
  resource-intensive approaches such as the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm. It is related
  to Buck’s method (Buck, 1960; Little & Rubin, 2019, section 4.2).
Mean imputation can be expected to give the worst imputation, with other methods offering varying
improvements. In particular, missforest often delivers top-tier performance on tabular data
(Waljee et al., 2013; Jarrett et al., 2022; Yoon et al., 2018; Mattei & Frellsen, 2019; Jäger et al., 2021).

Models: As the effect of imputation on prediction quality can be modulated by the predictive
model used, we included three predictive models. We took care to include both a deep learning
and a tree-based representative, as the prediction functions produced by these models have different
properties, for example regarding their smoothness. These representatives were chosen because they
were identified as state-of-the-art in their category according to recent benchmarks (Borisov et al.,
2022; Grinsztajn et al., 2022).
• MLP: a basic Multilayer Perceptron with ReLU activations, to serve as a simple baseline.
• SAINT (Somepalli et al., 2021): Self-Attention and Intersample Attention Transformer (SAINT)
  is a deep tabular model that performs both row and column attention. The numerical features are
  first embedded to a d-dimensional space before being fed to the transformer. We chose SAINT as it
  has been shown to be state-of-the-art among deep learning approaches for tabular data in several
  surveys (Borisov et al., 2022; Grinsztajn et al., 2022).
• XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016): We chose XGBoost as it is a popular state-of-the-art boosting
  method, and it has been shown to be the best tree-based model on regression tasks with numerical
  features only in Grinsztajn et al. (2022).
For XGBoost and the MLP, hyperparameters were tuned using Optuna (Akiba et al., 2019) with 50
trials, i.e, Optuna draws 50 sets of hyperparameters, trains a model for each of these hyperparameter
sets, and retains the best one according to the prediction performance on the validation set. For
SAINT, we used the default hyperparameters provided by its authors (Somepalli et al., 2021) for
computational reasons. Tables 2 to 4 in the Appendix provide the hyperparameter spaces searched,
default hyperparameters as well as optimization details.

Native handling of missing values: Both SAINT and XGBoost can directly be applied on incom-
plete data, without prior imputation of the missing values, each with its own strategy. XGBoost uses
the Missing Incorporated in Attribute (MIA) (Twala et al., 2008; Josse et al., 2019) approach. When
splitting, samples with missing values in the split feature can go left, right, or form their own leaf.
MIA retains the option that minimizes the prediction error. In SAINT, numerical features are embed-
ded in a d-dimensional space using simple MLPs. In case of missing value, a learnable d-dimensional
embedding is used to represent the NaN. Each feature has its own missingness embedding.

The datasets We use a benchmark created by Grinsztajn et al. (2022) for tabular learning. It
comprises 19 datasets (listed in table 1), each corresponding to a regression task with continuous and
ordinal features. Missing data is generated according to a MCAR mechanism with either 20% or 50%
missing rate. Specifically, each value has a 20% or 50% chance of being missing. Continuous features
are gaussianized using scikit-learn’s QuantileTransformer while ordinal features are standard
scaled to have a zero mean and unit variance. This is true for all imputation and model combination
except for XGBoost with native handling of missing values, as it is not expected to benefit from
a normalization. The outputs y are also standard scaled. In all cases, the parameters of these data


                                                     4
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 normalizations are learned on the train set with missing values. We also provide experiments on
 semi-synthetic data where the response y is simulated as a linear function of the original data X. The
 coefficients β of the linear function are all taken equal and scaled so that the variance of β ⊤ X is
 equal to 1. Noise is added with a signal-to-noise ratio of 10.


Evaluation strategy Each dataset is randomly split into 3 folds (train - 80%, validation - 10% and
test - 10%), and each split is furthermore capped at 50,000 samples (table 1). Train, validation and
test sets are imputed using the same imputation model trained on the train set. Prediction models
are then trained on the imputed train set. When the indicator is used, it is appended as extra features
to the imputed data, it is not leveraged for the imputation stage. We run all combinations of the
3 prediction models with the 4 imputation techniques, with and without the indicator, resulting in
4 × 3 × 2 = 24 models to which we add XGBoost and SAINT with native handling of missing
values. This results in a total of 26 models displayed in Figure 1. Finally, the whole process is
repeated with 10 different train/validation/test splits. For reproducibility, the code is available at
https://github.com/marineLM/Imputation_for_prediction_benchmark.


Computational resources. Properly benchmarking methodologies with missing values is particu-
larly resource-intensive, as already emphasized in previous works (Jäger et al., 2021; Perez-Lebel
et al., 2022). Computing costs are driven on the one hand by the need to run the imputation and
prediction pipeline across multiple train-test splits (which is important to account for benchmark
variance, Bouthillier et al., 2021), and on the other hand by the combinatorics of imputation and
prediction models, hyperparameter optimization for both, inclusion and exclusion of the missingness
indicator, and varying missing rates. Multiplying the number of models (26) with the number of
datasets (19 + 19 linear versions), the hyperparameter tuning (50 trials), the number of repetitions of
the experiments (10), and the 2 missing rates, we get a very large number of runs (around 1,000,000).
As some methods are computationally expensive –such as missforest for imputing, as well as SAINT
notably when the indicator is used–, these experiments required a total of 325 CPU days for the
MCAR experiments. A fifth of this time was dedicated to imputation.


                                          missing_rate = 20%                                      missing_rate = 50%

                          +.05
Relative prediction R 2


                            0


                          -.05

                                 MLP            SAINT                  XGBoost            MLP           SAINT               XGBoost
                                                               Imputation                                  Add missingness indicator
                                   mean       iterativeBR          condexp       missforest     None             False        True

 Figure 1: Relative prediction performances across datasets for different imputations, predictors,
 and use of the missingness indicator. Each boxplot represents 200 points (20 datasets with 10
 repetitions per dataset). The performances shown are R2 scores on the test set relative to the mean
 performance across all models for a given dataset and repetition. A value of 0.01 indicates that
 a given method outperforms the average performance on a given dataset by 0.01 on the R2 score.
 Corresponding critical difference plots in figs. 6 and 7.


                                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     R ESULTS : D ETERMINANTS OF PREDICTIONS PERFORMANCE WITH MCAR
      MISSINGNESS

4.1    B ENEFITS OF SOPHISTICATED IMPUTATION , THE INDICATOR , AND XGB OOST AMID HIGH
       VARIANCE .

Figure 1 summarizes the relative performance of the various predictors combined with the different
imputation schemes across the 19 datasets. Some trends emerge: more sophisticated imputers tend
to improve prediction, with missForest-based predictors often outperforming those using condexp
or iterativeBR imputers, which in turn outperform predictors based on mean imputation. However,
using the missingness indicator decreases this effect. Additionally, while less powerful models like
MLPs show greater improvements with more advanced imputations, this effect is barely noticeable
for the strongest predictor, XGBoost, which maintains its advantages on tabular data (as described in
Grinsztajn et al., 2022) even in the presence of missing values.
That the best predictor barely benefits from fancy imputers brings us back to our original question:
should efforts go into imputation? Drawing a conclusion from figure 1 would be premature: the
variance across datasets is typically greater than the difference in performance between methods
(critical difference diagram in figs. 6 and 7). For example, missforest + XGBoost + indicator
outperforms all other methods in only 4 out of 19 datasets. Additionally, XGBoost + indicator does
not perform significantly better with missforest than with condexp at 50% missingness, while mean
imputation does not always lead to the worst prediction. In what follows, we focus on quantifying the
effects of improved imputation accuracy on predictions in different scenarios.

4.2    A DETOUR THROUGH IMPUTATION ACCURACIES : HOW DO IMPUTERS COMPARE ?

Although comparing imputers is not our main objective, it is enlightening for our prediction purpose
to characterize their relative performance range. Figure 2 (left) gives imputation performances
measured as the R2 score between the imputed and ground truth values relative to the average across
imputations, for each dataset. At a 20% missing rate, missForest is the best imputer, followed by
condexp and iterativeBR, which are nearly tied, while mean imputation performs significantly worse.
At a 50% missing rate, the imputation accuracy of all but mean imputation drop, but condexp is
much less affected. It is interesting that such a simple method performs best. It is notably two
orders of magnitude faster than missforest (figure 2 right), which makes it an imputation technique
worth considering. It is possible that the gaussianization of the features helped condexp, although a
feature-wise gaussianization does not produce a jointly Gaussian dataset.
In order to highlight the link between imputation and prediction quality, it is necessary to achieve
varying imputation qualities. Here the high range of imputation accuracy between the best and worst

                                                missing rate = 20%
                                                                                                 Dataset
        mean                                                                                 medical_charges
                                                                                             diamonds
 iterativeBR                                                                                 sulfur
                                                                                             Bike_Sharing_Demand
    condexp                                                                                  abalone
                                                                                             Brazilian_houses
  missforest                                                                                 delays_zurich_transport
                                                                                             houses
               0.4       0.2       0.0        0.2      0.4    1ms    1s        1mn     1hr   nyc-taxi-green-dec-2016
                                                                                             wine_quality
                                                missing rate = 50%                           MiamiHousing2016
                                                                                             house_sales
        mean                                                                                 house_16H
                                                                                             elevators
 iterativeBR                                                                                 cpu_act
                                                                                             pol
    condexp                                                                                  Ailerons
                                                                                             yprop_4_1
  missforest                                                                                 superconduct
               0.4       0.2       0.0        0.2      0.4    1ms    1s        1mn     1hr
                     Relative imputation R 2 score                   Imputation time

Figure 2: Left: Imputer performance for recovery. Performances are given as R2 scores for each
dataset relative to the mean performance across imputation techniques. A negative value indicates
that a method perform worse than the average of other methods. Right: Imputation time.


                                                              6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                               Figure 3: Example fit of
                                                     MLP                      MLP + indicator                                  prediction     performance
                                   0.05 correlation: 0.64                correlation: -0.13
Relative prediction R 2
                                                                                                                               as a function of impu-
                                          slope: 0.23                    slope: -0.01                                          tation accuracy, for the
                                                                                                                Imputation
                                   0.00                                                                          mean          Bike_Sharing_Demand
                                                                                                                 iterativeBR   dataset and a missing rate
                                   0.05                                                                          condexp       of 50%: on the left using
                                                                                                                 missforest
                                                                                                                               an MLP as predictor, and
                                             0.2        0.0      0.2          0.2    0.0          0.2                          on the right an MLP with
                                                     Relative imputation recovery R 2                                          missingness indicator.



methods (an average difference of 0.5 R2 points at 20% and 0.3 R2 points at 50%) allows capturing
differences in prediction performance.

4.3                                L INKING IMPUTATION ACCURACY AND PREDICTION PERFORMANCES .

Combining the four imputation techniques with 10 repetitions of each experiment yields 40 (im-
putation R2 , prediction R2 ) pairs for each model and dataset. To quantify how improvements in
imputation accuracy translate into downstream prediction performance, we fit a linear regression
using these 40 points for each model and dataset1 . Figure 3 gives two examples of such fit: on
the Bike_Sharing_Demand dataset, for a missing rate of 50%, the prediction R2 increases as a
function of the imputation R2 ; the effect is greater for the MLP, for which the fit gives a slope of
0.23, than for the MLP with indicator for which the slope is -0.01.
Figure 4 summarizes the slopes estimated using the aforementioned methodology across all datasets,
predictors with and without the indicator, and varying missing rates. Firstly, the fact that most slopes
are positive indicates that better imputations correlate with better predictions, aligning with common
beliefs. However, this observation should be interpreted with nuance in light of the effect sizes.

Gains in prediction R2 are 10% or less of the gains in imputation R2 . Figure 4 shows that
the slopes are typically small, rarely exceeding 0.1. This implies that an improvement of 0.1 in
imputation R2 typically leads to an improvement in prediction R2 that is 10 times smaller, i.e. a gain
of 0.01 in prediction R2 , or even less. For XGBoost, the average slope across datasets in rather close
to 0.025 or less (even zero without the mask at 20% missing rate). Thus, an enhancement of 0.3 in
imputation R2 , which represents the average difference between the best of the worst imputer in this
scenario (mean vs condexp in fig. 2), implies a gain in prediction R2 of only 0.0075.

                      1
     The repetition identifier is also used as a covariate in the linear regression to account for the effects of the
various train/test splits on prediction performance.


                                                   missing_rate = 20%                         missing_rate = 50%
                                   0.25
                                                                                                                                 Missingness indicator    delays_zurich
prediction R 2 to imputation R 2
Regression coefficient linking


                                   0.20                                                                                              False                houses
                                                                                                                                     True                 nyc-taxi
                                   0.15                                                                                          Coef significantly > 0   wine_quality
                                                                                                                                     yes                  MiamiHousing
                                   0.10                                                                                              no                   house_sales
                                                                                                                                 Datasets                 house_16H
                                   0.05                                                                                              medical_charges      elevators
                                                                                                                                     diamonds             cpu_act
                                   0.00                                                                                              sulfur               pol
                                                                                                                                     Bike_Sharing         Ailerons
                                   0.05                                                                                              abalone              yprop_4_1
                                                                                                                                     Brazilian_houses     superconduct
                                   0.10
                                             MLP         SAINT      XGBoost            MLP              SAINT        XGBoost

Figure 4: Effect of the imputation recovery on the prediction performance. We report the slope of
the regression line where imputation quality is used to predict prediction performance. A coefficient
is marked as significantly greater than zero (circle) if the associated p-value (one-sided T-test) is
below 0.05 after Bonferroni correction for multiple testing.


                                                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                missing_rate = 20%                   missing_rate = 50%
                                    1.0


prediction R 2 and imputation R 2
                                                                                                                    Outcome                nyc-taxi
                                    0.8                                                                                 real               wine_quality
      Correlation between                                                                                               linear             MiamiHousing
                                    0.6                                                                             Datasets               house_sales
                                                                                                                        medical_charges    house_16H
                                    0.4                                                                                 diamonds           elevators
                                    0.2                                                                                 sulfur             cpu_act
                                                                                                                        Bike_Sharing       pol
                                    0.0                                                                                 abalone            Ailerons
                                                                                                                        Brazilian_houses   yprop_4_1
                                    0.2                                                                                 delays_zurich      superconduct
                                    0.4                                                                                 houses
                                          MLP         SAINT          XGBoost   MLP         SAINT          XGBoost

Figure 5: Correlation between imputation quality and prediction performance. A correlation
close to 1 indicates that the quality of imputations is stronly associated to the quality of predictions,
while a correlation close to zero means that the quality of predictions is not linked to the quality of
imputations. Each correlation is computed using 40 different imputation/performance pairs, made of
4 imputation methods (mean, iterativeBR, missforest, condexp) repeated 10 times.


Good imputations matter less for more expressive predictors. Comparison between models
shows a decrease in slope from MLP to SAINT, to XGBooost. A one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank
test assessing whether the median of each boxplot in Figure 4 is significantly greater than 0 reveals
that the positive effect of imputation on prediction is significant for the MLP, but not for SAINT
or XGBoost (case without missingness indicator). These results illustrate the idea that a powerful
model can compensate for the simplicity or inaccuracy of an imputation (in our case, the MLP can be
considered the least expressive model, and XGBoost the most expressive). Le Morvan et al. (2021)
gives a formal proof in an extreme case: given enough samples, a sufficiently expressive model can
always build a Bayes optimal predictor even on the simplest imputations (e.g. a constant).

Good imputations matter less when adding the indicator. Figure 4 shows that adding the
missingness indicator clearly decreases the effect size: imputing better has less impact on performance
when the indicator is used (we discuss this effect further in section 4.5).

Good imputations matter less when the response is non-linear. When the response y is a linear
function of the input X, the best predictor can be built using a linear model on the most accurate
simple imputation. However, when the responses are non-linear, it may be difficult to learn the best
possible predictor as it becomes a discontinuous function even with the most accurate imputation
(Le Morvan et al., 2021). There are thus reasons to believe that response non-linearity, which is
common in real data, alters the relationship between imputation accuracy and prediction performance.
To investigate this, we compare the real datasets with matching semi-simulated datasets where y is
simulated as a linear function of the input X. We also measure correlation2 (fig. 5) in addition to the
slope, to quantify the reliability of the association: correlation captures not only the effect size (slope)
but also the amount of noise (appendix C recalls this classic result) in the relationship. While the
effects are similar between real and linear outcomes (fig. 11 gives effects in the semi-simulated case),
the correlation between imputation accuracy and prediction performance, averaged across all datasets,
is systematically smaller for real outcomes than for linear ones (fig. 5). The average decrease in
correlation lies between 0.1 and 0.3 across models. Moreover, the variance in correlations for real
outcomes is much larger, with many datasets with a near-zero correlation. This shows that the gains
expected in prediction from better imputation are much more reliably achieved when the response is
linear.

4.4                                 L OWER EFFECT OF IMPUTATION ACCURACY ON PREDICTION PERFORMANCE WITH
                                    MNAR MISSINGNESS .

We argue that MCAR provides a best-case scenario to study the potential benefit of imputation on
prediction. It is indeed the easiest setting for imputation, as the missingness does not depend on the
data. In addition, expecting general conclusions to apply universally across all MAR and MNAR
                      2
                             Specifically we use the partial correlation, partialing out the effect of repeated train/test splits.


                                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


mechanisms is unrealistic, as these categories encompass families of missingness mechanisms with
infinitely many variations (see, for example, Pereira et al. (2024)). Instead, the effects will depend on
the specific MAR or MNAR model used. For instance, in self-censoring (a MNAR mechanism), the
probability of a feature being missing can follow a hard-thresholding function based on underlying
values, making imputation very hard, or an almost flat function, which is much closer to an easy
MCAR scenario.
To illustrate the difference between MCAR and MNAR scenarios, we re-ran all experiments with a
self-censoring mechanism, where the probability of missingness increases smoothly from 0 to 1 over
the support of the data, according to a probit function (details in Appendix L.1). This mechanism was
chosen to be neither too hard (e.g. hard thresholding), nor too easy (e.g almost MCAR). Figure 34
shows that the estimated effects are consistently lower than in the MCAR case. When the missingness
indicator is not used, improving imputation quality even has, on average, a negative effect on
prediction accuracy of XGBoost and SAINT. This is mainly because mean imputation performs well
compared to more advanced strategies, likely because the mean allows to retain the information that
a value was imputed. Overall, these experiments show that MCAR is a best-case scenario and that
imputation in other settings will bring less benefits.

4.5   W HY IS THE INDICATOR BENEFICIAL , EVEN WITH MCAR DATA ?

In general, we find that adding the missingness indicator improves prediction. While it is expected
that adding the indicator is beneficial in MNAR scenarios, as the missingness is informative, it is less
obvious in the MCAR settings studied here. Indeed, the indicator contains absolutely no relevant
information for predicting the outcome. To the best of our knowledge, the benefit of using an indicator
in MCAR has not yet been established.
A possible theoretical explanation for this finding lies in the challenge of learning optimal prediction
functions on imputed data. The best possible predictor in the presence of missingness can always
be expressed as the composition of an imputation and a prediction function (Le Morvan et al.,
2021). But, in general, the best prediction function on the imputed data can be challenging to learn,
even for perfect conditional imputation. In fact, it often displays discontinuities on imputed points.
We hypothesize that adding the missingness indicator simplifies modeling functions that exhibit
discontinuities at these points, as the indicator can act as a switch to encode these discontinuities.
To assess the role of the information encoded in the missingness indicator, we repeated the experiments
with a shuffled missingness indicator, where the columns of the indicator were randomly shuffled for
each sample. This preserves the total number of missing values per sample but removes information
about which specific features are missing. Figure 15a demonstrates that using a shuffled missingness
indicator harms prediction performance, except for XGBoost for which performances are unchanged.
In contrast, the true missingness indicator improves performances (fig. 1). Furthermore, the shuffled
indicator does not affect the relationship between imputation accuracy and prediction accuracy
(fig. 15b), whereas the true indicator reduces the effect size (fig. 4). These results confirm that the
benefit of the missingness indicator is not due to a regularization or merely encoding the number of
missing values. Experiments on feature importance further show that the importance of a feature
drops when imputed compared to when observed (Appendix H), suggesting that imputations do not
contribute to predictions as effectively as observed values.
The case of XGBoost in Figure 1 illustrates the importance of keeping the missingness information
encoded. For 50% missing rate, in the absence of an indicator, no imputation benefits prediction
with XGBoost, and the best option is to use the native handling of missing values. This suggests that
XGBoost benefits from knowing which values are missing. With advanced imputations, distinguishing
between imputed and observed values becomes challenging. Appending the indicator to the imputed
data reinstates the missingness information unambiguously, which enables XGBoost to benefit from
more advanced imputations, in particular missforest.

5     C ONCLUSION
Imputation matters for prediction, but only marginally. Prior theoretical work showed that in
extreme cases (asymptotics), imputation does not matter for predicting with missing values. We
quantified empirically the effect of imputation accuracy gains on prediction performance across


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


many datasets and scenarios. We show that in practice, imputation does play a role. But various
factors modulate the importance of better imputations for prediction: investing in better imputations
will be less beneficial when a flexible model is used, when a missing-value indicator is used, and if
the response is non-linear. These results are actually in line with the theoretical results suggesting
that imputation does not matter, as these hold for very flexible models (ie universally consistent).
A notable new insight is that adding a missing-value indicator as input is beneficial for prediction
performances even for MCAR settings, where missingness is uninformative.
We show that large gains in imputation accuracy translate into small gains in prediction performance.
These results were drawn from a favorable MCAR setting, and it is likely that with native missingness,
often Missing Non At Random (MNAR), the performance gains are even smaller. As novel imputation
methods usually provide small gains in imputation accuracy compared to the state-of-the-art, the
corresponding gains in downstream prediction tasks are likely to be even smaller.
There are multiple potential reasons why imputation gains do not always correlate with performance
gains. For instance, some features may be well recovered, but not useful in the prediction because they
are not predictive. Or even with accurate imputations, it may still be difficult to learn a predictor that
performs well for all missing data patterns (Le Morvan et al., 2021). Finally, the imputation accuracy
is also probably an imperfect measure of the potential gains in prediction: in our experiments on
50% missing rate, missforest and iterativeBR performs comparable on average yet missforest-based
predictors tend to outperform those based on iterativeBR.

Limitations and future work. It would be valuable to investigate whether imputations based on
random draws outperform deterministic imputations for downstream prediction tasks, and the useful-
ness of multiple imputations (Perez-Lebel et al., 2022). A related question is whether reconstructing
well the data distribution is important for better predictions. Shadbahr et al. (2023) shows that it
does not seem crucial for classification performances but may compromise more seriously model
interpretability. Finally, appending the indicator to the input improves predictions, but doubles the
feature count and may not be the most effective encoding for enhancing downstream performance.
Alternative approaches, such as missingness-aware feature encodings (Lenz et al., 2024), learned
missingness embeddings (Somepalli et al., 2021), or missingness-aware layers (Le Morvan et al.,
2020), have been proposed, but further investigation is needed in these directions.

Outlook Improving imputation is often a difficult way of improving prediction. On top of im-
putation, future research could focus more on developing advanced modeling techniques that can
inherently handle missing values and effectively incorporate missingness indicators to improve
predictive performance.

R EFERENCES
Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna:
  A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
  SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 2623–2631, 2019.
Alexis Ayme, Claire Boyer, Aymeric Dieuleveut, and Erwan Scornet. Naive imputation implicitly
  regularizes high-dimensional linear models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  1320–1340. PMLR, 2023.
Alexis Ayme, Claire Boyer, Aymeric Dieuleveut, and Erwan Scornet. Random features models: a
  way to study the success of naive imputation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03839, 2024.
Dimitris Bertsimas, Colin Pawlowski, and Ying Daisy Zhuo. From predictive methods to missing
  data imputation: an optimization approach. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(196):1–39,
  2018.
Dimitris Bertsimas, Arthur Delarue, and Jean Pauphilet. Simple imputation rules for prediction
  with missing data: Theoretical guarantees vs. empirical performance. Transactions on Machine
  Learning Research, 2024.
Lynn A Blewett, Julia A Rivera Drew, Miriam L King, Kari CW Williams, Natalie Del Ponte, and Pat
  Convey. Ipums health surveys: National health interview survey. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2019.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Vadim Borisov, Tobias Leemann, Kathrin Seßler, Johannes Haug, Martin Pawelczyk, and Gjergji
  Kasneci. Deep neural networks and tabular data: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
  and Learning Systems, 2022.

Xavier Bouthillier, Pierre Delaunay, Mirko Bronzi, Assya Trofimov, Brennan Nichyporuk, Justin
  Szeto, Nazanin Mohammadi Sepahvand, Edward Raff, Kanika Madan, Vikram Voleti, et al.
  Accounting for variance in machine learning benchmarks. Proceedings of Machine Learning and
  Systems, 3:747–769, 2021.

Samuel F Buck. A method of estimation of missing values in multivariate data suitable for use with
  an electronic computer. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 22(2):
  302–306, 1960.

Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the
  22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD
  ’16, pp. 785–794, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.

Léo Grinsztajn, Edouard Oyallon, and Gaël Varoquaux. Why do tree-based models still outperform
  deep learning on typical tabular data? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  507–520, 2022.

Sebastian Jäger, Arndt Allhorn, and Felix Bießmann. A benchmark for data imputation methods.
  Frontiers in big Data, 4:693674, 2021.

Daniel Jarrett, Bogdan C Cebere, Tennison Liu, Alicia Curth, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Hyperim-
  pute: Generalized iterative imputation with automatic model selection. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 9916–9937. PMLR, 2022.

Julie Josse, Nicolas Prost, Erwan Scornet, and Gaël Varoquaux. On the consistency of supervised
  learning with missing values. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.06931, 2019.

Marine Le Morvan, Julie Josse, Thomas Moreau, Erwan Scornet, and Gaël Varoquaux. Neumiss
 networks: differentiable programming for supervised learning with missing values. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:5980–5990, 2020.

Marine Le Morvan, Julie Josse, Erwan Scornet, and Gael Varoquaux. What’s a good imputation
 to predict with missing values? In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and
 J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp.
 11530–11540. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.

Oliver Urs Lenz, Daniel Peralta, and Chris Cornelis. Polar encoding: A simple baseline approach for
  classification with missing values. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, 2024.

JiaHang Li, ShuXia Guo, RuLin Ma, Jia He, XiangHui Zhang, DongSheng Rui, YuSong Ding, Yu Li,
   LeYao Jian, Jing Cheng, et al. Comparison of the effects of imputation methods for missing data
   in predictive modelling of cohort study datasets. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 24(1):41,
   2024.

Roderick JA Little and Donald B Rubin. Statistical analysis with missing data, volume 793. John
  Wiley & Sons, 2019.

Julián Luengo, Salvador García, and Francisco Herrera. On the choice of the best imputation methods
  for missing values considering three groups of classification methods. Knowledge and information
  systems, 32:77–108, 2012.

Pierre-Alexandre Mattei and Jes Frellsen. Miwae: Deep generative modelling and imputation of
  incomplete data sets. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4413–4423. PMLR,
  2019.

Boris Muzellec, Julie Josse, Claire Boyer, and Marco Cuturi. Missing data imputation using optimal
  transport. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7130–7140. PMLR, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


George Paterakis, Stefanos Fafalios, Paulos Charonyktakis, Vassilis Christophides, and Ioannis
  Tsamardinos. Do we really need imputation in automl predictive modeling? ACM Transactions on
  Knowledge Discovery from Data, 2024.
Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
  Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn:
  Machine learning in python. the Journal of machine Learning research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
Ricardo Cardoso Pereira, Pedro Henriques Abreu, Pedro Pereira Rodrigues, and Mário AT Figueiredo.
  Imputation of data missing not at random: Artificial generation and benchmark analysis. Expert
  Systems with Applications, 249:123654, 2024.
Alexandre Perez-Lebel, Gaël Varoquaux, Marine Le Morvan, Julie Josse, and Jean-Baptiste Poline.
  Benchmarking missing-values approaches for predictive models on health databases. GigaScience,
  11:giac013, 2022.
Jason Poulos and Rafael Valle. Missing data imputation for supervised learning. Applied Artificial
  Intelligence, 32(2):186–196, 2018.
Burim Ramosaj, Justus Tulowietzki, and Markus Pauly. On the relation between prediction and
  imputation accuracy under missing covariates. Entropy, 24(3):386, 2022.
Tolou Shadbahr, Michael Roberts, Jan Stanczuk, Julian Gilbey, Philip Teare, Sören Dittmer, Matthew
  Thorpe, Ramon Viñas Torné, Evis Sala, Pietro Lió, et al. The impact of imputation quality on
  machine learning classifiers for datasets with missing values. Communications Medicine, 3(1):139,
  2023.
Gowthami Somepalli, Micah Goldblum, Avi Schwarzschild, C Bayan Bruss, and Tom Goldstein.
  Saint: Improved neural networks for tabular data via row attention and contrastive pre-training.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01342, 2021.
Daniel J Stekhoven and Peter Bühlmann. Missforest—non-parametric missing value imputation for
  mixed-type data. Bioinformatics, 28(1):112–118, 2012.
Cathie Sudlow, John Gallacher, Naomi Allen, Valerie Beral, Paul Burton, John Danesh, Paul Downey,
  Paul Elliott, Jane Green, Martin Landray, et al. Uk biobank: an open access resource for identifying
  the causes of a wide range of complex diseases of middle and old age. PLoS medicine, 12(3):
  e1001779, 2015.
Bheki ETH Twala, MC Jones, and David J Hand. Good methods for coping with missing data in
  decision trees. Pattern Recognition Letters, 29(7):950–956, 2008.
Stef Van Buuren. Flexible imputation of missing data. CRC press, 2018.
Stef Van Buuren and Karin Groothuis-Oudshoorn. mice: Multivariate imputation by chained equations
  in r. Journal of statistical software, 45:1–67, 2011.
Mike Van Ness, Tomas M Bosschieter, Roberto Halpin-Gregorio, and Madeleine Udell. The missing
 indicator method: From low to high dimensions. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD
 Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 5004–5015, 2023.
Akbar K Waljee, Ashin Mukherjee, Amit G Singal, Yiwei Zhang, Jeffrey Warren, Ulysses Balis,
 Jorge Marrero, Ji Zhu, and Peter DR Higgins. Comparison of imputation methods for missing
  laboratory data in medicine. BMJ open, 3(8):e002847, 2013.
Katarzyna Woźnica and Przemysław Biecek. Does imputation matter? benchmark for predictive
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.02837, 2020.
Jinsung Yoon, James Jordon, and Mihaela Schaar. Gain: Missing data imputation using generative
   adversarial nets. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5689–5698. PMLR, 2018.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A List of datasets.                                                                              14

     B Hyperparameter search spaces                                                                   14

     C Link between correlation and effect size.                                                      16

     D Critical Difference diagrams.                                                                  16

     E Prediction performances for the semi-synthetic data.                                           19

     F Regression slopes for the semi-synthetic data.                                                 19

     G Effect of the missing rate.                                                                    20

     H Feature importance depending on the missingness status.                                        21

     I   Investigating the role of the missingness indicator.                                         22
         I.1 Prediction performance gains when using the missingness indicator versus imputa-
              tion accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
         I.2 Shuffling the missingness indicator. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     23

     J   Computation times per method.                                                                24

     K Scatterplots of prediction R2 vs imputation R2 for each model and dataset.                     26

     L MNAR scenario.                                                                                 38
       L.1 Description of the self-censoring mechanism. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         38
       L.2 Results under MNAR missingness. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            39


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    L IST OF DATASETS .
This benchmark was created by Grinsztajn et al. (2022), and is available on OpenML at
https://www.openml.org/search?type=benchmark&study_type=task&sort=
tasks_included&id=336.

                                   Table 1: Dataset dimensions.

                         dataset                      d    n_train     n_test
                         house_16H                   16        18185    2274
                         cpu_act                     21         6553     820
                         elevators                   16        13279    1661
                         wine_quality                11         5197     651
                         Brazilian_houses             8         8553    1070
                         house_sales                 15        17290    2162
                         sulfur                       6         8064    1009
                         Ailerons                    33        11000    1375
                         Bike_Sharing_Demand          6        13903    1739
                         diamonds                     6        43152    5394
                         fifa                         5        14450    1807
                         houses                       8        16512    2064
                         medical_charges              3        50000   50000
                         MiamiHousing2016            13        11145    1394
                         nyc-taxi-green-dec-2016      9        50000   50000
                         pol                         26        12000    1500
                         superconduct                79        17010    2127
                         yprop_4_1                   42         7108     889
                         abalone                      7         3341     419



B    H YPERPARAMETER SEARCH SPACES

Table 2: XGBoost hyperparameter space. We used the XGBRegressor from the xgboost
Python library. The hyperparameters optimized are commonly accepted as the most important ones.
The variation ranges are inspired by the ones used in Grinsztajn et al. (2022), while the default
hyperparameters are those of the xgboost library.

                   parameter                         range       log scale      default
                   n_estimators               [100, 2000]               no        100
                   max_depth                   −5 [1, 6]                no           6
                   learning_rate               10−8 , 0.72             yes         0.3
                   reg_alpha                  10 , 10                  yes       10−8
                   reg_lambda                        [1, 4]            yes           1
                   early_stopping_rounds                   -             -         20


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: MLP hyperparameter space. We implemented the MLP in PyTorch. The parameter d for
the width of the MLP represents the number of features. When d > 1024, the width is taken equal to
the number of features d.

                      parameter                         range                       default
         MLP          depth                             J0, 6K                     3
                      width              [d, min (10d, 1024)]                    3d
                      dropout rate                    [0, 0.5]                   0.2
         Optimizer    name                                   -              AdamW
                      weight decay                           -                 10−6
                      learning rate                          -                 10−3
         Scheduler    name                                   -   ReduceLROnPlateau
                      factor                                 -                   0.2
                      patience                               -                    10
                      threshold                              -                 10−4
         General      max nb. epochs                         -                 2000
                      early stopping                         -                  Yes
                      batch size                             -                  256


Table 4: SAINT default hyperparameters. We used the implementation provided by Somepalli et al.
(2021). d refers to the number of features of the dataset. We did not use a scheduler with SAINT. We
followed the default configuration provided by the paper introducing SAINT (Somepalli et al., 2021)
when there is both intersample and feature attention (i.e. attention_type = ’colrow’).

                       parameter                                                  default
          SAINT        dim                32 if d < 70, 16 if d ∈ [70, 200], 4 if d ≥ 200
                       depth                                                             1
                       heads                                                             4
                       attn_dropout                                                    0.8
                       ff_dropout                                                      0.8
                       attentiontype                                               colrow
          Optimizer    name                                                       AdamW
                       weight decay                                                  10−2
                       learning rate                                                 10−4
          General      max nb. epochs                                                 100
                       early stopping                                                  yes
                       batch size                                                     256


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    L INK BETWEEN CORRELATION AND EFFECT SIZE .
For completeness, we recall below the relationship between correlation and effect size.
Proposition C.1 (Link between correlation and effect size.). Let X1 ∈ R be a random variable, and
β ∈ R a parameter. Furthermore, define:
                       X2 = βX1 + ϵ where         E[ϵ|X1 ] = 0, var (ϵ) = σ 2 .
Then:
                                                            1
                                  cor (X1 , X2 ) = q             2
                                                                σ
                                                       1 + β 2 var(X1)



Proof. Let’s first derive the expression of the variance of X2 :
                                             h                 i
                                                             2
                               Var (X2 ) = E (X2 − E[X2 ])
                                             h                       i
                                                                   2
                                         = E (βX1 + ϵ − βE[X1 ])
                                             h                         i
                                                                 2
                                         = E (β (X1 − E[X1 ])) + ϵ2
                                        = β 2 var(X1 ) + σ 2

It follows that:
                                         E[(X2 − E[X2 ]) (X1 − E[X1 ])]
                         cor (X2 , X1 ) =      p
                                                  var(X1 ) var(X2 )
                                          h                   i
                                                            2
                                         E β (X1 − E[X1 ])
                                       = p
                                            var(X1 ) var(X2 )
                                          p
                                             var(X1 )
                                       = βp
                                             var(X2 )
                                              p
                                                 var(X1 )
                                       =β p
                                             β var(X1 ) + σ 2
                                              2

                                                1
                                       =q
                                                    σ2
                                           1 + β 2 var(X1)


In this work, we look at the effect of imputation accuracy (X1 ) on prediction performance (X2 ).
Hence, in a case where the imputation accuracy X1 covers a wider range of values, i.e., var(X1 )
is larger, but the effect β and the noise σ 2 stay the same, then the correlation between imputation
accuracy and prediction performance increases.

D    C RITICAL D IFFERENCE DIAGRAMS .
Figures 6 to 9 give the Critical Difference diagrams across all predictors and imputers of average
score ranks for a significance level of 0.05. The difference in ranks for all methods covered by the
same black crossbar are not statistically significant according to a Nemenyi test for multiple pairwise
comparisons. The colors encode the imputation type, the markers identify the model, and the line
types encode the presence or absence of an indicator.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Figure 6: Critical Difference diagram - 20% missingness rate.


                 Figure 7: Critical Difference diagram - 50% missingness rate.


Figure 8: Critical Difference diagram - 20% missingness rate, semi-synthetic data with linear
outcomes.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Critical Difference diagram - 50% missingness rate, semi-synthetic data with linear
outcomes.


                                               18
       Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        E                             P REDICTION PERFORMANCES FOR THE SEMI - SYNTHETIC DATA .

                                                             missing_rate = 20%                                                  missing_rate = 50%
                           0.04
Relative prediction R 2



                           0.02

                           0.00

                           0.02

                           0.04
                                                 MLP               SAINT                   XGBoost                 MLP                 SAINT               XGBoost
                                                                                   Imputation                                             Add missingness indicator
                                                   mean          iterativeBR             condexp          missforest           None             False            True

       Figure 10: Relative prediction performances for the semi-synthetic data with linear outcomes
       across datasets for different imputations, predictors, and use of the missingness indicator. Each
       boxplot represents 200 points (20 datasets with 10 repetitions per dataset). The performances shown
       are R2 scores on the test set relative to the mean performance across all models for a given dataset
       and repetition. A value of 0.01 indicates that a given method outperforms the average performance
       on a given dataset by 0.01 on the R2 score.


        F                            R EGRESSION SLOPES FOR THE SEMI - SYNTHETIC DATA .

                                                         missing_rate = 20%                                   missing_rate = 50%
                                          0.25
                                                                                                                                                Missingness indicator    delays_zurich
       prediction R 2 to imputation R 2
       Regression coefficient linking


                                          0.20                                                                                                      False                houses
                                                                                                                                                    True                 nyc-taxi
                                          0.15                                                                                                  Coef significantly > 0   wine_quality
                                                                                                                                                    yes                  MiamiHousing
                                          0.10                                                                                                      no                   house_sales
                                                                                                                                                Datasets                 house_16H
                                          0.05                                                                                                      medical_charges      elevators
                                                                                                                                                    diamonds             cpu_act
                                          0.00                                                                                                      sulfur               pol
                                                                                                                                                    Bike_Sharing         Ailerons
                                          0.05                                                                                                      abalone              yprop_4_1
                                                                                                                                                    Brazilian_houses     superconduct
                                          0.10
                                                   MLP         SAINT           XGBoost                  MLP            SAINT     XGBoost

       Figure 11:      Effect of the imputation recovery on the prediction performance
       for the semi-synthetic data with linear outcomes. We report the slope of the regression line
       where imputation quality is used to predict prediction performance.


                                                                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    E FFECT OF THE MISSING RATE .


Figure 12: Increasing missing rates lead to larger effects (slopes) but noisier associations (lower
correlation). The values reported are median across datasets, for each model. Data is MCAR.

Figure 12 shows that effects are larger for higher missing rates: this is particularly clear for linear
outcomes, but less for real outcomes. This suggests that imputation matters more at higher missing
rates, although for real outcomes and powerful models, these effects are still very small. By contrast,
correlations decrease when the missing rate increases, i.e, the association is noisier (less likely to be
significant).


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    F EATURE IMPORTANCE DEPENDING ON THE MISSINGNESS STATUS .

                                       1.2                                              Missingness indicator
                                                                                   False
                                                                                   True
                                             feature more important when imputed        Dataset
                                       1.0   feature less important when imputed   Ailerons
                                                                                   Bike_Sharing_Demand
                                                                                   Brazilian_houses
                                                                                   MiamiHousing2016
                                       0.8
            importance when observed

                                                                                   abalone
             importance when missing



                                                                                   cpu_act
                                                                                   delays_zurich_transport
                                       0.6                                         diamonds
                                                                                   elevators
                                                                                   house_16H
                                                                                   house_sales
                                       0.4                                         houses
                                                                                   medical_charges
                                                                                   nyc-taxi-green-dec-2016
                                                                                   pol
                                       0.2                                         sulfur
                                                                                   superconduct
                                                                                   wine_quality
                                                                                   yprop_4_1
                                       0.0
                                             condexp                 missforest
                                                        imputation

Figure 13: Ratio of importances (when missing over when observed) for the two most important
features of each dataset. Importances are calculated with feature permutation. The 2 most important
features per dataset are identified based on the whole test set. For each feature j, a permutation
importance is then calculated based on the subset of test samples where feature j is missing, and the
subset where it is observed. The ratio between these two values is then reported on the figure, where
a point refers to one feature, and its color identifies the dataset it belongs to. A ratio of 1 indicates
that the feature is as important whether it is imputed or observed (red line). A ratio of 0.1 means that
it is 10 times less important when it is imputed compared to when it is observed.

This experiment was conducted using XGBoost with condexp or missforest imputation, both with and
without the mask. Figure 13 indicates that on average, a feature is half as important when imputed
compared to when observed, with considerable variability (i.e., many features are 10 times less
important when imputed, and some features remain as important when imputed). When a mask is
used, importances drop significantly more with missforest imputation compared to when no mask is
used (Wilcoxon signed-rank test p-value < 0.01). However, this effect is not significant with condexp
imputation.


                                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I     I NVESTIGATING THE ROLE OF THE MISSINGNESS INDICATOR .
I.1   P REDICTION PERFORMANCE GAINS WHEN USING THE MISSINGNESS INDICATOR VERSUS
      IMPUTATION ACCURACY


                                                                  missing_rate = 20%         missing_rate = 50%
                                                                                                                    Datasets
                                                                                                                    house_16H
          to the gain in prediction R 2 due to the mask
                                                                                                                    cpu_act
          Regression coefficient linking imputation R 2

                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                    elevators
                                                                                                                    wine_quality
                                                                                                                    Brazilian_houses
                                                          0.1                                                       house_sales
                                                                                                                    sulfur
                                                                                                                    Ailerons
                                                                                                                    Bike_Sharing
                                                          0.0                                                       diamonds
                                                                                                                    houses
                                                                                                                    medical_charges
                                                          0.1                                                       MiamiHousing
                                                                                                                    nyc-taxi
                                                                                                                    pol
                                                                                                                    superconduct
                                                          0.2                                                       abalone
                                                                                                                    delays_zurich
                                                                                                                    yprop_4_1
                                                                  MLP    SAINT XGBoost      MLP    SAINT XGBoost
                                                                                       (a) Real outcome.
                                                                   missing_rate = 20%        missing_rate = 50%
                                                          0.025                                                     Datasets
                                                                                                                    house_16H
          to the gain in prediction R 2 due to the mask


                                                                                                                    cpu_act
          Regression coefficient linking imputation R 2


                                                          0.000                                                     elevators
                                                                                                                    wine_quality
                                                          0.025                                                     Brazilian_houses
                                                                                                                    house_sales
                                                                                                                    sulfur
                                                          0.050                                                     Ailerons
                                                                                                                    Bike_Sharing
                                                                                                                    diamonds
                                                          0.075                                                     houses
                                                                                                                    medical_charges
                                                                                                                    MiamiHousing
                                                          0.100                                                     nyc-taxi
                                                                                                                    pol
                                                          0.125                                                     superconduct
                                                                                                                    abalone
                                                                                                                    delays_zurich
                                                          0.150                                                     yprop_4_1
                                                                   MLP    SAINT XGBoost      MLP    SAINT XGBoost
                                                                             (b) Semi-synthetic linear outcome.

Figure 14: Effect of imputation accuracy on the improvement in prediction when using the
mask, compared to not using it.

Most effects are negative, indicating that using the missingness indicator brings the largest boost in
prediction performance when imputations have low accuracy. Moreover, effects are strongest for the
MLP and smallest for XGBoost, meaning that with more powerful models, prediction boosts due to
the missingness indicator are less pronounced.


                                                                                              22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I.2    S HUFFLING THE MISSINGNESS INDICATOR .


(a) Effect of appending a shuffled mask on prediction performances. Real outcome, 50% MCAR missingness.

                                                      missing_rate = 50%
                                         0.25
                                                                                Add shuffled missingness indicator   delays_zurich
      prediction R 2 to imputation R 2
      Regression coefficient linking


                                         0.20                                       False                            houses
                                                                                    True                             nyc-taxi
                                         0.15                                   Coef significantly > 0               wine_quality
                                                                                    yes                              MiamiHousing
                                         0.10                                       no                               house_sales
                                         0.05                                   Datasets                             house_16H
                                                                                    medical_charges                  elevators
                                         0.00                                       diamonds                         cpu_act
                                                                                    sulfur                           pol
                                         0.05                                       Bike_Sharing                     Ailerons
                                                                                    abalone                          yprop_4_1
                                         0.10                                       Brazilian_houses                 superconduct
                                                MLP         SAINT     XGBoost


(b) Comparing effect sizes of imputation accuracy on prediction accuracy, with a shuffled mask versus without
mask. Real outcome, 50% MCAR missingness.

                                                  Figure 15: Effects of appending a shuffled mask

We repeat experiments with a shuffled missingness indicator, where the columns of the indicator are
shuffled for each sample. This preserves the total number of missing values per sample but removes
information about which specific features are missing.
Figure 15a demonstrates that using a shuffled missingness indicator harms prediction performance,
except for XGBoost for which performances are unchanged. In contrast, the true missingness indicator
improves performances (fig. 1). Furthermore, the shuffled indicator does not affect the relationship
between imputation accuracy and prediction accuracy (fig. 15b), whereas the true indicator reduces
the effect size (fig. 4).
These results confirm that the benefit of the missingness indicator is not due to a regularization or
merely encoding the number of missing values. Prediction models effectively leverage information
about which features are missing, even though under MCAR, this information is unrelated to the
unobserved values.



                                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J           C OMPUTATION TIMES PER METHOD .

                          4
                              add_mask = False | missing_rate = 20%        add_mask = False | missing_rate = 50%
                     10


                          3
                     10
    time (seconds)


                          2
                     10


                                                                                                                   imputation
                                                                                                                     mean
                              add_mask = True | missing_rate = 20%         add_mask = True | missing_rate = 50%      iterativeBR
                          4
                     10                                                                                              condexp
                                                                                                                     missforest
                                                                                                                     None

                          3
                     10
    time (seconds)


                          2
                     10


                              MLP            SAINT          XGBoost        MLP            SAINT          XGBoost
                                             model                                        model

Figure 16: Running time for each model, including the 50 iterations of hyperparameter search for
XGBoost and MLP.


                                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            add_mask = False | missing_rate = 20%        add_mask = False | missing_rate = 50%



                        3
                   10
  time (seconds)


                        2
                   10

                                                                                                                 imputation
                                                                                                                   mean
                            add_mask = True | missing_rate = 20%         add_mask = True | missing_rate = 50%      iterativeBR
                                                                                                                   condexp
                                                                                                                   missforest
                                                                                                                   None
                        3
                   10
  time (seconds)


                        2
                   10



                            MLP            SAINT          XGBoost        MLP            SAINT          XGBoost
                                           model                                        model

Figure 17: Running time for each model for the semi-synthetic data with linear outcomes, includ-
ing the 50 iterations of hyperparameter search for XGBoost and MLP.


                                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K    S CATTERPLOTS OF PREDICTION R2 VS IMPUTATION R2 FOR EACH MODEL
     AND DATASET.


Figure 18: Prediction R2 vs imputation R2 for a MLP - missing rate 50%. The R2 scores are given
relative to the mean R2 score, with the effects of experiment repetitions eliminated (i.e. the effect of
the train/test splits on the performance)


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 19: Prediction R2 vs imputation R2 for a MLP + indicator - missing rate 50%. The
R2 scores are given relative to the mean R2 score, with the effects of experiment repetitions eliminated
(i.e. the effect of the train/test splits on the performance)


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 20: Prediction R2 vs imputation R2 for SAINT - missing rate 50%. The R2 scores are given
relative to the mean R2 score, with the effects of experiment repetitions eliminated (i.e. the effect of
the train/test splits on the performance)


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 21: Prediction R2 vs imputation R2 for SAINT + indicator - missing rate 50%. The
R2 scores are given relative to the mean R2 score, with the effects of experiment repetitions eliminated
(i.e. the effect of the train/test splits on the performance)


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 22: Prediction R2 vs imputation R2 for XGBoost - missing rate 50%. The R2 scores are
given relative to the mean R2 score, with the effects of experiment repetitions eliminated (i.e. the
effect of the train/test splits on the performance)


                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 23: Prediction R2 vs imputation R2 for XGBoost + indicator - missing rate 50%. The
R2 scores are given relative to the mean R2 score, with the effects of experiment repetitions eliminated
(i.e. the effect of the train/test splits on the performance)


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 24: Prediction R2 vs imputation R2 for a MLP - semi-synthetic data with linear outcomes,
missing rate 50%. The R2 scores are given relative to the mean R2 score, with the effects of experiment
repetitions eliminated (i.e. the effect of the train/test splits on the performance)


                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 25:          Prediction R2 vs imputation R2 for a MLP + indicator -
semi-synthetic data with linear outcomes, missing rate 50%. The R2 scores are given relative
to the mean R2 score, with the effects of experiment repetitions eliminated (i.e. the effect of the
train/test splits on the performance)


                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 26: Prediction R2 vs imputation R2 for SAINT - semi-synthetic data with linear outcomes,
missing rate 50%. The R2 scores are given relative to the mean R2 score, with the effects of experiment
repetitions eliminated (i.e. the effect of the train/test splits on the performance)


                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 27:           Prediction R2 vs imputation R2 for SAINT + indicator -
semi-synthetic data with linear outcomes, missing rate 50%. The R2 scores are given relative
to the mean R2 score, with the effects of experiment repetitions eliminated (i.e. the effect of the
train/test splits on the performance)


                                                35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure       28:          Prediction  R2     vs    imputation       R2     for      XGBoost        -
semi-synthetic data with linear outcomes, missing rate 50%. The R2 scores are given relative
to the mean R2 score, with the effects of experiment repetitions eliminated (i.e. the effect of the
train/test splits on the performance)


                                                36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 29:          Prediction R2 vs imputation R2 for XGBoost + indicator -
semi-synthetic data with linear outcomes, missing rate 50%. The R2 scores are given relative
to the mean R2 score, with the effects of experiment repetitions eliminated (i.e. the effect of the
train/test splits on the performance)


                                                37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L     MNAR SCENARIO .
L.1      D ESCRIPTION OF THE SELF - CENSORING MECHANISM .

The MNAR mechanism implemented is a probit self-masking, defined for any feature j as:
                                 P (Mj = 1|Xj ) = Φ(λj Xj − cj )
where Φ denotes the probit function and λj ∈ R, cj ∈ R its slope and bias.
Denoting by σj the standard deviation of feature j, we chose λj = 2σ1 j to have a missingness
probability that smoothly increases over the support of the data. The bias is then fixed to impose a
desired missing rate r based on proposition L.1.
Proposition L.1 (Achieving a targeted missing rate with probit self-censoring). Assume that the
random variable X ∈ R follows a Gaussian distribution and is affected by a probit self-masking
mechanism, i.e,
                   X ∼ N (X|µ, σ 2 ) and P (M = 1|X) = Φ(λX − c),
where λ ∈ R and c ∈ R control the slope and shift of the self-masking function. Given a fixed slope
λ0 , a missing rate r is achieved by choosing:
                                                     q
                                               −1        −2     2
                                 c0 = λ0 µ − Φ (r) λ0 + σ


Proof.
                                r = P (M = 1)                                                     (1)
                                    Z
                             ⇐⇒ r = P (M = 1|X)P (X)dX                                            (2)
                                    Z
                             ⇐⇒ r = Φ(λX − c)N (X|µ, σ 2 )dX                                      (3)
                                         µ − λc

                             ⇐⇒ r = Φ √                                                           (4)
                                         λ−2 + σ 2
                                                 p
                             ⇐⇒ c = λ µ − Φ−1 (r) λ−2 + σ 2                                       (5)

where eq. (4) is obtained according to equation 4.152 in Bishop.

Experiments show that the target missingness probability is achieved even though the features are not
Gaussian.


                                                 38
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 L.2                         R ESULTS UNDER MNAR MISSINGNESS .

                                           missing_rate = 20%                                       missing_rate = 50%

                          +.05
Relative prediction R 2


                            0


                          -.05

                                  MLP            SAINT                  XGBoost             MLP           SAINT               XGBoost
                                                                Imputation                                   Add missingness indicator
                                    mean       iterativeBR          condexp        missforest     None             False        True

 Figure 30: Relative prediction performances across datasets for different imputations, predictors,
 and use of the missingness indicator under MNAR missingness. Each boxplot represents 200
 points (20 datasets with 10 repetitions per dataset). The performances shown are R2 scores on the test
 set relative to the mean performance across all models for a given dataset and repetition. A value of
 0.01 indicates that a given method outperforms the average performance on a given dataset by 0.01
 on the R2 score. Corresponding critical difference plots in figs. 31 and 32.


                          Figure 31: Critical Difference diagram - 20% missingness rate under MNAR missingness.


                          Figure 32: Critical Difference diagram - 50% missingness rate under MNAR missingness.


                                                                              39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                       missing rate = 20%
                                                                                                                                                          Dataset
                 mean                                                                                                                                 medical_charges
                                                                                                                                                      diamonds
          iterativeBR                                                                                                                                 sulfur
                                                                                                                                                      Bike_Sharing_Demand
             condexp                                                                                                                                  abalone
                                                                                                                                                      Brazilian_houses
           missforest                                                                                                                                 delays_zurich_transport
                                                                                                                                                      houses
                                          1.00    0.75    0.50   0.25 0.00      0.25    0.50   0.75   1ms        1s          1mn         1hr          nyc-taxi-green-dec-2016
                                                                                                                                                      wine_quality
                                                                                       missing rate = 50%                                             MiamiHousing2016
                                                                                                                                                      house_sales
                 mean                                                                                                                                 house_16H
                                                                                                                                                      elevators
          iterativeBR                                                                                                                                 cpu_act
                                                                                                                                                      pol
             condexp                                                                                                                                  Ailerons
                                                                                                                                                      yprop_4_1
           missforest                                                                                                                                 superconduct
                                          1.00    0.75    0.50   0.25 0.00      0.25    0.50   0.75   1ms        1s          1mn         1hr
                                                       Relative imputation R 2 score                           Imputation time

Figure 33: Left: Imputer performance for recovery under MNAR missingness. Performances are
given as R2 scores for each dataset relative to the mean performance across imputation techniques.
A negative value indicates that a method perform worse than the average of other methods. Right:
Imputation time under MNAR missingness.


                                                           missing_rate = 20%                               missing_rate = 50%
                                   0.25

                                   0.20                                                                                                        Missingness indicator            nyc-taxi
                                                                                                                                                   False                        wine_quality
prediction R 2 to imputation R 2
Regression coefficient linking


                                   0.15                                                                                                            True                         MiamiHousing
                                                                                                                                               Datasets                         house_sales
                                   0.10                                                                                                            medical_charges              house_16H
                                                                                                                                                   diamonds                     elevators
                                                                                                                                                   sulfur                       cpu_act
                                   0.05                                                                                                            Bike_Sharing                 pol
                                                                                                                                                   abalone                      Ailerons
                                   0.00                                                                                                            Brazilian_houses             yprop_4_1
                                                                                                                                                   delays_zurich                superconduct
                                   0.05                                                                                                            houses

                                   0.10
                                                 MLP             SAINT           XGBoost              MLP        SAINT             XGBoost


Figure 34: Effect of the imputation recovery on the prediction performance under MNAR
missingness. We report the slope of the regression line where imputation quality is used to predict
prediction performance.


                                                                                                      40
