Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


N OT A LL L ANGUAGE M ODEL F EATURES A RE
O NE -D IMENSIONALLY L INEAR
 Joshua Engels                                 Eric J. Michaud                             Isaac Liao
 MIT                                           MIT & IAIFI                                 MIT
 jengels@mit.edu                               ericjm@mit.edu                              iliao@mit.edu

 Wes Gurnee                                              Max Tegmark
 MIT                                                     MIT & IAIFI
 wesg@mit.edu                                            tegmark@mit.edu



                                                 A BSTRACT

          Recent work has proposed that language models perform computation by manipu-
          lating one-dimensional representations of concepts (“features”) in activation space.
          In contrast, we explore whether some language model representations may be
          inherently multi-dimensional. We begin by developing a rigorous definition of
          irreducible multi-dimensional features based on whether they can be decomposed
          into either independent or non-co-occurring lower-dimensional features. Motivated
          by these definitions, we design a scalable method that uses sparse autoencoders
          to automatically find multi-dimensional features in GPT-2 and Mistral 7B. These
          auto-discovered features include strikingly interpretable examples, e.g. circular
          features representing days of the week and months of the year. We identify tasks
          where these exact circles are used to solve computational problems involving
          modular arithmetic in days of the week and months of the year. Next, we provide
          evidence that these circular features are indeed the fundamental unit of computation
          in these tasks with intervention experiments on Mistral 7B and Llama 3 8B, and
          we examine the continuity of the days of the week feature in Mistral 7B. Overall,
          our work argues that understanding multi-dimensional features is necessary to
          mechanistically decompose some model behaviors.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Language models trained for next-token prediction on large text corpora have demonstrated remark-
able capabilities, including coding, reasoning, and in-context learning (Bubeck et al., 2023; Achiam
et al., 2023; Anthropic, 2024; Team et al., 2023). However, the specific algorithms models learn
to achieve these capabilities remain largely a mystery to researchers; we do not understand how
language models write poetry. Mechanistic interpretability is a field that seeks to address this gap by
reverse-engineering trained models from the ground up into variables (features) and the programs
(circuits) that process these variables (Olah et al., 2020).
One mechanistic interpretability research direction has focused on understanding toy models in detail.
This work has found multi-dimensional representations of inputs such as lattices (Michaud et al.,
2024) and circles (Liu et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2023a), and has successfully reverse-engineered the
algorithms that models use to manipulate these representations. A separate direction has identified one-
dimensional representations of high level concepts and quantities in large language models (Gurnee
& Tegmark, 2023; Marks & Tegmark, 2023; Heinzerling & Inui, 2024; Bricken et al., 2023). These
findings have led to the linear representation hypothesis (LRH): a hypothesis which has historically
claimed both that 1. all representations in pretrained large language models lie along one-dimensional
lines, and 2. model states are a simple sparse sum of these representations (Park et al., 2023; Bricken
et al., 2023). In this work, we specifically call into question the first part of the LRH.1
    1
      An earlier version of this manuscript sparked discussion in the mechanistic interpretability community on
the distinction between non-linear features and multi-dimensional features, and in fact this discussion directly led


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Days of the Week                                Months of the Year                            Years of the 20th Century
              Monday                   Friday                  January                  October
              Tuesday                  Saturday                February                 November                             1900 1950 1999
              Wednesday                Sunday                  March                    December
              Thursday                 Other                   April                    Other
                                                               May
                                                               June
                                                               July
                                                               August
PCA axis 3


                                                  PCA axis 3
                                                               September


                                                                                                   PCA axis 4
                          PCA axis 2                                       PCA axis 2                                   PCA axis 3

Figure 1: Circular representations of days of the week, months of the year, and years of the 20th
century in layer 7 of GPT-2-small colored by the token they fire on. These representations were
discovered via clustering SAE dictionary elements, described in Section 4. Points are colored
according to the token which created the representation. See Fig. 14 for other axes and Fig. 15 for
similar plots for Mistral 7B.


For the most part, these two directions have been disconnected: Yedidia (2023a) and Gould et al.
(2023) find intriguing hints of circular language model representations, and Bricken et al. (2023)
speculate about the existence of feature manifolds, but these brief results only serve to further
emphasize the lack of a unifying and satisfying perspective on the nature of language model features.
In this work, we seek to bridge this gap by formalizing, investigating, and systematically searching
for multi-dimensional language model features.

1.1          C ONTRIBUTIONS
1. In Section 3, we generalize the one-dimensional definition of a language model feature to multi-
   dimensional features and provide an updated multi-dimensional superposition hypothesis to
   account for these new features.
2. In Section 4, we build on the definitions proposed in Section 3 to develop a theoretically grounded
   and empirically practical test that uses sparse autoencoders to find irreducible features. Using
   this test, we identify multi-dimensional representations automatically in GPT-2 and Mistral 7B,
   including circular representations for the day of the week and month of the year.
3. In Section 5, we show that Mistral 7B and Llama 3 8B use these circular representations when
   performing modular addition in days of the week and in months of the year. To the best of our
   knowledge, we are the first to find causal circular representations of concepts in a language model.
   We additionally find that the model’s circular representations respect a continuous notion of time.


2            R ELATED W ORK
Linear Representations: Early word embedding methods such as GloVe and Word2vec, although
only trained using co-occurrence data, contained directions in their vector spaces corresponding to
semantic concepts (Mikolov et al., 2013b; Pennington et al., 2014; Mikolov et al., 2013a). Recent
research has found similar evidence of one-dimensional linear representations in sequence models
trained only on next token prediction, including Othello board positions (Nanda et al., 2023b; Li
et al., 2022), the truth value of assertions (Marks & Tegmark, 2023), and numeric quantities such as
longitude, latitude, birth year, and death year (Gurnee & Tegmark, 2023; Heinzerling & Inui, 2024).
These results have inspired the linear representation hypothesis (Park et al., 2023; Elhage et al., 2022)
to a consensus around the two part LRH we describe above (see (Olah, 2024; Csordás et al., 2024; Mendel, 2024;
Kantamneni & Tegmark, 2025)). To clarify, we agree with these discussions, and believe the multi-dimensional
features we find are "linear" in the sense that they are contained in a low-dimensional linear subspace, but
"non-linear" in the sense that this low-dimensional subspace is not one-dimensional (and this is the sense we
mean in the title).


                                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


defined above. Jiang et al. (2024) provide theoretical evidence for this hypothesis, assuming a latent
(binary) variable-based model of language. Empirically, Bricken et al. (2023) and Cunningham
et al. (2023) successfully use sparse autoencoders to break down a model’s feature space into an
over-complete basis of linear features. These works assume that the number of linear features stored
in superposition exceeds the model dimensionality (Elhage et al., 2022).
Multi-Dimensional Representations: There has been comparatively little research on multi-
dimensional features in language models. Shai et al. (2024) predict and verify that a transformer
trained on a hidden Markov model uses a fractal structure to represent the probability of each next
token, a clear example of a necessary multi-dimensional feature, but the analysis is restricted to a toy
setting. Yedidia (2023a;b) finds that GPT-2 learned position vectors form a helix, which implies a
circle when “viewed” from below. Thus, we are not the first to find a circular feature in a language
model. However, our work finds circular features that represent latent concepts from text, while
the GPT-2 learned position vectors are specific to tokenization, separate from the rest of the model
parameters, and causally implicated only due to positional attention masking. Another suggestive
result, due to Hanna et al. (2024), is the presence of a U-shape in the representation of numbers
between 0 and 100; however, Hanna et al. (2024) find that this representation is not causal, and they
only show it exists within a specific prompt distribution. Recent work on dictionary learning (Bricken
et al., 2023) has speculated about multi-dimensional feature manifolds; our work is similar to this
direction and develops the idea of feature manifolds theoretically and empirically. Finally, in a
separate direction, Black et al. (2022) argue for interpreting neural networks through the polytopes
they split the input space into, and identifies regions of low polytope density as “valid” regions for a
potential linear representation.
Circuits: Circuits research seeks to identify and understand circuits, subsets of a model (usually
represented as a directed acyclic graph) that explain specific behaviors (Olah et al., 2020). The
base units that form a circuit can be layers, neurons (Olah et al., 2020), or sparse autoencoder
features (Marks et al., 2024). In the first circuits-style work, Olah et al. (2020) found line features
that were combined into curve detection features in the InceptionV1 image model. More recent work
has examined language models, for example the indirect object identification circuit in GPT-2 (Wang
et al., 2022). Given the difficulty of designing bespoke experiments, there has been increased research
in automated circuit discovery methods (Marks et al., 2024; Conmy et al., 2023; Syed et al., 2023).
Interpretability for Arithmetic Problems: Liu et al. (2022) study models trained on modular
arithmetic problems a + b = c (mod m) and find that models that generalize well have circular
representations for a and b. Further work by Nanda et al. (2023a) and Zhong et al. (2024) shows that
models use these circular representations to compute c via a “clock” algorithm and a separate “pizza”
algorithm. These papers are limited to the case of a small model trained only on modular arithmetic.
Another direction has studied how large language models perform basic arithmetic, including a
circuits level description of the greater-than operation in GPT-2 (Hanna et al., 2024) and addition in
GPT-J (Stolfo et al., 2023). These works find that to perform a computation, models copy pertinent
information to the token before the computed result and perform the computation in the subsequent
MLP layers. Finally, recent work by Gould et al. (2023) investigates language models’ ability to
increment numbers and finds linear features that fire on tokens equivalent modulo 10.


3     D EFINITIONS

This section focuses on hypotheses for how hidden states of language models can be decomposed
into sums of functions of the input (features). We focus on L layer transformer models M that take
in token input t = (t1 , . . . , tn ) from input token distribution T , have hidden states x1,l , . . . , xn,l
for layers l, and output logit vectors y1 , . . . , yn . Given a set of inputs T , we let Xi,l be the set of
all corresponding xi,l . We write matrices in capital bold, vectors and vector valued functions in
lowercase bold, and sets in capital non-bold.


3.1   M ULTI -D IMENSIONAL F EATURES

Definition 1 (Feature). We define a df -dimensional feature as a function f that maps a subset of the
input space into Rdf . We say that a feature is active on the aforementioned subset.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The input token distribution T induces a df -dimensional probability distribution over feature vectors
f (t). As an example, let n = 1 (so inputs are single tokens) and consider a feature f that maps integer
tokens to their integer values in R1 . Then f is a 1-dimensional feature that is active on integer tokens,
and f (t) is the marginal integer occurrence distribution from the token distribution.
How can we differentiate "true" multi-dimensional features from sums of lower dimensional features?
We make this distinction by examining the reducibility of a potential multi-dimensional feature.
That is, f is a "true" multi-dimensional feature if it cannot be written as the sum of two statistically
independent features and it cannot be written as the sum of two non-co-occurring features. Formally,
we have the following definition:
Definition 2. A feature f is reducible into features a and b if there exists an affine transformation
                                                            a
                                          f 7→ Rf + c ≡                                              (1)
                                                             b
for some orthonormal df × df matrix R and additive constant c, such that the transformed feature
probability distribution p(a, b) satisfies at least one of these conditions:
        1. p is separable, i.e., factorizable as a product of its marginal distributions:
           p(a, b) = p(a)p(b).
        2. p is a mixture, i.e., a sum of disjoint distributions, one of which is lower dimensional:
           p(a, b) = wp(a)δ(b) + (1 − w)p(a, b)
Here, p is a probability density function that is conditional on the subset of T that f is active on,
δ is the Dirac delta function, and 0 < w < 1. By two probability distributions being disjoint, we
mean that they have disjoint support (there is no set where both have positive probability measure, or
equivalently the two features a and b cannot be active at the same time). In Eq. (1), a is the first k
components of the vector Rf + c and b is the remaining df − k components. When p is separable
or a mixture, we also say that f is separable or a mixture. We term a feature irreducible if it is not
reducible, i.e., if no rotation and translation makes it separable or a mixture.
An example of a feature that is a mixture is a one hot encoding along a simplex; an example of a
feature that is separable is a normal distribution2 . In natural language, a mixture might be a one hot
encoding of “breed of dog”, while a separable distribution might be the “latitude” and “longitude” of
location tokens.
In practice, the mixture and separability definitions may not be precisely satisfied. Thus, we soften
our definitions to permit degrees of reducibility:
Definition 3 (Separability Index and ϵ-Mixture Index). Consider a feature f . The separability index
S(f ) measures the minimal mutual information between all possible a and b defined in Eq. (1):
                                             S(f ) ≡ min I(a; b)                                       (2)
where I denotes the mutual information. Smaller values of S(f ) mean that f is more separable.
The ϵ-mixture index Mϵ (f ) tests how often f can be projected near zero while it is active:
                                                             p
               Mϵ (f ) = max Pt∈T |v · f (t) + c| < ϵ E[(v · f (t) + c)2 ]                             (3)
                              v∈Rdf , c∈R

Larger values of Mϵ (f ) mean that f is more of a mixture.
In Appendix B, we expand on the intuition behind why the separability and ϵ-mixture indices as
defined here correspond to weakened versions of Definition 2.
We develop optimization procedures to empirically solve for the separability and ϵ-mixture indices
of two dimensional feature distributions. At a high level, the separability procedure iterates over
a sweep of rotations and estimates the mutual information between the axes for each angle, while
the ϵ-mixture index procedure performs gradient descent to find the ϵ band that contains the largest
possible fraction of the feature distribution. For more details on the implementation of the tests,
see Appendix B.2. In Section 4, we apply these empirical tests to real language model feature
distributions to find irreducible multi-dimensional features; we show the detailed test results on the
“days of the week” cluster in Fig. 2
   2
       since any multidimensional Gaussian can be rotated to have a diagonal covariance matrix


                                                       4
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 M (f) = 0.4750                                    S(f) = 0.9506
                                         600


                                                                    Mutual Info (bits)
                                                                                         1.0
                                         400


                                 Count
PCA 3

                                                                                         0.5
                                         200
                                           0                                             0.0
               PCA 2                               2     0      2                              0   2
                                                                                                               3   2
                                                                                                               2
                                                  Norm. v f + c                                        Angle
Figure 2: Empirical ϵ-mixture index and separability index for the “days of the week” cluster along
PCA components 2 and 3. Left: The ϵ band parameterized by v and c that the optimization procedure
found contained the highest fraction of points. Mid: Dot products of points in the feature distribution
with the ϵ band; Mϵ (f ) is the percent of dot products within ϵ = 0.1 of 0. Right: Estimated mutual
information for different rotations of the space; S(f ) is the minimum over all rotations. This point
cloud has a lower ϵ-mixture index and higher separability index than PCA projections within typical
clusters (see Fig. 3), indicating that it is more likely to be an irreducible multi-dimensional feature.


 3.2     S UPERPOSITION

 In this section, we propose an updated superposition hypothesis (Elhage et al., 2022) that takes into
 account multi-dimensional features. First, we restate the original superposition hypothesis:
 Definition 4 (δ-orthogonal matrices). Two matrices A1 ∈ Rd×d1 and A2 ∈ Rd×d2 are δ-orthogonal
 if |x1 · x2 | ≤ δ for all unit vectors x1 ∈ colspace(A1 ) and x2 ∈ colspace(A2 ).
 Hypothesis 1 (One-Dimensional Superposition Hypothesis, paraphrased from (Elhage et al., 2022)).
 Hidden states xi,l are the sum of many (≫Pd) sparse one-dimensional features fi and pairwise
 δ-orthogonal vectors vi such that xi,l (t) = i vi fi (t). We set fi (t) to zero when t is outside the
 domain of fi .
 In contrast, our new superposition hypothesis posits independence between irreducible multi-
 dimensional features instead of unknown levels of independence between one-dimensional features:
 Hypothesis 2 (Multi-Dimensional Superposition Hypothesis, changes underlined). Hidden states xi,l
 are the sum of many (≫ d) sparse low-dimensional irreducible features fi and pairwise δ-orthogonal
 matrices Vi ∈ Rd×dfi such that xi,l (t) = i Vi fi (t). We set fi (t) to zero when t is outside the
                                           P
 domain of fi .
 Note that since multi-dimensional features can be written as the sums of projections of lower-
 dimensional features, our new superposition hypothesis is a stricter version of Hypothesis 1. In the
 next section, we will explore empirical evidence for our hypothesis, while in Appendix A, we prove
 upper and lower bounds on the number of δ-almost orthogonal matrices Vi that can be packed into d
 dimensional space.

 4      S PARSE AUTOENCODERS F IND M ULTI -D IMENSIONAL F EATURES
 In this section, we describe a method to identify multi-dimensional features in language model hidden
 states using sparse autoencoders (SAEs). Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) deconstruct model hidden
 states into sparse vector sums from an over-complete basis (Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham et al.,
 2023). For hidden states Xi,l , a one-layer SAE of size m with sparsity penalty λ minimizes the
 following dictionary learning loss (Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023):

                                         X     h                                                   i
                                                                            2
     DL(Xi,l ) =       arg min                  ∥xi,l − D · ReLU(E · xi,l )∥2 + λ∥ReLU(E · xi,l )∥0 (4)
                   E∈Rm×d ,D∈Rd×m xi,l ∈Xi,l



                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In practice, the L0 loss on the last term is relaxed to Lp for 0 < p ≤ 1 to make the loss differentiable.
We call the m columns of D (vectors in Rd ) dictionary elements.
We now argue that SAEs can discover irreducible multi-dimensional features by clustering D. We
will consider a simple form of clustering: build a complete graph on D with edge weights equal to
the cosine similarity between dictionary elements, prune all edges below a threshold T , and then set
the clusters equal to the connected components of the graph. If we now consider the spaces spanned
by each cluster, they will be approximately T -orthogonal by construction, since their basis vectors
are all T -orthogonal. Now, consider some irreducible two-dimensional feature f ; we claim that if the
SAE is large enough and f is active enough such that the SAE can reconstruct f when f is active, one
of the clusters is likely to be exactly equal to f . If D includes just two dictionary elements spanning
f , then these elements both must have nonzero activations post-ReLU to reconstruct f (otherwise
f is a mixture). Because of the sparsity penalty in Eq. (4), this two-vector solution to reconstruct
f is disincentivized, so instead the dictionary is likely to learn many elements that span f . These
dictionary elements will then have a high cosine similarity, and so the edges between them will not
be pruned away during the clustering process; hence, they will be in a cluster.
Thus, we have a way to operationalize Hypothesis 2: clustering D finds T -orthogonal subspaces,
and if irreducible multi-dimensional features exist, they are likely to be equal to some of these
subspaces. This suggests a natural approach to using sparse autoencoders to search for irreducible
multi-dimensional features:
1. Cluster dictionary elements by their pairwise cosine similarity. We use both the simple similarity-
based pruning technique described above, as well as spectral clustering; see Appendix F for details,
including comments on scalability.
2. For each cluster, run the SAEs on all xi,l ∈ Xi,l and ablate all dictionary elements not in the
cluster. This will give the reconstruction of each xi,l restricted to the cluster found in step 1 (if no
cluster dictionary elements are non-zero for a given point, we ignore the point).
3. Examine the resulting reconstructed activation vectors for irreducible multi-dimensional features.
This step can be done manually by visually inspecting the PCA projections for known irreducible
multi-dimensional structures (e.g. circles, see Fig. 10) or automatically by passing the PCA projec-
tions to the tests for Definition 3.
Pseudocode for this method is in the appendix in Alg. 1.
                                                                                          1.0
This method succeeds on toy datasets of synthetic irre-                                              Other cluster
ducible multi-dimensional features; see Appendix D.3 We                                              Cluster shown in Figure 1
                                                                                          0.8
                                                                 S(f): more irreducible


apply this method to language models using GPT-2 (Rad-
ford et al., 2019) SAEs trained by Bloom (2024) for every                                                   days
                                                                                          0.6          months years
layer and Mistral 7B (Jiang et al., 2023) SAEs that we train
on layers 8, 16, and 24 (training details in Appendix E).
                                                                                          0.4
Strikingly, we reconstruct irreducible multi-dimensional
features that are interpretable circles: in GPT-2, days,                                  0.2
months, and years are arranged circularly in order (see
Fig. 1); in Mistral 7B, days and months are arranged circu-                               0.0
larly in order (see Fig. 15). These plots contain the PCA                                       1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0
dimensions that most clearly show circular structure; these                                      M (f): more irreducible
best dimensions are usually the second and third because
the first PCA dim is an “intensity” direction that manifests     Figure 3: Mixture index and separability
as the radius of the circle in Fig. 1 (thus the overall struc-   index of GPT-2 features. Features from
ture for these multi-d features is perhaps best thought of as    Fig. 1, which we had manually identi-
a cone). See Fig. 14 for all PCA dimensions visualized).         fied, score highly as candidate multidi-
                                                                 mensional features with these metrics.
For each cluster of GPT-2 SAE features, we take the re-
constructed activations and project them onto PCA components 1-2, 2-3, 3-4, and 4-5 (or fewer
if there are fewer features in the cluster) and measure the separability index and ϵ-mixture index
of each 2D point cloud as described in Appendix B.2. The mean scores across these planes are a
computationally tractable approximation of Definition 3. We plot these mean scores in Fig. 3, and find
that the features which we had manually identified in Fig. 1 are among the top scoring features along
   3
       Code: https://github.com/JoshEngels/MultiDimensionalFeatures


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Aggregate model accuracy on days
                                                                 Mon TueWed               Jan Feb Mar
of the week and months of the year modular                                               Dec
arithmetic tasks. Performance broken down                                                             Apr
by problem instance in Appendix I.                           Sun                       Nov            May
                                                                              Thu        Oct           Jun
                                                               Sat Fri                     Sep    Jul
      Model        Weekdays          Months                                                    Aug
    Llama 3 8B        29 / 49       143 / 144
    Mistral 7B        31 / 49       125 / 144         Figure 4: Top two PCA components on the α to-
      GPT-2           8 / 49         10 / 144         ken. Colors show α. Left: Layer 30 of Mistral on
                                                      Weekdays. Right: Layer 5 of Llama on Months.


both measures of irreducibility. Thus, our theoretical tests can indeed be used to find interpretable
irreducible features. We show the top 20 feature clusters, measured by the product of (1 − ϵ-mixture
index ) and separability index, in Appendix G. Out of all 1000 clusters, the Fig. 1 clusters rank 9, 28,
and 15 by this metric, respectively.4

5     C IRCULAR R EPRESENTATIONS IN L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
In this section, we examine tasks in which models use the multi-dimensional features we discovered
in Section 4, thereby providing evidence that these representations are indeed the fundamental unit of
computation for some problems. Inspired by prior work studying circular representations in modular
arithmetic (Liu et al., 2022), we define two prompts that represent “natural” modular arithmetic tasks:

         Weekdays task: “Let’s do some day of the week math. Two days from Monday is”
           Months task: “Let’s do some calendar math. Four months from January is”

For Weekdays, we range over the 7 days of the week and durations between 1 and 7 days to get
49 prompts. For Months, we range over the 12 months of the year and durations between 1 and
12 months to get 144 prompts. Mistral 7B and Llama 3 8B (AI@Meta, 2024) achieve reasonable
performance on the Weekdays task and excellent performance on the Months task (measured
by comparing the highest logit valid token against the ground truth answer), as summarized in
Table 1. Interestingly, although these problems are equivalent to modular arithmetic problems
α + β ≡ ? (mod m) for m = 7, 12, both models get trivial accuracy on plain modular addition
prompts, e.g. “5 + 3 (mod 7) ≡”. Finally, although GPT-2 has circular representations, it gets trivial
accuracy on Weekdays and Months.
To simplify discussion, let α be the day of the week or month of the year token (e.g. “Monday” or
“April”), β be the duration token (e.g. “four” or “eleven”), and γ be the target ground truth token the
model should predict, such that (abusing notation) we have α + β = γ. Let the prompts of the task
be parameterized by j, such that the jth prompt asks about αj , βj , and γj .
We confirm that Llama 3 8B and Mistral 7B have circular representations of α on this task by
examining the PCA projections of hidden states across prompts at various layers on the α token. We
plot two of these in Fig. 4 and show all layers in Fig. 18. These plots show circular representations as
the highest varying two components in the model’s representation of α at many layers.

5.1    I NTERVENING ON C IRCULAR DAY AND M ONTH R EPRESENTATIONS

We now experiment with intervening on these circular representations. We base our experiments
on the common interpretability technique of activation patching, which replaces activations from
a “dirty” run of the model with the corresponding activations from a “clean” run (Zhang & Nanda,
2023). Activation patching empirically tests whether a specific model component, position, and/or
representation has a causal influence on the model’s output. We employ a custom subspace patching
    4
      We also tried an alternative ranking scheme: we sorted the clusters by separability and irreducibility and set
the cluster score equal to the minimum sorted position between the two sorted lists. The Fig. 1 clusters rank
8, 105, and 12 by this metric.


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Step 1: Learn Circular Probe
                Find +
                                           Learn                   2
                                                                                                                         Mistral Weekdays                         Mistral Months
                Apply                                         1              3
   Training
   Points        PCA
                                          Circular
                                                         0                                                     2.5                                 5
                Matrix                    Probe                              4
                                                              6         5
                                                                                                               0.0                                 0


                                                                                          Average logit diff
                   Step 2: Intervene with
                                                                                                               2.5                                 5
   Initial
   point      Apply                        Apply
                                                                                                                         Llama Weekdays                           Llama Months
              PCA             0 1
                                          Circular
                                                              11
                                                                   22
                                                                             33                                 2                                  5
                            6    2
              Matrix                                     00
                           55    3         Probe                             44
                               4                              66        55
                                                                                                                0                                  0
   New          Apply
                                              Apply intervention
                                                                                                                2                                  5
             transpose
   point                                    Apply             1
                                                                   2
                                                                                                                     0        10          20               0           10       20
               of PCA
                Matrix      66
                               00 11
                                     22
                                           pinv(P)
                                                         0
                                                                             3

                                                                             44
                                                                                                                                               Layer
                           55
                                 44
                                    33                        6         5                                                   No-op         Patch circle         Average ablate
                                                                                                                            Patch layer   Patch PCA


Figure 5: Visual representation of the Figure 6: Mean and 96% error bars for intervening on the
circular intervention process. Top: We α token across layers using different intervention methods.
learn a circular probe on the PCA projec- The circular intervention technique outperforms patching
tion of a training set. Bot: To intervene, only the top 5 PCA components and leaving the rest un-
we change the circular representation to changed, and almost reaches the upper bound performance
αj′ and average ablate other dimensions. of patching the entire layer.


method to allow testing for whether a specific circular subspace of a hidden state is sufficient to
causally explain model output. Specifically, our patching technique relies on the following steps
(visualized in Fig. 5):
1. Find a subspace with a circle to intervene on: Using a PCA reduced activation subspace
to avoid overfitting, we train a “circular probe” to identify representations which exhibit strong
circular patterns. More formally, let xji,l be the hidden state at layer l token position i for prompt
j. Let Wi,l ∈ Rk×d be the matrix consisting of the top k principal component directions of
xji,l . In our experiments, we set k = 5. We learn a linear probe P ∈ R2,k from Wi,l · Xi,l to a
unit circle in α. In other words, if circle(α) = [cos(2πα/7), sin(2πα/7)] for Weekdays and
circle(α) = [cos(2πα/12), sin(2πα/12)] for Months, P is defined as follows:
                                      X                                       2
                         P = arg min         P′ · Wi,l · xji,l − circle(α)                          (5)
                                                     P′ ∈R2,k                                                                                          2
                                                                                  xji,l

2. Intervene on the subspace: Say our initial prompt had α = αj and we are intervening with
α = αj ′ . In this step, we replace the model’s projection on the subspace P · Wi,l , which will be
close to circle(αj ), with the “clean” point circle(αj ′ ). Note that we do not use the hidden
         ′
state xji,l from the “clean” run, only the “clean” label αj ′ . In practice, other subspaces of xji,l may be
used concurrently by the model in “backup” circuits (see e.g. Wang et al. (2022)) to compute the
answer, so if we just intervene on the circular subspace the remaining components of the activation
may interfere in downstream computations. Thus, to isolate the effect of our intervention, we set
the average ablate the portion of the activation not in the intervened subspace. Letting xi,l be the
average of xji,l across all prompts indexed by j and P+ be the pseudoinverse of P, we intervene via
the formula
                                                     ∗
                                             xji,l = xi,l + Wi,l T P+ (circle(αj ′ ) − xi,l )                                                                                        (6)

We run our patching on all 49 Weekday problems and 144 Month problems and use as “clean”
runs the 6 or 11 other possible values for β, resulting in a total of 49 ∗ 6 patching experiments for
Weekdays and 144 ∗ 11 patching experiments for Months. We also run baselines where we (1)
replace the entire subspace corresponding to the first 5 PCA dimensions with the corresponding
subspace from the clean run, (2) replace the entire layer with the corresponding layer from the clean
run, and (3) replace the entire layer with the average across the task. The metric we use is average
logit difference across all patching experiments between the original correct token (αj ) and the


                                                                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


target token (αj ′ ). See Fig. 6 for these interventions on all layers of Mistral 7B and Llama 3 8B on
Weekdays and Months.
The main takeaway from Fig. 6 is that circular subspaces
are causally implicated in computing γ, especially for                                                       Task Duration = 2 Days Task Duration = 3 Days
                                                                                                             2                         2
Weekdays. Across all models and tasks, early layer
interventions on the circular subspace have almost the                                                       1                         1
same intervention effect as patching the entire layer, and                                                   0                         0
are usually better than patching the top PCA dimensions                                                      1                         1
from the clean problem.                                                                                      2                         2
                                                                                                                 2       0      2          2       0            2
Patching experiments in Appendix J show α is copied to                                                       Task Duration = 4 Days Task Duration = 5 Days
the final token on layers 15 to 17, which is why interven-                                                   2                         2
tions drop off there. Additionally, while in this section we                                                 1                         1
train a probe on a dataset of prompts, in Section 5.2, we                                                    0                         0
show that intervening on the circle discovered via SAE                                                       1                         1
clustering in Section 4 also works.                                                                          2                         2
To investigate exactly how models use the circular sub-               2      0       2     2       0     2
space, we perform off distribution interventions. We mod-            Monday    Wednesday  Friday     Sunday
                                                                     Tuesday   Thursday   Saturday
ify Eq. (6) so that instead of intervening on the circumfer-
ence circle(α), we sweep over a grid of positions (r, θ) Figure 7: Off distribution interventions
within the circle:                                             on Mistral layer 5 on the Weekdays
     ∗
  xji,l = xi,l + Wi,l T P+ [r cos(θ), r sin(θ)]T − xi,l ) (7) task. The color corresponds to the high-
                                                               est logit γ after performing the circular
We intervene with r             ∈     [0, 0.1, . . . , 2], θ ∈ subspace intervention on that point.
[0, 2π/100, . . . , 198π/100] and record the highest
logit γ after the forward pass. Fig. 7 displays these results on Mistral layer 5 for β ∈ [2, 3, 45]. They
imply that Mistral treats the circle as a multi-dimensional representation with α encoded in the angle.

5.2   I NTERVENING WITH THE SAE P LANE

In the last section, we train probes manually on the PCA of the activations to fit a circle. A perhaps
more natural approach is intervening with the precise circle we found in Section 4. To determine if
this approach is feasible, we first project layer 8 Mistral 7B Weekdays activations into the weekdays
plane that was discovered by clustering (see Fig. 15; the plane is defined by PCA dimensions 2 and 3
of the cluster). In the rest of this section, we call this plane the SAE plane. In Fig. 19, we find that
indeed, the Weekdays representations projected into the SAE plane form a circle (see Fig. 19). We
thus can fit a circular probe to this 2D plane as in Eq. (5). Similarly, we call this probe the SAE probe.
Because we only have layer 8 clustering results
                                                     Average logit difference after intervention


                                                                                                                                 Intervene w/ Layer 8 Probe
for Mistral, we train an SAE probe only on layer
                                                                                                   0.0                           Intervene w/ SAE Probe
8. We then evaluate interventions using this                                                                                     Intervene w/ Per-Layer Probe
SAE probe on layer 8 of Mistral, but also at                                                       0.5
neighboring layers, since nearby layers should
                                                                                                   1.0
have similar representations (see e.g. Belrose
et al. (2023)). We compare to two baselines:                                                       1.5
1) training a normal circular probe on the PCA                                                     2.0
projections of each layer as described in Sec-
tion 5.1, and 2) training a circular probe only on                                                 2.5
layer 8 and then evaluating on adjacent layers                                                     3.0
(in the same way as for the layer 8 SAE probe).                                                          6           7         8               9          10
                                                                                                                             Layer
We show the results of these methods in Fig. 8.
                                                   Figure 8: Interventions on the Mistral 7B
We find that on all layers, using the SAE probe Weekdays task with different methods of deter-
only slightly decreases intervention performance mining the probe.
as compared to training a circular probe (from
-2.58 to -2.01 average logit difference on layer
8). Even more interestingly, the layer 8 SAE probe is much more robust to layer shifts than the layer
8 circular probe; for example, using the layer 8 circular probe on layer 6 results in an average logit
difference of 0.029, whereas using the layer 8 SAE probe results in an average logit difference of


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


-2.32. This is intriguing evidence that the SAE is perhaps finding more “true” (or at least more robust)
 features than our circular probing technique.


5.3    C ONTINUITY OF C IRCULAR R EPRESENTATIONS

In past sections, the representations of the interpretable
numeric quantities we have discovered have been mostly                          Fri
discontinuous; that is, the days of the week and months                             Morning Fri Sat
                                                                   Thu Evening Thu Evening Fri Morning Sat
of the year in Fig. 1 and Fig. 15 are clustered at the ver-             Morning Thu            Evening Sat
tices of a heptagon and dodecagon, and there is nothing
"between" adjacent weekdays or months along the cir-                Evening Wed
                                                                 Wed Morning Wed                     Morning Sun Sun
cle. In this section, we will examine the "continuity"                                              Evening Sun
of the circular features we have discovered. Although                    Evening Tue
continuity of the representation is not a requirement of              Tue Morning TueEvening Mon Mon
                                                                                         Morning
Definition 3, it would further decrease the ϵ-mixture index,                           Mon
and would also increase our subjective perception of the
circular feature as an intrinsic model feature representing
a continuous quantity (time). Thus, we create a synthetic Figure 9: Layer 30 Mistral 7B activa-
dataset containing the text "[very early/very late] on [Mon- tions for [morning/evening] on [Mon-
day/Tuesday/.../Sunday]" and simply plot the projections day/Tuesday/.../Sunday], plotted pro-
of the layer 30 activations into the top two PCA compo- jected into the PCA plane for [Mon-
nents of the activations of [Monday/Tuesday/.../Sunday]. day/Tuesday/.../Sunday].
The results, shown in Fig. 9, show that Mistral 7B indeed can map intermediate quantities to their
expected place in the circle: the very early and very late version of each weekday are more to-
wards the last and the next weekday along the circle, respectively. We show similar results for
"[morning/evening] on [Monday/Tuesday/.../Sunday]" in Appendix Fig. 22.


6     D ISCUSSION

Our work proposes a significant refinement to the simple one-dimensional linear representation hy-
pothesis. While previous work has convincingly shown the existence of one-dimensional features, we
find evidence for irreducible multi-dimensional representations, requiring us to generalize the notion
of a feature to higher dimensions. Fortunately, we find that existing unsupervised feature extraction
methodologies like sparse autoencoders can readily be applied to discover multi-dimensional repre-
sentations. However, we think our work raises interesting questions about whether individual SAE
features are appropriate “mediators” (Mueller et al., 2024) for understanding model computation, if
some features are in fact multi-dimensional. Although taking a multi-dimensional representation per-
spective may be more complicated, we believe that uncovering the true (perhaps multi-dimensional)
nature of model representations is necessary for discovering the underlying algorithms that use these
representations. Ultimately, our field aims to turn complex circuits in future more-capable models
into formally verifiable programs (Tegmark & Omohundro, 2023; Dalrymple et al., 2024), which
requires the ground truth “variables” of language models; we believe this work takes an important
step towards discovering these variables.

Limitations: It is unclear why we did not find more interpretable multi-dimensional features. We
are unsure if we are failing to interpret some of the high-scoring multi-dimensional features, if
most multi-dimensional features lie in dimensions higher than two, if our clustering technique is
not powerful enough to find some features, or if there are truly not that many. Additionally, our
definitions for irreducible features (Definition 2) are purely statistical and not intervention based,
and also had to be relaxed to hold in practice, resulting in measures that return a possibly subjective
“degree” of reducibility (Definition 3). Thus, although this work provides preliminary evidence for the
multi-dimensional superposition hypothesis (Hypothesis 2), it is still unclear if this theory provides
the best description for the representations models use. Future work might make progress on this
question by investigating new techniques for decomposing model representations, exploring higher
dimensional representations, or determining conclusively whether models use representations in ways
that necessitate the representations are non-linear.


                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank (in alphabetical order) Dowon Baek, Kaivu Hariharan, Vedang Lad, Ziming Liu, and Tony
Wang for helpful discussions and suggestions. This work is supported by Erik Otto, Jaan Tallinn, the
Rothberg Family Fund for Cognitive Science, the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship (Grant No.
2141064), and IAIFI through NSF grant PHY-2019786.


R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
  Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

AI@Meta. Llama 3 model card, 2024. URL https://github.com/meta-llama/llama3/
  blob/main/MODEL_CARD.md.

Noga Alon. Problems and results in extremal combinatorics—i. Discrete Mathematics, 273(1-3):
  31–53, 2003.

Anthropic. The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku. Technical report, Anthropic, 2024.

Nora Belrose, Zach Furman, Logan Smith, Danny Halawi, Igor Ostrovsky, Lev McKinney, Stella
  Biderman, and Jacob Steinhardt. Eliciting latent predictions from transformers with the tuned lens.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08112, 2023.

Sid Black, Lee Sharkey, Leo Grinsztajn, Eric Winsor, Dan Braun, Jacob Merizian, Kip Parker,
  Carlos Ramón Guevara, Beren Millidge, Gabriel Alfour, et al. Interpreting neural networks through
  the polytope lens. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12312, 2022.

Joseph Bloom.    Open source sparse autoencoders for all residual stream layers of
  gpt2 small. https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/f9EgfLSurAiqRJySD/
  open-source-sparse-autoencoders-for-all-residual-stream, 2024.

Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Conerly, Nick
  Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan Wu, Shauna Kravec,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Alex Tamkin, Karina
  Nguyen, Brayden McLean, Josiah E Burke, Tristan Hume, Shan Carter, Tom Henighan, and
  Christopher Olah. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with dictionary
  learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2023/monosemantic-
  features/index.html.

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.

Arthur Conmy, Augustine Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià Garriga-
  Alonso. Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36:16318–16352, 2023.

Róbert Csordás, Christopher Potts, Christopher D Manning, and Atticus Geiger. Recurrent neural
  networks learn to store and generate sequences using non-linear representations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.10920, 2024.

Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse autoen-
  coders find highly interpretable features in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08600,
  2023.

David Dalrymple, Joar Skalse, Yoshua Bengio, Stuart Russell, Max Tegmark, Sanjit Seshia, Steve
  Omohundro, Christian Szegedy, Ben Goldhaber, Nora Ammann, et al. Towards guaranteed safe ai:
  A framework for ensuring robust and reliable ai systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06624, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCandlish,
  Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. Toy models of super-
  position. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022. https://transformer-circuits.pub/
  2022/toy_model/index.html.

Simon Foucart and Holger Rauhut. A Mathematical Introduction to Compressive Sensing. 2013.

Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang,
  Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for
  language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.

Semyon Aranovich Gershgorin. über die abgrenzung der eigenwerte einer matrix. Izvestiya Rossiı̆skoi
  akademii nauk. Seriya matematicheskaya, (6):749–754, 1931.

Rhys Gould, Euan Ong, George Ogden, and Arthur Conmy. Successor heads: Recurring, interpretable
  attention heads in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09230, 2023.

Wes Gurnee and Max Tegmark. Language models represent space and time. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2310.02207, 2023.

Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. How does gpt-2 compute greater-than?: Inter-
 preting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Benjamin Heinzerling and Kentaro Inui. Monotonic representation of numeric properties in language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10381, 2024.

Nicholas J. Higham. Singular value inequalities. https://nhigham.com/2021/05/04/
  singular-value-inequalities/, May 2021.

Bill Johnson (https://mathoverflow.net/users/2554/bill johnson). Almost orthogo-
  nal vectors.      MathOverflow.        URL https://mathoverflow.net/q/24873.
  URL:https://mathoverflow.net/q/24873 (version: 2010-05-16).

Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.

Yibo Jiang, Goutham Rajendran, Pradeep Ravikumar, Bryon Aragam, and Victor Veitch. On the
  origins of linear representations in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03867, 2024.

William B. Johnson and Joram Lindenstrauss. Extensions of lipschitz mappings into a hilbert space.
 In Conference in modern analysis and probability (New Haven, Conn., 1982), volume 26 of
 Contemporary Mathematics, pp. 189–206. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1984.
 ISBN 0-8218-5030-X. doi: 10.1090/conm/026/737400.

Subhash Kantamneni and Max Tegmark. Language models use trigonometry to do addition. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2502.00873, 2025.

Silvio Lattanzi, Thomas Lavastida, Kefu Lu, and Benjamin Moseley. A framework for parallelizing
   hierarchical clustering methods. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases:
  European Conference, ECML PKDD 2019, Würzburg, Germany, September 16–20, 2019, Pro-
   ceedings, Part I, pp. 73–89. Springer, 2020.

Kenneth Li, Aspen K Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Watten-
  berg. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic task.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13382, 2022.

Ziming Liu, Ouail Kitouni, Niklas S Nolte, Eric Michaud, Max Tegmark, and Mike Williams.
  Towards understanding grokking: An effective theory of representation learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:34651–34663, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Samuel Marks and Max Tegmark. The geometry of truth: Emergent linear structure in large language
  model representations of true/false datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06824, 2023.

Samuel Marks, Can Rager, Eric J Michaud, Yonatan Belinkov, David Bau, and Aaron Mueller. Sparse
  feature circuits: Discovering and editing interpretable causal graphs in language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2403.19647, 2024.

Jake Mendel. Sae feature geometry is outside the superposition hypothesis. AI Alignment Forum,
  2024. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/MFBTjb2qf3ziWmzz6/
  sae-feature-geometry-is-outside-the-superposition-hypothesis.

Eric J Michaud, Isaac Liao, Vedang Lad, Ziming Liu, Anish Mudide, Chloe Loughridge, Zifan Carl
  Guo, Tara Rezaei Kheirkhah, Mateja Vukelić, and Max Tegmark. Opening the ai black box:
  program synthesis via mechanistic interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05110, 2024.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. Distributed representations
  of words and phrases and their compositionality. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 26, 2013a.

Tomáš Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig. Linguistic regularities in continuous space
  word representations. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference of the north american chapter of the
  association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies, pp. 746–751, 2013b.

Depen Morwani, Benjamin L Edelman, Costin-Andrei Oncescu, Rosie Zhao, and Sham Kakade.
  Feature emergence via margin maximization: case studies in algebraic tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.07568, 2023.

Aaron Mueller, Jannik Brinkmann, Millicent Li, Samuel Marks, Koyena Pal, Nikhil Prakash, Can
  Rager, Aruna Sankaranarayanan, Arnab Sen Sharma, Jiuding Sun, et al. The quest for the right
  mediator: A history, survey, and theoretical grounding of causal interpretability. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.01416, 2024.

Neel Nanda and Joseph Bloom.    Transformerlens.                        https://github.com/
  TransformerLensOrg/TransformerLens, 2022.

Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures
  for grokking via mechanistic interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.05217, 2023a.

Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent linear representations in world models
  of self-supervised sequence models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00941, 2023b.

Chris Olah. What is a linear representation? what is a multidimensional feature? Transformer Circuits
  Thread, 2024. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/july-update/
  index.html#linear-representations.

Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.001.
  https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in.

Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. The linear representation hypothesis and the geometry
  of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03658, 2023.

Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Instruction tuning with
  gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03277, 2023.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word
  representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language
  processing (EMNLP), pp. 1532–1543, 2014.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 2019.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Adam Shai, Paul Riechers, Lucas Teixeira, Alexander Oldenziel, and Sarah
  Marzen.   Transformers represent belief state geometry in their residual stream.
  https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/gTZ2SxesbHckJ3CkF/
  transformers-represent-belief-state-geometry-in-their, 2024.
Alessandro Stolfo, Yonatan Belinkov, and Mrinmaya Sachan. A mechanistic interpretation of
  arithmetic reasoning in language models using causal mediation analysis. In Proceedings of the
  2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7035–7052, 2023.
Aaquib Syed, Can Rager, and Arthur Conmy. Attribution patching outperforms automated circuit
  discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10348, 2023.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu
  Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable
  multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Max Tegmark and Steve Omohundro. Provably safe systems: the only path to controllable agi. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2309.01933, 2023.
Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.00593, 2022.
Adam Yedidia.     Gpt-2’s positional embedding matrix is a helix, 2023a.
  URL            https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/qvWP3aBDBaqXvPNhS/
  gpt-2-s-positional-embedding-matrix-is-a-helix.       Accessed: 2024-09-
 16.
Adam Yedidia. The positional embedding matrix and previous-token heads: how do they actually
 work?, 2023b. URL https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/zRA8B2FJLtTYRgie6/
  the-positional-embedding-matrix-and-previous-token-heads-how. Ac-
  cessed: 2024-09-17.
Fred Zhang and Neel Nanda. Towards best practices of activation patching in language models:
  Metrics and methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16042, 2023.
Ziqian Zhong, Ziming Liu, Max Tegmark, and Jacob Andreas. The clock and the pizza: Two stories in
  mechanistic explanation of neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36, 2024.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    M ULTI -D IMENSIONAL F EATURE C APACITY
The Johnson-Lindenstrauss (JL) Lemma (Johnson & Lindenstrauss, 1984) implies that we can choose
     2
eCdδ pairwise one-dimensional δ-orthogonal vectors to satisfy Hypothesis 1 for some constant C,
thus allowing us to build the model’s feature space with a number of one-dimensional δ-orthogonal
features exponential in d. We now prove a similar result for low-dimensional projections (the main
idea of the proof is to combine δ-orthogonal vectors as guaranteed from the JL lemma):
                                                                           ′2   2
Theorem 1. For any d′ and δ, it is possible to choose dmax
                                                        1
                                                            eC1 (d/d )δ pairwise δ-orthogonal
                          ′
matrices Ai ∈ Rni ×d for some constant C1 . Furthermore, it is not possible to choose more than
                   1
eC2 (d−dmax δ log( δ )) for some constant C2 .

We will first prove a lemma that will help us prove Theorem 1.
Lemma 1. Pick n pairwise δ-orthogonal unit vectors in v1 , . . . , vn ∈ Rd . Let y ∈ Rd be a unit norm
                                                                                     Pn z1 . . . , zn ∈ R.
vector that is a linear combination of unit norm vectors v1 , . . . , vn with coefficients
We can write A = [v1 , . . . , vn ] and z = [z1 , . . . , zn ]T , so that we have y = k=1 zk vk = AzT
with ∥y∥2 = 1. Then,
                                       n                      r
                                      X                              n
                                          zk = ∥z∥1 ≤
                                                                  1 − δn
                                       k=1


Proof. We will first bound the L2 norm of z. If σn is the minimum singular value of A, then we
have via standard singular value inequalities (Higham, 2021)
                                       ∥y∥2           ∥y∥2    1
                                σn ≤        =⇒ ∥z∥2 ≤      =
                                       ∥z∥2            σn    σn

Thus we now lower bound σn . The singular values are the square roots of the eigenvalues of the
matrix AT A, so we now examine AT A. Since all elements of A are unit vectors, the diagonal
of AT A is all ones. The off diagonal elements are dot products of pairs of δ-orthogonal vectors,
and so are within the range [−δ, δ]. Then by the Gershgorin circle theorem (Gershgorin, 1931), all
eigenvalues λi of AT A are in the range
                                  (1 − δ(n − 1), 1 + δ(n − 1))
                                                         p
In particular, σn2 = λn ≥ 1 − δ(n − 1), pand thus σn ≥ 1 − δ(n − 1). Plugging into our upper
bound for ∥z∥2 , we have that ∥z∥2 ≤ 1/ 1 − δ(n − 1). Finally, the largest L1 for a point√ on an
n-hypersphere of radius r is when all dimensions are equal and such a point has magnitude nr, so
                                       r                  r
                                               n                n
                              ∥z∥1 ≤                   ≤
                                         1 − δ(n − 1)        1 − δn

                                                                           ′2   2
Theorem 1. For any d′ and δ, it is possible to choose dmax
                                                        1
                                                            eC1 (d/d )δ pairwise δ-orthogonal
                          ′
matrices Ai ∈ Rni ×d for some constant C1 . Furthermore, it is not possible to choose more than
                   1
eC2 (d−dmax δ log( δ )) for some constant C2 .

Proof. By the JL lemma (Johnson & Lindenstrauss, 1984; , https://mathoverflow.net/users/2554/bill
                                                 2
johnson), for any d and δ, we can choose eCdδ δ-orthogonal unit vectors in Rd indexed as vi , for
some constant C. Let Ai = [vdmax ∗i , . . . , vdmax ∗i+ni −1 ] where each element in the brackets is a
column. Then by construction all Ai are matrices composed of unique δ-orthogonal vectors and
                   2
           1
there are dmax eCdδ matrices Ai .
Now, consider two of these matrices Ai = [v1 , . . . , vni ] and Aj = [u1 , . . . , unj ], i ̸= j; we will
                                                                     Pni
prove that they are f (δ)-orthogonal
                           Pnj       for some function f . Let yi = k=1      zi,k vk be a vector in the
colspace of Ai and yj = k=1 zj,k uk be a vector in the colspace of Aj , such that yi and yj are
unit vectors. To prove f (δ)-orthogonality, we must bound the absolute dot product between yi and
yj :


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  nj
                          ni
                                          !                        !
                          X                       X
        |yi · yj | =            zi,k vk       ·          zj,k uk
                         k=1                      k=1
                        ni X nj
                        X
                  =                    (zi,k1 vk1 ) · (zj,k2 uk2 )
                        k1 =1 k2 =1
                        ni    nj
                       X X
                  ≤                   |zi,k1 zj,k2 | |vk1 · uk2 |                               Triangle Inequality
                       k1 =1 k2 =1
                        ni    nj
                       X X
                  ≤                   |zi,k1 zj,k2 | δ                                  All vi , uj are δ orthogonal
                       k1 =1 k2 =1
                           ni    nj
                         X X
                  =δ                    |zi,k1 zj,k2 |
                        k1 =1 k2 =1
                          ni             nj
                          X              X
                  =δ            zi,k           zj,k                                          Factoring the product
                          k=1            k=1
                        r
                          ni                  nj
                                        r
                  ≤δ                                                                                  By Lemma 1
                       1 − δni              1 − δnj
                      δdmax
                  ≤                                                                ni , nj ≤ dmax by assumption
                    1 − δdmax

Thus Ai and Aj are f (δ)-orthogonal for f (δ) = δdmax /(1 − δdmax ), and so it is possible to
                2
        1
choose dmax eCdδ pairwise f (δ)-orthogonal projection matrices. Remapping the variable δ with
                                                                                                              2        2 2
δ 7→ f −1 (δ) = δ/(dmax (1 + δ)), we find that it is possible to choose dmax      1
                                                                                     eCdδ /((1+δ) dmax )
pairwise δ-orthogonal projection matrices. Because 1 + δ is at most 2 with δ ∈ (0, 1), we can further
                                                                        2     2
                                                              1
simplify the exponent and find that it is possible to choose dmax eC(d/dmax )δ /4 pairwise δ-orthogonal
projection matrices. Absorbing the 4 into the constant C finishes the proof of the lower bound.

For the upper bound, we can proceed much more simply. Consider k pairwise δ-orthogonal matrices
         ′
Ai ∈ Rd . Since these matrices are full rank, their column spaces each parameterize a subspace
                                                                                     ′ 2   1
of dimension d′ , and so by a result from (Alon, 2003) it is possible to choose eCd δ log( δ ) almost
orthogonal vectors in this subspace. Furthermore, by our definition of δ-orthogonal matrices, all pairs
of these vectors between subspaces will be δ-orthogonal. Finally, again by (Alon, 2003) we cannot
                     2     1
have more than eCdδ log( δ ) δ-orthogonal vectors overall, so we have that
                                                         2     1           2        1
                                           keCdmax δ log( δ ) < eCdδ log( δ )
and simplfying,
                                                                       2       1
                                                  k < eC(d−dmax )δ log( δ )



These results imply that models can still represent an exponential number of higher dimensional
features. However, there is a large exponential gap between the lower and upper bound we have shown.
If the lower bound is reasonably tight, then this would mean that models would be highly incentivized
to fit features within the smallest dimensional space possible, suggesting a reason for recent work
showing interesting compressed encodings of multi-dimensional features in toy problems (Morwani
et al., 2023).
Note that the proof assumes the “worst case” scenario that all of the features are dimension dmax ,
while in practice many of the features may be 1 or low dimensional, so the effect on the capacity of a
real model that represents multi-dimensional features is unlikely to be this extreme.


                                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, we note that the dictionary learning literature may have discovered similar results in the past
(which we were unaware of), see Foucart & Rauhut (2013).


B     M ORE ON R EDUCIBILITY

B.1     A DDITIONAL I NTUITION FOR D EFINITIONS

Here, we present some extra intuition and high level ideas for understanding our definitions and
the motivation behind them. Roughly, we intend for our definitions in the main text to identify
representations in the model that describe an object or concept in a way that fundamentally takes
multiple dimensions. We operationalize this as finding a subspace of representations that 1. has
basis vectors that “always co-occur” no matter the orientation 2. is not made up of combinations of
independent lower-dimensional features.
1. The first condition is met by the mixture part of our definition. The feature in question should
be part of an irreducible manifold, and so should “fill” a plane or hyperplane. There shouldn’t be
any part of the plane where the probability distribution of the feature is concentrated, because this
region is then likely part of a lower dimensional feature. The idea of this part of the definition is
to capture multi-dimensional objects; if the entire multi-dimensional space is truly being used to
represent a high-dimensional object, then the representations for the object should be “spread out”
entirely through the space.
2. The second condition is met by the separability part of our definition. This part of the definition is
intended to rule out features that co-occur frequently but are fundamentally not describing the same
object or concept. For example, latitude and longitude are not a mixture in that they frequently co-
occur, but we do not think it is necessarily correct to say they are part of the same multi-dimensional
feature because they are independent.

B.2     E MPIRICAL I RREDUCIBLE F EATURE T EST D ETAILS

Our tests for reducibility require the computation of two quantities S(f ) for the separability index
and Mϵ (f ) for the ϵ-mixture index. We describe how we compute each index in the following two
subsections.

B.2.1    S EPARABILITY I NDEX

We define the separability index in Equation 2 as

                                         S(f ) = min I(a; b)

where the min is over rotations R used to split f ′ = Rf + c into a and b. In two dimensions, the
rotation is defined by a single angle, so we can iterate over a grid of 1000 angles and estimate the
mutual information between a and b for each angle. We first normalize f by√subtracting off the mean
and then dividing by the root mean squared norm of f (and multiplying by 2 since the toy datasets
are in two dimensions). To estimate the mutual information, we first clip the data f to a 6 by 6 square
centered on the origin. We then bin the points into a 40 by 40 grid, to produce a discrete distribution
p(a, b). After computing the marginals p(a) and p(b) by summing the distribution over each axis, we
obtain the mutual information via the formula
                                           X                 p(a, b)
                                 I(a; b) =      p(a, b) log                                          (8)
                                                            p(a)p(b)
                                              a,b


B.2.2    ϵ-M IXTURE I NDEX

We define the ϵ-mixture index in Equation 3 as
                                                   p
                    Mϵ (f ) = max P |v · f + c| < ϵ E[(v · f + c)2 ]
                                v∈Rdf , c∈R



                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


representation dim 2
                                                                                                                        2


                                                                                                   Mutual info (bits)
                                                           2000


                                                   count
                                                                                                                        1
                                                           1000
                                                                                 M (f ) = 0.6396
                                                                                                                             S(f ) = 0.3691
                                                               0                                                        0     π
                                                                   −5           0            5                           0    2        π          3π
                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                       2π
                         representation dim 1                           normalized v · f + c                                        angle θ
                                                (a) Testing S(a) and Mϵ (a) on a reducible feature a.
representation dim 2


                                                                                                                                  S(f ) = 2.683


                                                                                                   Mutual info (bits)
                                                             200                                                        2
                                                     count                  M (f ) = 0.1784
                                                             100                                                        1

                                                               0                                                        0     π
                                                                    −1.5 −1.0 −0.5           0.0                         0    2        π          3π
                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                       2π
                         representation dim 1                           normalized v · f + c                                         angle θ
                                            (b) Testing S(b) and Mϵ (b) on an irreducible feature b

Figure 10: Testing irreducibility of synthetic features. Left in each subfigure: Distributions of x.
For feature a, 63.96% lies within the narrow dotted lines, indicating the feature is likely a mixture.
For feature b, 17.84% lies within the wide lines, indicating the feature is unlikely to be a mixture.
The green cross indicates the angle θ that minimizes mutual information. Middle in each subfigure:
Histograms of the distribution of v · x with red lines indicating a 2ϵ-wide region. Right in each
subfigure: Mutual information between a and b as a function of the rotation angle θ of matrix R.
Feature b has a large minimum mutual information so is unlikely to be separable; feature a has a
medium value of minimum mutual information of about 0.37 bits.


The challenge with computing Mϵ (f ) is to compute the maximum. We opted to maximize via gradient
descent; and we guaranteed differentiability by softening the inequality < with a sigmoid,
                                                                          !!!
                                              1            |v · f + c|
                     Mϵ,T (f , v, c) =E σ         ϵ− p                                        (9)
                                              T          E[(v · f + c)2 ]
where T is a temperature, which we linearly decay from 1 to 0 throughout training. We optimize
for v and c using this loss Mϵ,T (f , v, c) using full batch gradient descent over 10000 steps with
learning rate 0.1. With the solution (v∗ , c∗ ), the final value of Mϵ,T =0 (f , v∗ , c∗ ) is then our estimate
of Mϵ (f ).
We also run the irreducibility tests on additional synthetic feature distributions in Fig. 11a and
Fig. 11b.

C                      A LTERNATIVE D EFINITIONS
In this section, we present an alternative definition of a reducible feature that we considered during our
work. This chiefly deals with multi-dimensional features from the angle of computational reducibility
as opposed to statistical reducibility. In other words, this definition considers whether representations
of features on a specific set of tasks can be split up without changing the accuracy of the task. This
captures an interesting (and important) aspect of feature reducibility, but because it requires a specific
set of prompts (as opposed to allowing unsupervised discovery) we chose not to use it as our main
definition.
Our alternative definitions consider representation spaces that are possibly multi-dimensional, and
defines these spaces through whether they can completely explain a function h on the output logits.
We consider a group theoretic approach to irreducible representations, via whether computation
involving multiple group elements can be decomposed.


                                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


representation dim 2


                                                                                                             Mutual info (bits)
                                                                100                                                               0.50


                                                        count
                                                                      M (f ) = 0.0794
                                                                 50                                                               0.25
                                                                                                                                                 S(f ) = 0.1156
                                                                  0                                                               0.00           π
                                                                               −2       0         2                                         0    2       π        3π
                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                       2π
                        representation dim 1                                   normalized v · f + c                                                    angle θ
                                                   (a) Testing S(c) and Mϵ (c) on a reducible feature c.
representation dim 2


                                                                                                                     Mutual info (bits)
                                                              1000                                                                        1.0
                                                      count                                 M (f ) = 0.259
                                                                500                                                                       0.5

                                                                                                                                                 S(f ) = 0.2541
                                                                  0                                                                       0.0    π
                                                                         −2.5      0.0        2.5                                            0   2        π       3π
                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                       2π
                        representation dim 1                                normalized v · f + c                                                       angle θ
                                           (b) Testing S(d) and Mϵ (d) on an irreducible feature d

Figure 11: Testing irreducibility of synthetic features. Left in each subfigure: Distributions of x.
For feature c, 7.94% lies within the narrow dotted lines, indicating the feature is unlikely to be a
mixture. For feature d, 25.90% lies within the wide lines, indicating the feature is likely a mixture.
The green cross indicates the angle θ that minimizes mutual information. Middle in each subfigure:
Histograms of the distribution of v · x with red lines indicating a 2ϵ-wide region. Right in each
subfigure: Mutual information between a and b as a function of the rotation angle θ of matrix R.
Both features have a small (< 0.5 bits) minimum mutual information and so are likely separable.


C.1                    A LTERNATIVE D EFINITION : I NTERVENTIONS AND R EPRESENTATION S PACES

Assume that we restrict the input set of prompts T = {tj } to some subset of prompts and that we
have some evaluation function h that maps from the output logit distribution of M to a real number.
For example, for the Weekdays problems, T is the set of 49 prompts and h could be the arg max
over the days of week logits. Abusing notation, we let M also be the function from the layer we are
intervening on; this is always clear from context. Then we can define a representation space of xji,l as
a subspace in which interventions always work:
Definition 5 (Representation Space). Given a prompt set T = {tj }, a rank-r dimensional repre-
sentation space of intermediate value xji,l is a rank r projection matrix P such that for all j, j ′ ,
                                               ′                           ′
h(M ((I − P )xji,l + P xji,l )) = h(M (xji,l )).

Note that it immediately follows that the rank d dimensional matrix Id is trivially a rank d representa-
tion space for all prompt sets T .
Definition 6 (Minimality). A representation space P of rank r is minimal if there does not exist a
lower rank representation space.
A minimal representation with rank > 1 is a multi-dimensional representation.
Definition 7 (Alternative Reducibility). A representation space P of rank r is reducible if there are
orthonormal representation spaces P1 and P2 (such that P1 + P2 = P , P1 P2 = 0) where
                                        h(M (P1 xji,l ) + M (P2 xji,l )) = h(M (P1 xji,l + P2 xji,l ))
for all j, j ′ .
Suppose T , h and M define the multiplication of two elements in a finite group G of order n. Then if
we interpret the embedding vectors as the group representations, our definition of reducibility implies
to the standard group-theoretical definition of irreducibility –– specifically, reducibility into a tensor
product representation.


                                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D       T OY C ASE OF T RAINING SAE S ON C IRCLES
To explore how SAEs behave when reconstructing irreducible features of dimension df > 1, we
perform experiments with the following toy setup. Inspired by the circular representations of integers
that networks learn when trained on modular addition (Nanda et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2022), we
create synthetic datasets of activations containing multiple features which are each 2d irreducible
circles.
First however, consider activations for a single circle – points uniformly distributed on the unit circle
in R2 . We train SAEs on this data with encoder Enc(x) = ReLU(We (x − bd ) + be ) and decoder
Dec(f ) = Wd f + bd . We train SAEs with m = 2 and m = 10 with the Adam optimizer and
a learning rate of 10−3 , sparsity penalty λ = 0.1, for 20,000 steps, and a warmup of 1000 steps.
In Fig. 12 we show the dictionary elements of these SAEs. When m = 2, the SAE must use both
SAE features on each input point, and uses db to shift the reconstructed circle so it is centered at the
origin. When m = 10, the SAE learns db ≈ 0 and the features spread out across the circle, arranged
close together, and only a subset are active on each input.


              sparsity loss: 1.93                  sparsity loss: 1.27, seed=2       sparsity loss: 1.28, seed=4
    2         SAE hidden activations
              db
              Reconstruction                   1                                 1
    1         Dictionary element


    0                                          0                                 0
    1                                                  db                                db
                                               1       Reconstruction            1       Reconstruction
    2                                                  Dictionary element                Dictionary element

          2         1         0        1   2            1            0      1             1           0       1

Figure 12: SAEs trained to reconstruct a single 2d circle with m = 2 (left) and m = 10 (middle and
right) dictionary elements. When there are several SAE features, there is no natural/canonical choice
of feature directions, and the dictionary elements spread out across the circle.

We now consider synthetic activations with multiple circular features. Our data consists of points in
R10 , where we choose two orthogonal planes spanned by (e1 , e2 ) and (e3 , e4 ), respectively. With
probability one half a points is sampled uniformly on the unit circle in the e1 -e2 plane, otherwise the
point will be sampled uniformly on the unit circle in the e3 -e4 plane. We train SAEs with m = 64
on this data with the same hyperparameters as the single-circle case.
We now apply the procedure described in Section 4 to see if we can automatically rediscover these
circles. Encouragingly, we first find that the alive SAE features align almost exactly with either
the e1 -e2 or the e3 -e4 plane. When we apply spectral clustering with n_clusters = 2 to the
features with the pairwise angular similarities between dictionary elements as the similarity matrix
(Fig. 13, left), the two clusters correspond exactly to the features which span each plane. As described
in Section 4, given a cluster of dictionary elements S ⊂ {1, . . . , m}, we run a large set of activations
through the SAE, then filter out samples which don’t activate any element in S. For samples which
do activate an element of S, reconstruct the activation while setting all SAE features not in S to have
a hidden activation of zero. If some collection of SAE features together represent some irreducible
feature, we want to remove all other features from the activation vector, and so we only allow SAE
features in the collection to participate in reconstructing the input activation. We find that this
procedure almost exactly recovers the original two circles, which encouraged us to apply this method
for discovering the features shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 15.

E    T RAINING M ISTRAL SAE S
Our Mistral 7B (Jiang et al., 2023) sparse autoencoders (SAEs) are trained on over one billion tokens
from a subset of the Pile (Gao et al., 2020) and Alpaca (Peng et al., 2023) datasets. We train our SAEs


                                                                20
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Cosine sim between alive features                                Cluster 1 reconstruction                    Cluster 2 reconstruction
                     0                           1
                                                                  1                                           1
alive SAE feature


                                                     PCA axis 2


                                                                                                 PCA axis 2
                    15
                                                 0                0                                           0

                    30
                                                                  1                                           1
                                                     1
                         0         15       30                          1        0         1                        1        0         1
                             alive SAE feature                               PCA axis 1                                  PCA axis 1
      Figure 13: Automatic discovery of synthetic circular features by clustering SAE dictionary elements.


     on layers 8, 16, and 24 out of 32 total layers to maximize coverage of the model’s representations.
     We use a 16× expansion factor, yielding a total of 65536 dictionary elements for each SAE.
     To train our SAEs, we use an Lp sparsity penalty for p = 1/2 with sparsity coefficient
                                                                                       √      λ = 0.012.
     Before an SAE forward pass, we normalize our activation vectors to have norm dmodel = 64 in
     the case of Mistral. We do not apply a pre-encoder bias. We use an AdamW optimizer with weight
     decay 10−3 and learning rate 0.0002 with a linear warm up. We apply dead feature resampling
     (Bricken et al., 2023) five times over the course of training to converge on SAEs with around 1000
     dead features.


      F              GPT-2 AND M ISTRAL 7B D ICTIONARY E LEMENT C LUSTERING

      In this section, we first present pseudocode in Alg. 1 for the overall high level technique that finds
      multi-dimensional features and that uses clustering as a subroutine. We then provide the specific
      clustering algorithm implementations we use for GPT-2 and Mistral.

     Algorithm 1: High Level Clustering Approach For Finding Multi-D Features
     Input: Dictionary elements D, activation vectors Xi,l , SAE
     Output: Irreducible multi-dimensional features
     Si,j ← CosineSim(Di , Dj );
     clusters ← Cluster(S);
     reconstructions ← {};
     for cluster in clusters do
         Rcluster ← ids of dictionary elements in cluster;
         for xi,l in Xi,l do
             encoding ← ReLU(E · xi,l );
             if max(encoding[Rcluster ]) > 0 then
                 r ← D[:, Rcluster ] · encoding;
                 reconstructions ← reconstructions ∪ {r};
             end
         end
     end
     f eatures ← {};
     for R in reconstructions do
         proj ← PCA(R);
         if TestIrreducible(proj) then
             Add proj to f eatures;
         end
     end
     return f eatures


                                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.1   GPT-2- SMALL METHODS AND RESULTS

For GPT-2-small, we perform spectral clustering on the roughly 25k layer 7 SAE features
from (Bloom, 2024), using pairwise angular similarities between dictionary elements as the similarity
matrix. We use n_clusters = 1000 and manually looked at roughly 500 of these clusters. For
each cluster, we looked at projections onto principal components 1-4 of the reconstructed activations
for these clusters. In Fig. 14, we show projections for the most interesting clusters we identified,
which appear to be circular representations of days of the week, months of the year, and years of the
20th century.


Figure 14: Projections of days of week, months of year, and years of the 20th century representations
onto top four principal components, showing additional dimensions of the representations than Fig. 1.


F.2   M ISTRAL 7B METHODS AND RESULTS

For Mistral 7B, our SAEs have 65536 dictionary elements and we found it difficult to run spectral
clustering on all of these at once. We therefore develop a simple graph based clustering algorithm
that we run on Mistral 7B SAEs:

      1. Create a graph G out of the dictionary elements by adding directed edges from each
         dictionary element to its k closest dictionary elements by cosine similarity. We use k = 2.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           2. Make the graph undirected by turning every directed edge into an undirected edge.
                           3. Prune edges with cosine similarity less than a threshold value τ . We use τ = 0.5.
                           4. Return the connected components as clusters.

We run this algorithm on the Mistral 7B layer 8 SAE (216 dictionary elements) and find roughly
2700 clusters containing between 2 and 1000 elements. We manually inspected roughly 2000 of
these. From these, we re-discover circular representations of days of the week and months of the
year, shown in Fig. 15. However, we did not find other obviously interesting and clearly irreducible
features.
We also investigate the sensitivity of this method to τ and k by varying τ and k and showing the max
Jaccard similarity between any of the resulting clusters and the days of the week cluster we show
in Fig. 15. We show the results in Fig. 16, where we find that varying k has minimal effect, while
varying τ shows 3 regimes: small τ causes all features to group in one cluster, so the days of the
week cluster is not found; medium τ causes the days of the week cluster to become identifiable; large
τ causes all features to be divided into their own clusters.


Figure 15: Circular representations of days of the week and months of the year which we discover
with our unsupervised SAE clustering method in Mistral 7B. Unlike similar features in GPT-2, we
also find an additional “weekend” representation in between Saturday and Sunday representations
(left) and additional representations of seasons among the months (right). For instance, “winter”
tokens activate a region of the circle in between the representation of January and December.


                              Cluster Stability Across Parameters        1.0
                                                                                                                    Mean Cluster Size Across Parameters
                    0.10
                    0.11
                    0.13
                                                                           Max Jaccard Similarity With GT Cluster


                    0.14
                    0.16    Cluster part of large super cluster          0.8                                                                                  103
                                                                                                                                                                Mean Cluster Size (log scale)


                    0.18
                    0.21
                    0.23
Similarity Cutoff


                    0.26                                                 0.6
                    0.30                                                                                                                                      102
                    0.34
                    0.38
                    0.43                                                 0.4
                    0.48
                    0.50
                                       Cluster formed
                    0.55                                                                                                                                      101
                    0.62                                                 0.2
                    0.70
                    0.78
                    0.89             Cluster broken apart
                    1.00                                                                                                                                      100
                               k=2               k=3               k=4                                               k=2              k=3               k=4
                                       Top-k for Graph (k=2,3,4)                                                            Top-k for Graph (k=2,3,4)


Figure 16: Hyperparameter regimes where the days of the week cluster exists. The cluster exists in
the regime between all features clumping together and all features being in their own cluster; this
regime seems reasonably stable.


                                                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As future work, we think it would be exciting to develop better clustering techniques for SAE
features. Our graph based clustering technique could likely be improved by more recent efficient
and high-quality graph based clustering techniques, e.g. hierarchical agglomerate clustering with
single-linkage (Lattanzi et al., 2020). Additionally, we believe we would see a large improvement by
setting edge weights to be a combination of both the cosine and Jaccard similarity of the dictionary
elements, e.g. max(cosine, Jaccard).

G     OTHER DISCOVERED CLUSTERS
In Fig. 17, we plot the top 11 ranked clusters by the product of a) the measured separability index
and b) one minus the measured ϵ-mixture index with ϵ = 0.1 (this is just one of many possible ways
to get an ordered ranking from a two-parameter score). We color by both the current token (which
results in clear patterns for all tokens) and the next token (to see if we find belief states as found by
Shai et al. (2024) in toy transformers). We note that weekdays are ranked 9 and so are shown in
the plot. Additionally, the next token patterns of the ‘such’ cluster and the ‘B’ cluster do seem to
display some clustering independently of the the current token pattern, which might lend the belief
state hypothesis some support.

H     F URTHER E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
H.1   A SSETS I NFORMATION

We use the following open source models for our experiments: Llama 3 8B (AI@Meta, 2024) (custom
Llama 3 license https://llama.meta.com/llama3/license/), Mistral 7B (Jiang et al.,
2023) (released under the Apache 2 License), and GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) (modified MIT
license, see https://github.com/openai/gpt-2/blob/master/LICENSE).

H.2   M ACHINE I NFORMATION

Intervention experiments were run on two V100 GPUs using less than 64 GB of CPU RAM; all exper-
iments can be reproduced from our open source repository in less than a day with this configuration.
We use the TransformerLens library (Nanda & Bloom, 2022) for intervention experiments. ϵ-mixture
index measurements on toy datasets took about one minute each, on 8GB of CPU RAM. EVR
experiments take seconds on 8GB of CPU RAM and are dominated by time taken to human-interpret
the RGB plots.
GPT-2 SAE clustering and plotting was run on a cluster of heterogeneous hardware. Spectral
clustering and computing reconstructions + plotting was done on CPUs only. We made reconstruction
plots for 500 clusters, with each taking less than 10 minutes. Mistral 7B SAE reconstruction plots
were made on the same cluster. We made roughly 2000 reconstruction plots for Mistral 7B (and
manually inspected each), with each taking less than 20 minutes to generate. Jobs were allocated
64GB of memory each.
Mistral SAE training was run on a single V100 GPU. Initially caching activations from Mistral 7B on
one billion tokens took approximately 60 hours. Training the SAEs on the saved activations took
another 36 hours.

H.3   E RROR BAR C ALCULATION

In Fig. 6 we report 96% error bars for all intervention methods. To compute these error bars, we
loop over all intervention methods and all layers and compute a confidence interval for each (method,
layer) pair across all prompts. Assuming normally distributed errors, we compute error bars with the
following standard formula:
                                         EB = µ ± z ∗ SE
where µ is the sample mean, z is the z score (slightly larger than 2 for 96% error bars), and SE is the
standard error (the standard deviation divided by the square root of the number of samples). We use
standard Python functions to compute this value.



                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 17: Top 10 GPT-2 clusters by Mixture and Separability Index.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Layer 0 Layer 1 Layer 2 Layer 3 Layer 4 Layer 5 Layer 6 Layer 7                                    Layer 0 Layer 1 Layer 2 Layer 3 Layer 4 Layer 5 Layer 6 Layer 7


    Layer 8 Layer 9 Layer 10 Layer 11 Layer 12 Layer 13 Layer 14 Layer 15                              Layer 8 Layer 9 Layer 10 Layer 11 Layer 12 Layer 13 Layer 14 Layer 15


    Layer 16 Layer 17 Layer 18 Layer 19 Layer 20 Layer 21 Layer 22 Layer 23                            Layer 16 Layer 17 Layer 18 Layer 19 Layer 20 Layer 21 Layer 22 Layer 23


    Layer 24 Layer 25 Layer 26 Layer 27 Layer 28 Layer 29 Layer 30 Layer 31                            Layer 24 Layer 25 Layer 26 Layer 27 Layer 28 Layer 29 Layer 30 Layer 31


        Monday         Tuesday       Wednesday     Thursday   Friday      Saturday       Sunday            Monday                                     Tuesday            Wednesday      Thursday   Friday       Saturday       Sunday



                            (a) Mistral 7B, Weekdays                                                                                                           (b) Llama 3 8B, Weekdays

    Layer 0 Layer 1 Layer 2 Layer 3 Layer 4 Layer 5 Layer 6 Layer 7                                    Layer 0 Layer 1 Layer 2 Layer 3 Layer 4 Layer 5 Layer 6 Layer 7


    Layer 8 Layer 9 Layer 10 Layer 11 Layer 12 Layer 13 Layer 14 Layer 15                              Layer 8 Layer 9 Layer 10 Layer 11 Layer 12 Layer 13 Layer 14 Layer 15


    Layer 16 Layer 17 Layer 18 Layer 19 Layer 20 Layer 21 Layer 22 Layer 23                            Layer 16 Layer 17 Layer 18 Layer 19 Layer 20 Layer 21 Layer 22 Layer 23


    Layer 24 Layer 25 Layer 26 Layer 27 Layer 28 Layer 29 Layer 30 Layer 31                            Layer 24 Layer 25 Layer 26 Layer 27 Layer 28 Layer 29 Layer 30 Layer 31


                 January         March      May      July     September       November                              January                                          March      May       July     September        November
                 February        April      June     August   October         December                              February                                         April      June      August   October          December



                             (c) Mistral 7B, Months                                                                                                             (d) Llama 3 8B, Months

Figure 18: Projections onto the top two PCA dimensions of model hidden states on the α token show
that circular representations of α are present in various layers.


The reason that the Months error bars are smaller than the Weekdays error bars is because there
are more Months prompts: there are 12 ∗ 12 ∗ 11 = 1584 intervention effect values, rather than
7 ∗ 7 ∗ 6 = 294 intervention effect values.


I     M ORE W E E K D A Y S AND M O N T H S P LOTS AND D ETAILS

I.0.1        BASIC P LOTS
                                                                                                                                                                     Monday            Wednesday            Friday             Sunday
                                                                                                                                                                     Tuesday           Thursday             Saturday
We show the results of Mistral 7B and Llama 3 8B on all
                                                                                                                     Projection onto third SAE PCA component


individual instances of Weekdays that at least one of the                                                                                                      0.4
models get wrong in Table 2 and present a similar table
                                                                                                                                                               0.2
for Months in Table 3.
                                                                                                                                                               0.0
We show projections onto the top two PCA directions
for both Mistral 7B and Llama 3 8B in Fig. 18 on the                                                                                                           0.2
hidden layers on top of the α token, colored by α. These
are similar plots to Fig. 4, except they are on all layers.                                                                                                    0.4

The circular structure in α is visible on many—but not                                                                                                                0.4          0.2        0.0        0.2        0.4                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                               Projection onto second SAE PCA component
all—layers. Much of the linear structure visible is due to
β.
                                                                                                                     Figure 19: Projections of Mistral 7B
                                                                                                                     Weekdays task activations at layer 8
I.0.2        I NTERVENING WITH THE SAE P ROBE
                                                                                                                     into the plane discovered by clustering
                                                                                                                     layer 8 SAE features.
We show the results of projecting Mistral Weekdays
representations into the plane discovered by clustering
SAE features in Fig. 19. The result is clearly circular.


                                                                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


*Monday                                                 0.3        *Monday                                           0.4
      is                                                                 is                                          0.3
                                                        0.2
    two                                                                two                                           0.2
   days                                                 0.1           days                                           0.1
   from                                                               from
            0              10            20       30    0.0                    0        10            20       30    0.0
                                 Layer                                                        Layer
                    (a) Mistral 7B MLP Patching                                (b) Mistral 7B attention patching

 *Monday                                                     *Monday
                                                         0.4                                                        0.2
       is                                                          is
     two                                                         two
                                                         0.2                                                        0.1
    days                                                        days
    from                                                        from
                0           10            20       30    0.0          0                10            20      30     0.0
                                  Layer                                                      Layer
                    (c) Llama 3 8B MLP patching                            (d) Llama 3 8B attention patching

Figure 20: Attention and MLP patching results on Weekdays. Results are averaged over 20 different
runs with fixed α and varying β and 20 different runs with fixed β and varying α.


    *Two                                                0.3            *Two                                          0.4
 months                                                             months                                           0.3
                                                        0.2
    from                                                               from                                          0.2
*January                                                0.1        *January
                                                                                                                     0.1
       is                                                                 is
            0              10            20       30    0.0                    0        10            20       30    0.0
                                 Layer                                                        Layer
                    (a) Mistral 7B MLP Patching                                (b) Mistral 7B attention patching

     *Two                                                0.4     *Two
                                                                                                                    0.3
  months                                                 0.3 months
     from                                                        from                                               0.2
                                                         0.2
 *January                                                    *January                                               0.1
                                                         0.1
        is                                                          is
                0           10            20       30    0.0           0               10            20      30     0.0
                                  Layer                                                      Layer
                    (c) Llama 3 8B MLP patching                            (d) Llama 3 8B attention patching

Figure 21: Attention and MLP patching results on Months. Results are averaged over 20 different
runs with fixed α and varying β and 20 different runs with fixed β and varying α.


I.0.3   BASIC PATCHING
In Fig. 20 and Fig. 21, we report MLP and attention head patching results for Weekdays and
Months. We experiment on 20 pairs of problems with the same α and different β and 20 pairs
of problems with the same β and different α, for a total of 40 pairs of problems. For each pair


                                                              27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Table 2: Weekdays finegrained results. Row ommited if both models get it correct.

    α    β     Ground truth γ   Mistral top γ   Mistral correct?   Llama top γ   Llama correct?
    1    1     Wednesday        Wednesday       Yes                Thursday      No
    3    1     Friday           Friday          Yes                Tuesday       No
    4    1     Saturday         Saturday        Yes                Thursday      No
    3    2     Saturday         Saturday        Yes                Tuesday       No
    4    2     Sunday           Sunday          Yes                Wednesday     No
    5    2     Monday           Monday          Yes                Tuesday       No
    2    3     Saturday         Friday          No                 Saturday      Yes
    3    3     Sunday           Sunday          Yes                Tuesday       No
    4    3     Monday           Monday          Yes                Tuesday       No
    0    4     Friday           Thursday        No                 Friday        Yes
    3    4     Monday           Monday          Yes                Tuesday       No
    0    5     Saturday         Friday          No                 Saturday      Yes
    1    5     Sunday           Saturday        No                 Wednesday     No
    2    5     Monday           Sunday          No                 Monday        Yes
    4    5     Wednesday        Tuesday         No                 Tuesday       No
    6    5     Friday           Thursday        No                 Thursday      No
    1    6     Monday           Sunday          No                 Thursday      No
    2    6     Tuesday          Monday          No                 Tuesday       Yes
    3    6     Wednesday        Tuesday         No                 Tuesday       No
    4    6     Thursday         Thursday        Yes                Tuesday       No
    5    6     Friday           Friday          Yes                Thursday      No
    6    6     Saturday         Thursday        No                 Thursday      No
    0    7     Monday           Sunday          No                 Tuesday       No
    1    7     Tuesday          Sunday          No                 Tuesday       Yes
    2    7     Wednesday        Sunday          No                 Wednesday     Yes
    3    7     Thursday         Sunday          No                 Thursday      Yes
    4    7     Friday           Thursday        No                 Tuesday       No
    5    7     Saturday         Friday          No                 Saturday      Yes
    6    7     Sunday           Friday          No                 Thursday      No


of problems, we patch the MLP/attention outputs from the "clean" to the "dirty" problem for each
layer and token, and then complete the forward pass. Defining the logit difference as the logit of the
clean γ minus the logit of the dirty γ, we record what percent of the difference between the original
logit difference of the dirty problem and the logit difference of the clean problem is recovered upon
intervening, and average across these 40 percentages for each layer and token. This gives us a score
we call the Average Intervention Effect.
For simplicity of presentation, we clip all of the (few) negative intervention averages to 0 (prior
work (Zhang & Nanda, 2023) has also found negative-effect attention heads during patching experi-
ments).

I.0.4        C IRCLE C ONTINUITY
Finally, in Fig. 22, we show another example of the continuity of the circular days of the week
representation in Mistral 7B.

J       PATCHING
In this section, we present results to support a claim that MLPs (and not attention blocks) are
responsible for computing γ. In Fig. 25, we deconstruct states on top of the final token (before
predicting γ) on Llama 3 8B Months (we show a similar plot for the states on the final token
of Mistral 7B on Weekdays in the main text in Fig. 24. These plots show that the value of γ is
computed on the final token around layers 20 to 25. To show that this computation of occurs in the
MLPs, we must show that no attention head is copying γ from a prior token or directly computing γ.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Table 3: Months finegrained results. Row ommited if both models get it correct.

 α      β     Ground truth γ      Mistral top γ      Mistral correct?      Llama top γ      Llama correct?
  0     4     May                 April              No                    May              Yes
  6     4     November            October            No                    November         Yes
  0     6     July                June               No                    July             Yes
  0     7     August              July               No                    August           Yes
  1     7     September           October            No                    September        Yes
  3     7     November            October            No                    November         Yes
  5     7     January             December           No                    January          Yes
  6     7     February            January            No                    February         Yes
  7     7     March               February           No                    March            Yes
  9     7     May                 April              No                    May              Yes
  4     9     February            February           Yes                   January          No
  2    10     January             December           No                    January          Yes
  8    10     July                June               No                    July             Yes
  1    11     January             December           No                    January          Yes
  2    11     February            December           No                    February         Yes
  3    11     March               February           No                    March            Yes
  7    11     July                June               No                    July             Yes
  8    11     August              July               No                    August           Yes
  9    11     September           August             No                    September        Yes
  0    12     January             December           No                    January          Yes

                                                                                     Fri
We first perform a patching experiment with the same                               LateFriFri
                                                                                Early            Sat
setup Fig. 21 and Fig. 20 on individual attention heads         Thu Late Thu                  EarlySat
                                                                                                    Sat
                                                                     Early Thu                Late
on the final token. From the patching results we identify
the top 10 attention heads by average intervention effect.         Late Wed
For each attention head, we compute one EVR run with          Wed Early Wed                            Early
                                                                                                     Late SunSun Sun
explanatory functions equal to one-hot functions of α and               Late Tue
β (resulting in 14 functions gi for Weekdays and 24 for                  Early Tue Late Mon
                                                                   Tue                Early Mon
Months) and one with explanatory functions equal to one-                             Mon
hot functions of α, β, and γ. We find that for all layers
before 25, adding γ to the explanatory functions adds
almost no explanatory power. Since we established above
that the model has already computed γ at this point, we Figure 22: Layer 30 Mistral 7B ac-
know that attention heads do not participate in computing tivations for [very early/very late] on
γ.                                                         [Monday/Tuesday/.../Sunday], plotted
To isolate the rough circuit for Weekdays and Months, projected into the PCA plane for [Mon-
we perform layer-wise activation patching on 40 random day/Tuesday/.../Sunday].
pairs of prompts. The results, displayed in Fig. 21 show
that the circuit to compute γ consists of MLPs on top of the α and β tokens, a copy to the token before
γ, and further MLPs there (roughly similar to prior work studying arithmetic circuits (Stolfo et al.,
2023)). Moreover, fine-grained patching in Appendix K shows that there are just a few responsible
attention heads for the writes to the token before γ. However, patching alone cannot tell use how or
where γ is represented. For that, we need a new technique, which we expand on in the next section.


K     E XPLANATION VIA R EGRESSION (EVR)

So far, we have focused on examining and intervening on the representation for α, which we present
as a circle in the top PCA components on top of the α token. In this section, we examine how the
generated output, γ, is represented.
First, to isolate the rough circuit for Weekdays and Months, we perform layer-wise activation
patching on 40 random pairs of prompts. The results, displayed in Fig. 21 and Fig. 20, show that
the circuit to compute γ consists of MLPs on top of the α and β tokens, a copy to the token before


                                                        29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       layer 17     layer 18       layer 19      layer 20      layer 21    layer 22    layer 23    layer 24     layer 25     layer 26     layer 27         layer 28    layer 29


         original     original       original     original      original    original    original    original     original     original     original         original    original
        r2: 0.0%     r2: 0.0%       r2: 0.0%     r2: 0.0%      r2: 0.0%    r2: 0.0%    r2: 0.0%    r2: 0.0%     r2: 0.0%     r2: 0.0%     r2: 0.0%         r2: 0.0%    r2: 0.0%


       one hot α, β one hot α, β one hot α, β one hot α, β one hot α, β one hot α, β one hot α, β one hot α, β one hot α, β one hot α, β one hot α, β one hot α, β one hot α, β
       r2: 94.0%    r2: 95.6%      r2: 96.3%    r2: 94.5%      r2: 91.4%   r2: 89.0%   r2: 87.3%   r2: 85.4%   r2: 81.9%    r2: 78.4%     r2: 74.8%        r2: 72.3%   r2: 70.4%


                    α for tmr      α for tmr    α for tmr       circle γ    circle γ    circle γ    circle γ    circle γ     circle γ      circle γ         circle γ    circle γ
                    r2: 98.1%      r2: 98.2%    r2: 96.8%      r2: 94.4%   r2: 93.6%   r2: 93.4%   r2: 92.2%   r2: 91.2%    r2: 88.7%     r2: 87.7%        r2: 86.4%   r2: 84.6%


                    circle α − β    circle γ     circle γ circle α − β circle α − β circle α − β circle α − β circle α − β circle α − β circle α − β
                    r2: 98.6%      r2: 98.7%    r2: 98.1% r2: 96.3% r2: 95.6% r2: 95.5% r2: 94.4% r2: 93.7% r2: 91.0% r2: 89.9%


                                   circle α − β circle α − β               α for tmr   α for tmr   α for tmr
                                   r2: 99.2%    r2: 99.0%                  r2: 98.0%   r2: 98.1%   r2: 97.6%


Figure 24: EVR residual RGB plots on Mistral hidden states on the Weekdays final token, layers 17
to 29. From top to bottom, we show each residual RGB plot after adding the function(s) gi labelled
just underneath, as well as the resulting r2 value. We write “tmr” meaning “tomorrow” for β = 1.
We also write “circle for x” meaning the inclusion of two functions gi (x) = {cos, sin}(2πx/7).


γ, and further MLPs there (roughly similar to what Stolfo et al. (2023) find in prior work studying
arithmetic circuits). Thus, we know where to look for a representation of γ: in the second half of the
layers on the token before γ. However, patching alone cannot tell use how γ is represented.
Unlike α, γ has no obvious circular (or linear) pattern in the top
PCA components on these layers. To determine the representation                                                                                               3
for γ, we introduce a more powerful technique we call Explanation                                                                              Tue                 Wed
                                                                                                                                                              2
via Regression (EVR): given a set of token sequences with a corre-
                                                                                                                                         Mon                  1          Thu
sponding set of hidden states Xi,l , we choose a set of interpretable
                                                                                                                                                              0
explanation functions of the input tokens {gj (t)}. The r2 value of                                                                       4            2              2 Fri 4
                                                                                                                                                              1 0
a linear regression from {gj (t)} to Xi,l tells us how much of the
                                                                                                                                                              2
variance in the activations the {gj (t)} explain, and conversely the                                                                          Sun                 Sat
                                                                                                                                                              3
residuals show the exact components of the representation we have
yet to explain.
                                                                                                                                 Figure 23: Top two PCA com-
                                                                                                                                 ponents of residual errors after
K.1 U SING                                                                                                                       EVR with one-hot in α and β.
EVR TO UNCOVER A CIRCULAR REPRESENTATION FOR γ                                                                                   Mistral 7B Weekdays, layer
                                                                                                                                 25, final token. Colored by γ.
We first use EVR to determine the representation for γ by plotting the
top two PCA components of the layer 25 Mistral 7B activations after
subtracting the components that can be explained using a regression
with one hot functions in α and β (i.e. g1 = [α = 0], g2 = [β = 1], g3 = [α = 1], . . .). The
result, shown in Fig. 23, is an incredibly clear circle in γ, which suggests that the model’s generated
representation of γ lies along a circle. A simple PCA projection was not enough to find this result
because the representation for γ has interference from α and β, which the EVR removes. This
suggests that the models may be generating γ by using a trigonometry based algorithm like the
“clock” Nanda et al. (2023a) or “pizza” Zhong et al. (2024) algorithm in late MLP layers.

K.2    M ORE E XPERIMENTS WITH EVR

We now apply EVR to Months and Weekdays to break down Xi,l completely into interpretable
functions. We build a list of gi iteratively and greedily. At each iteration, we perform a linear
regression with the current list g1 . . . gk , visualize and interpret the residual prediction errors, and
build a new function gk+1 representing these errors to add to the list. Once most variance is explained,
we can conclude that g1 , . . . , gk constitutes the entirety of what is represented in the hidden states.


                                                                                         30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This information tells us what can and cannot be extracted via a linear probe, without having to train
any probes. Furthermore, if we treat each gi as a feature (see Definition 1), then the linear regression
coefficients tell us which directions in Xi,l these features are represented in, connecting back to
Hypothesis 2.
Since Xi,l consists of modular addition problems with two inputs α and β, we can visualize the errors
as we iteratively construct g1 , . . . , gk by making a heatmap with α and β on the two axes, where the
color shows what kind of error is made. More specifically, we take the top 3 PCA components of the
error distribution and assign them to the colors red, green, and blue. We call the resulting heatmap a
residual RGB plot. Errors that depend primarily on α, β, or γ show up as horizontal, vertical, or
diagonal stripes on the residual RGB plot.
In Fig. 24, we perform EVR on the layer 17-29 hidden states of Mistral 7B on the Weekdays
task; additional deconstructions are in Appendix K. We find that a circle in γ develops and grows in
explanatory power; we plot the layer 25 residuals after explaining with one hot functions in α and β
(i.e. g1 = [α = 0], g2 = [β = 1], g3 = [α = 1], . . .) in Fig. 23 to show this incredibly clear circle in
γ. This suggests that the models may be generating γ by using a trigonometry based algorithm like
the “clock” (Nanda et al., 2023a) or “pizza” (Zhong et al., 2024) algorithm in late MLP layers.

Table 4: Highest intervention effect attention heads from fine-grained attention head patching, as well
as EVR results with one hot α, β and one hot α, β, γ.

             (a) Mistral 7B, Weekdays.                              (b) Llama 3 8B, Weekdays.

   L    H      Average    EVR R2         EVR R2           L     H     Average    EVR R2        EVR R2
                Inter-    One Hot        One Hot                       Inter-    One Hot       One Hot
               vention     α, β          α, β, γ                      vention     α, β         α, β, γ
                Effect                                                 Effect
  28    18         0.22        0.39         0.73         17     0         0.18       0.98         0.99
  18    30         0.17        0.95         0.96         17     1         0.08       0.98         0.98
  15    13         0.17        0.94         0.95         19    10         0.08       0.95         0.96
  22    15         0.11        0.77         0.82         30    17         0.07       0.85         0.90
  16    21         0.09        0.92         0.93         17     3         0.07       0.93         0.95
  28    16         0.08        0.42         0.69         17    27         0.06       1.00         1.00
  15    14         0.06        0.98         0.99         31    22         0.05       0.37         0.78
  30    24         0.05        0.43         0.79         21     9         0.04       0.73         0.78
  21    26         0.04        0.53         0.63         20    28         0.04       1.00         1.00
  14     2         0.04        0.93         0.95         30    16         0.04       0.73         0.85

              (c) Mistral 7B, Months.                                (d) Llama 3 8B, Months.

   L    H      Average    EVR R2         EVR R2           L     H     Average    EVR R2        EVR R2
                Inter-    One Hot        One Hot                       Inter-    One Hot       One Hot
               vention     α, β          α, β, γ                      vention     α, β         α, β, γ
                Effect                                                 Effect
  20    28         0.15        0.76         0.76         15    13         0.26       0.62         0.62
  17     0         0.10        0.77         0.77         16    21         0.17       0.76         0.76
  25    14         0.08        0.19         0.61         18    30         0.13       0.77         0.77
  17     1         0.07        0.80         0.82         28    18         0.11       0.13         0.52
  17     3         0.06        0.71         0.71         28    16         0.07       0.13         0.52
  31    22         0.06        0.12         0.67         21    25         0.05       0.65         0.70
  17    27         0.05        0.58         0.58         15    14         0.03       0.72         0.72
  19     4         0.05        0.40         0.66         17    26         0.02       0.77         0.77
  19    10         0.04        0.62         0.62         31     1         0.02       0.11         0.57
  30    26         0.04        0.51         0.62         21    24         0.02       0.30         0.45


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  layer 13 layer 14 layer 15 layer 16 layer 17 layer 18 layer 19 layer 20 layer 21 layer 22 layer 23 layer 24 layer 25 layer 26 layer 27 layer 28 layer 29



  original   original   original   original   original   original   original    original    original    original    original    original    original     original    original    original    original
  r2: 0.0%   r2: 0.0%   r2: 0.0%   r2: 0.0%   r2: 0.0%   r2: 0.0%   r2: 0.0%    r2: 0.0%    r2: 0.0%    r2: 0.0%     r2: 0.0%    r2: 0.0%    r2: 0.0%    r2: 0.0%    r2: 0.0%    r2: 0.0%    r2: 0.0%


  one hot β one hot β one hot β one hot β one hot β one hot β one hot β one hot β one hot β circle γ circle γ circle γ circle γ circle γ γ parity γ parity circle γ
  r2: 69.7% r2: 72.8% r2: 69.9% r2: 89.0% r2: 76.6% r2: 81.8% r2: 54.1% r2: 47.8% r2: 36.8% r2: 23.6% r2: 24.3% r2: 24.7% r2: 25.5% r2: 25.5% r2: 12.0% r2: 12.2% r2: 23.7%


  one hot α one hot α one hot α one hot α one hot α one hot α γ parity circle γ circle 2γ one hot β one hot β one hot β one hot β one hot β circle γ circle γ one hot β
  r2: 95.7% r2: 96.0% r2: 96.8% r2: 98.7% r2: 99.0% r2: 96.8% r2: 60.2% r2: 60.9% r2: 47.8% r2: 51.6% r2: 48.3% r2: 48.2% r2: 48.2% r2: 48.1% r2: 35.4% r2: 34.2% r2: 43.6%


  α + 1 = β α + 1 = β α + 1 = β α + 1 = β circle 2γ γ parity circle 2γ γ parity circle γ γ parity γ parity γ parity γ parity γ parity one hot β one hot β γ parity
  r2: 96.4% r2: 96.5% r2: 97.2% r2: 98.9% r2: 99.2% r2: 98.0% r2: 64.7% r2: 68.0% r2: 62.5% r2: 59.5% r2: 57.9% r2: 56.9% r2: 55.6% r2: 55.1% r2: 56.8% r2: 56.5% r2: 54.4%


                                                         circle γ circle γ circle 2γ γ parity circle 2γ circle 2γ circle 2γ circle 2γ circle 2γ circle 2γ circle 2γ circle 2γ
                                                         r2: 98.8% r2: 73.4% r2: 73.7% r2: 68.7% r2: 68.6% r2: 66.2% r2: 64.4% r2: 63.6% r2: 64.0% r2: 65.7% r2: 65.6% r2: 65.1%


                                                                    one hot α one hot α one hot α one hot α one hot α one hot α one hot α one hot α one hot α one hot α one hot α
                                                                    r2: 92.0% r2: 89.9% r2: 83.8% r2: 81.4% r2: 80.1% r2: 77.5% r2: 76.2% r2: 75.6% r2: 76.9% r2: 76.6% r2: 74.7%


                                                                    one hot α+β one hot α+β one hot α+β one hot α+β one hot α+β one hot α+β one hot α+β one hot α+β one hot α+β one hot α+β one hot α+β
                                                                    r2: 95.2% r2: 94.3% r2: 91.4% r2: 90.6% r2: 90.9% r2: 90.8% r2: 90.7% r2: 90.6% r2: 90.9% r2: 91.1% r2: 92.4%


Figure 25: Iterative deconstruction of hidden state representations on the final token on Llama 3 8B,
Months.


                                                                                              32
