Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


FASTER A LGORITHMS FOR S TRUCTURED L INEAR AND
K ERNEL S UPPORT V ECTOR M ACHINES
 Yuzhou Gu                                 Zhao Song
 New York University                       Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, UC Berkeley
 yuzhougu@nyu.edu                          magic.linuxkde@gmail.com

 Lichen Zhang
 MIT CSAIL
 lichenz@csail.mit.edu



                                                 A BSTRACT
          Quadratic programming is a ubiquitous prototype in convex programming. Many
          machine learning problems can be formulated as quadratic programming, including
          the famous Support Vector Machines (SVMs). Linear and kernel SVMs have been
          among the most popular models in machine learning over the past three decades,
          prior to the deep learning era.
          Generally, a quadratic program has an input size of Θ(n2 ), where n is the number of
          variables. Assuming the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH), it is known
          that no O(n2−o(1) ) time algorithm exists when the quadratic objective matrix
          is positive semidefinite (Backurs, Indyk, and Schmidt, NeurIPS’17). However,
          problems such as SVMs usually admit much smaller input sizes: one is given n data
          points, each of dimension d, and d is oftentimes much smaller than n. Furthermore,
          the SVM program has only O(1) equality linear constraints. This suggests that
          faster algorithms are feasible, provided the program exhibits certain structures.
          In this work, we design the first nearly-linear time algorithm for solving quadratic
          programs whenever the quadratic objective admits a low-rank factorization, and the
          number of linear constraints is small. Consequently, we obtain results for SVMs:
             • For linear SVM when the input data is d-dimensional, our algorithm runs in
                            (ω+1)/2
                time O(nd
                      e             log(1/ϵ)) where ω ≈ 2.37 is the fast matrix multiplication
                exponent;
             • For Gaussian kernel SVM, when the data dimension d = O(log n) and the
                squared dataset radius is sub-logarithmic in n, our algorithm runs in time
                O(n1+o(1) log(1/ϵ)). We also prove that when the squared dataset radius is
                at least Ω(log2 n), then Ω(n2−o(1) ) time is required. This improves upon the
                prior best lower bound in both the dimension d and the squared dataset radius.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Quadratic programming (QP) represents a class of convex optimization problems that optimize a
quadratic objective over the intersection of an affine subspace and the non-negative orthant1 . QPs
naturally extend linear programming by incorporating a quadratic objective, and they find extensive
applications in operational research, theoretical computer science, and machine learning (Kozlov
et al., 1979; Wright, 1999; Gould & Toint, 2000; Gould et al., 2001; Propato & Uber, 2004; Cor-
nuejols & Tütüncü, 2006). The quadratic objective introduces challenges: QPs with a general (not
necessarily positive semidefinite) symmetric quadratic objective matrix are NP-hard to solve (Sahni,
1974; Pardalos & Vavasis, 1991). When the quadratic objective matrix is positive semidefinite, the
problem becomes weakly polynomial-time solvable, as it can be reduced to convex empirical risk
minimization (Lee et al., 2019) (refer to Section C for further discussion).
    1
      There are classes of QPs with quadratic constraints as well. However, in this paper, we focus on cases where
the constraints are linear.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Formally, the QP problem is defined as follows:
Definition 1.1 (Quadratic Programming). Given an n × n symmetric, positive semidefinite objective
matrix Q, a vector c ∈ Rn , and a polytope described by a pair (A ∈ Rm×n , b ∈ Rm ), the linearly
constrained quadratic programming (LCQP) or simply quadratic programming (QP) problem seeks
to solve the following optimization problem:
                                                 1 ⊤
                                          minn     x Qx + c⊤ x                                       (1)
                                          x∈R    2
                                            s.t. Ax = b
                                                 x ≥ 0.

A classic application of QP is the Support Vector Machine (SVM) problem (Boser et al., 1992;
Cortes & Vapnik, 1995). In SVMs, a dataset x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd is provided, along with corresponding
labels y1 , . . . , yn ∈ {±1}. The objective is to identify a hyperplane that separates the two groups of
points with opposite labels, while maintaining a large margin from both. Remarkably, this popular
machine learning problem can be formulated as a QP and subsequently solved using specialized QP
solvers (Muller et al., 2001). Thus, advancements in QP algorithms could potentially lead to runtime
improvements for SVMs.
Despite its practical and theoretical significance, algorithmic quadratic programming has garnered
relatively less attention compared to its close relatives in convex programming, such as linear
programming (Cohen et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2021; Brand, 2020; Song & Yu, 2021), convex
empirical risk minimization (Lee et al., 2019; Qin et al., 2023), and semidefinite programming (Jiang
et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2022; Gu & Song, 2022). In this work, we take a pioneering step in
developing fast and robust interior point-type algorithms for solving QPs. We particularly focus
on improving the runtime for high-precision hard- and soft-margin SVMs. For the purposes of
this discussion, we will concentrate on hard-margin SVMs, with the understanding that our results
naturally extend to soft-margin variants. We begin by introducing the hard-margin linear SVMs:
Definition 1.2 (Linear SVM). Given a dataset X ∈ Rn×d and a collection of labels y1 , . . . , yn each
in ±1, the linear SVM problem requires solving the following quadratic program:
                                             1 ⊤ ⊤
                                 max 1⊤                ⊤
                                       n α − α (yy ◦ XX )α,                                          (2)
                                 α∈Rn        2
                                 s.t. α⊤ y = 0,
                                      α ≥ 0.
where ◦ denotes the Hadamard product.

It should be noted that this formulation is actually the dual of the SVM optimization problem. The
primal program seeks a vector w ∈ Rd such that
                                       1
                                min      ∥w∥22 ,
                               w∈Rd    2
                                  s.t. yi (w⊤ xi − b) ≥ 1,     ∀i ∈ [n],
                                                         n
where b ∈ R is thePbias    term. Given the solution α ∈ R , one can conveniently convert it to a primal
                     n
solution: w∗ = i=1 αi∗ yi xi . At first glance, one might be inclined to solve the primal problem
directly, especially in cases where d ≪ n, as it presents a lower-dimensional optimization problem
compared to the dual. The dual formulation becomes particularly advantageous when solving the
kernel SVM, which maps features to a high or potentially infinite-dimensional space.
Definition 1.3 (Kernel SVM). Given a dataset X ∈ Rn×d and a positive definite kernel function
K : Rd × Rd → R, let K ∈ Rn×n denote the kernel matrix, where Ki,j = K(xi , xj ). With a
collection of labels y1 , . . . , yn each in {±1}, the kernel SVM problem requires solving the following
quadratic program:
                                                1 ⊤ ⊤
                                   max 1⊤ n α − α (yy ◦ K)α,                                         (3)
                                   α∈Rn         2
                                    s.t. α⊤ y = 0,
                                         α ≥ 0.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The positive definite kernel function K corresponds to a feature mapping, implying that K(xi , xj ) =
ϕ(xi )⊤ ϕ(xj ) for some ϕ : Rd → Rs . Thus, solving the primal SVM can be viewed as solving the
optimization problem on the transformed dataset. However, the primal program’s dimension depends
on the (transformed) data’s dimension s, which can be infinite. Conversely, the dual program, with
dimension n, is typically easier to solve. Throughout this paper, when discussing the SVM program,
we implicitly refer to the dual quadratic program, not the primal.
One key aspect of the SVM program is its minimal equality constraints. Specifically, for both linear
and kernel SVMs, there is only a single equality constraint of the form α⊤ y = 0. This constraint
arises naturally from the bias term in the primal SVM formulation and its Lagrangian. The limited
number of constraints enables us to design QP solvers with favorable dependence on the number of
data points n, albeit with a higher dependence on the number of constraints m, thus offering effective
end-to-end guarantees for SVMs.
Previous efforts to solve the SVM program typically involve breaking down the large QP into smaller,
constant-sized QPs. These algorithms, while easy to implement and well-suited to modern hardware
architectures, oftentimes lack tight theoretical analysis and the estimation of iteration count is usually
pessimistic (Chang & Lin, 2011). Theoretically, Joachims (2006) systematically analyzed this class
of algorithms, demonstrating that to achieve an ϵ-approximation solution, O(ϵ e −2 B · nnz(A)) time is
sufficient, where B is the squared-radius of the dataset and nnz(·) denotes the number of nonzero
entries. This is subsequently improved in Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2011) with a subgradient-based
                      e −1 d) time. Unfortunately, the polynomial dependence on the precision ϵ−1
method that runs in O(ϵ
makes them hard to be adapted for even moderately small ϵ. For example, when ϵ is set to be 10−3 to
account for the usual machine precision errors, these algorithms would require at least 103 iterations
to converge.
To develop a high-precision algorithm with poly log(ϵ−1 ) dependence instead of poly(ϵ−1 ), we
focus on second-order methods for QPs. A variety of approaches have been explored in previous
works, including the interior point method (Karmarkar, 1984), active set methods (Murty, 1988),
augmented Lagrangian techniques (Delbos & Gilbert, 2003), conjugate gradient, gradient projection,
and extensions of the simplex algorithm (Dantzig, 1955; Wolfe, 1959; Murty, 1988). Our interest is
particularly piqued by the interior point method (IPM). Recent advances in the robust IPM framework
have led to significant successes for convex programming problems (Cohen et al., 2019; Lee et al.,
2019; Brand, 2020; Jiang et al., 2020; Brand et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021; Song & Yu, 2021;
Jiang et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022; Gu & Song, 2022; Qin et al., 2023; Song et al., 2023). These
successes are a result of combining robust analysis of IPM with dedicated data structure design.
Applying IPM to solve QPs with a constant number of constraints is not entirely novel; existing
work (Ferris & Munson, 2002) has already adapted IPM to solve the linear SVM problem. However,
the runtime of their algorithm is sub-optimal. Each iteration of their algorithm requires multiplying a
d×n matrix with an n×d matrix in O(ndω−1 ) time, where ω ≈ 2.37 is the fast matrix multiplication
exponent (Duan et al., √ 2023; Williams et al., 2024; Gall, 2024; Alman et al., 2025). Moreover,
the IPM requires O( n log(1/ϵ)) iterations to converge. This ends up with an overall runtime
O(n1.5 dω−1 log(1/ϵ)), which is super-linear in the dataset size even when the dimension d is small.
In practical scenarios where n is usually large, the n1.5 dependence becomes prohibitive. Therefore,
it is crucial to develop an algorithm with almost- or nearly-linear dependence on n and logarithmic
dependence on ϵ−1 .
For linear SVM, we propose a nearly-linear time algorithm with high-precision guarantees, applicable
when the dimension of the dataset is smaller than the number of points:
Theorem 1.4 (Low-rank QP and Linear SVM, informal version of Theorem E.1). Given a quadratic
program as defined in Definition 1.1, and assuming a low-rank factorization of the quadratic objective
matrix Q = U V ⊤ , where U, V ∈ Rn×k , there exists an algorithm that can solve the program (1) up
to ϵ-error2 in O(n(k
               e     + m)(ω+1)/2 log(n/ϵ)) time.
Specifically, for linear SVM (as per Definition 1.2) with d ≤ n, one can solve program (2) up to
                 (ω+1)/2
ϵ-error in O(nd
           e             log(n/ϵ)) time.

  2
    We say an algorithm that solves the program up to ϵ-error if it returns an approximate solution vector α
                                                                                                           e
whose objective value is at most ϵ more than the optimal objective value.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


While a nearly-linear time algorithm for linear SVMs is appealing, most applications look at kernel
SVMs as they provide more expressive power to the linear classifier. This poses significant challenge
in algorithm design, as forming the kernel matrix exactly would require Ω(n2 ) time. Moreover, the
kernel matrix could be full-rank without any structural assumptions, rendering our low-rank QP
solver inapplicable. In fact, it has been shown that for data dimension d = ω(log n), no algorithm can
approximately solve kernel SVM within an error exp(−ω(log2 n)) in time O(n2−o(1) ), assuming
the famous Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH)3 (Backurs et al., 2017).
Conversely, a long line of works aim to speed up computation with the kernel matrix faster than
quadratic, especially when the kernel has certain smooth and Lipschitz properties (Alman et al.,
2020; Aggarwal & Alman, 2022; Bakshi et al., 2023; Charikar et al., 2024). For instance, when
kernel functions are sufficiently smooth, efficient approximation using low-degree polynomials is
feasible, leading to an approximate low-rank factorization. A prime example is the Gaussian RBF
kernel, where Aggarwal & Alman (2022) showed that for dimension d = Θ(log n) and squared
dataset radius (defined as maxi,j∈[n] ∥xi − xj ∥22 ) B = o(log n), there exists low-rank matrices
              o(1)
U, V ∈ Rn×n        such that for any vector x ∈ Rn , ∥(K − U V ⊤ )x∥∞ ≤ ϵ∥x∥1 . They subsequently
develop an algorithm to solve the Batch Gaussian KDE problem in O(n1+o(1) ) time.
Based on this dichotomy in fast kernel matrix algebra, we establish two results: 1) Solving Gaussian
kernel SVM in O(n1+o(1) log(1/ϵ)) time is feasible when B = o( logloglogn n ), and 2) Assuming SETH,
no sub-quadratic time algorithm exists for B = Ω(log2 n) in SVMs without bias and B = Ω(log6 n)
in SVMs with bias. This improves the lower bound established by Backurs et al. (2017) in terms of
dimension d.
Theorem 1.5 (Gaussian Kernel SVM, informal version of Theorem G.7 and G.12). Given a dataset
X ∈ Rn×d with dimension d and squared radius denoted by B, let K(xi , xj ) = exp(−∥xi − xj ∥22 )
be the Gaussian kernel function. Then, for the kernel SVM problem defined in Definition 1.3,

       • If d = O(log n), B = o( logloglogn n ), there exists an algorithm that solves the Gaussian kernel
         SVM up to ϵ-error in time O(n1+o(1) log(1/ϵ));

       • If d = Ω(log n), B = Ω(log2 n), then assuming SETH, any algorithm that solves the
         Gaussian kernel SVM without a bias term up to exp(−ω(log2 n)) error would require
         Ω(n2−o(1) ) time;

       • If d = Ω(log n), B = Ω(log6 n), then assuming SETH, any algorithm that solves the Gaus-
         sian kernel SVM with a bias term up to exp(−ω(log2 n)) error would require Ω(n2−o(1) )
         time.

To our knowledge, this is the first almost-linear time algorithm for Gaussian kernel SVM even when
d = log n and the radius is small. Our algorithm effectively utilizes the rank-no(1) factorization of
the Gaussian kernel matrix alongside our low-rank QP solver.

1.1   R ELATED W ORK

Support Vector Machines. SVM, one of the most prominent machine learning models before
the rise of deep learning, has a rich literature dedicated to its algorithmic speedup. For linear
SVM, Joachims (2006) offers a first-order algorithm that solves its QP in nearly-linear time, but
with a runtime dependence of ϵ−2 , limiting its use in high precision settings. This runtime is later
significantly improved by Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2011) to O(ϵ e −1 d) via a stochastic subgradient
descent algorithm. For SVM classification, existing algorithms such as SVM-Light (Joachims, 1999),
SMO (Platt, 1998), LIBSVM (Chang & Lin, 2011), and SVM-Torch (Collobert & Bengio, 2001)
perform well in high-dimensional data settings. However, their runtime scales super-linearly with
n, making them less viable for large datasets. Previous investigations into solving linear SVM via
interior point methods (Ferris & Munson, 2002) have been somewhat basic, leading to an overall
    3
      SETH is a standard complexity theoretical assumption (Impagliazzo et al., 1998; Impagliazzo & Paturi,
2001). Informally, it states that for a Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF) formula with m clauses and n variables,
there is no algorithm for checking its feasibility in time less than O(cn · poly(m)) for c < 2.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


runtime of O(n1.5 dω−1 log(1/ϵ)). For a more comprehensive survey on efficient algorithms for
SVM, refer to Cervantes et al. (2020). On the hardness side, Backurs et al. (2017) provides an
efficient reduction from the Bichromatic Closest Pair problem to Gaussian kernel SVM, establishing
an almost-quadratic lower bound assuming SETH.

Interior Point Method. The interior point method, a well-established approach for solving convex
programs under constraints, was first proposed by Karmarkar (1984) as a (weakly) polynomial-time
algorithm for linear programs, later improved by Vaidya (1989) in terms of runtime. Recent work
by Cohen et al. (2019) has shown how to solve linear programs with interior point methods in the
current matrix multiplication time, utilizing a robust IPM framework. Subsequent studies (Lee et al.,
2019; Brand, 2020; Jiang et al., 2021; Song & Yu, 2021; Huang et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2022; Qin
et al., 2023) have further refined their algorithm or applied it to different optimization problems.

Kernel Matrix Algebra. Kernel methods, fundamental in machine learning, enable feature map-
pings to potentially infinite dimensions for n data points in d dimensions. The kernel matrix, a
crucial component of kernel methods, often has a prohibitive quadratic size for explicit formation.
Recent active research focuses on computing and approximating kernel matrices and related tasks in
sub-quadratic time, such as kernel matrix-vector multiplication, spectral sparsification, and Laplacian
system solving. The study by Alman et al. (2020) introduces a comprehensive toolkit for solving
these problems in almost-linear time for small dimensions, leveraging techniques like polynomial
methods and ultra Johnson-Lindenstrauss transforms. Alternatively, Backurs et al. (2021); Bakshi
et al. (2023) reduce various kernel matrix algebra tasks to kernel density estimation (KDE), which
recent advancements in KDE data structures (Charikar & Siminelakis, 2017; Backurs et al., 2018;
Charikar et al., 2020) have made more efficient. A recent contribution by Aggarwal & Alman (2022)
provides a tighter characterization of the low-degree polynomial approximation for the e−x function,
leading to more efficient algorithms for the Batch Gaussian KDE problem. Another line of works aim
to apply oblivious sketching to the kernel matrix, so that a spectral approximation can be computed
in time nearly-linear in the dataset size and a low-rank factorization with rank being the statistical
dimension of the problem can be computed (Avron et al., 2014; Ahle et al., 2020; Zandieh et al.,
2021; Woodruff & Zandieh, 2022). Unfortunately, for the statistical dimension to be smaller than
n, one has to add a regularization parameter λ, which usually appears when one wants to solve a
kernel ridge regression. The work (Song et al., 2021) does not require the parameter λ, but it obtains
runtime improvements for d ≥ n, and the sketching dimension is super-linear in n.


2     T ECHNIQUE OVERVIEW

In this section, we provide an overview of the techniques employed in our development of two
nearly-linear time algorithms for structured QPs. In Section 2.1, we detail the robust IPM framework,
which forms the foundation of our algorithms. Subsequent section, namely Section 2.2 and 2.3,
delves into dedicated data structures designed for efficiently solving low-treewidth and low-rank QPs,
respectively. Finally, in Section 2.4, we discuss the adaptation of these advanced QP solvers for both
linear and kernel SVMs.
Due to the heavily-technical nature, we recommend that in the first read, the audience can skip
Section 2.2 and 2.3.

2.1   G ENERAL S TRATEGY

Our algorithm is built upon the robust IPM framework, an efficient variant of the primal-dual central
path method (Renegar, 1988). This framework maintains a primal-dual solution pair (x, s) ∈ Rn ×Rn .
To understand the central path for QPs, we first consider the central path equations for linear
programming (see Cohen et al. (2019); Lee et al. (2019) for reference):

                                         s/t + ∇ϕ(x) = µ,
                                                 Ax = b,
                                             A⊤ y + s = c,


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where x is the primal variable, s is the slack variable, y is the dual variable, ϕ(x) is a self-concordant
barrier function, and µ denotes the error. The central path is defined by the trajectory of (x, s) as t
approaches 0.
In quadratic programming, we modify these equations:
                                             s/t + ∇ϕ(x) = µ,
                                                     Ax = b,
                                         −Qx + A⊤ y + s = c,
where Q is the positive semidefinite objective matrix. The key difference in the central path equations
for LP and QP is the inclusion of the −Qx term in the third equation, significantly affecting algorithm
design.
Fundamentally, IPM is a Newton’s method in which we update the variables x, y and s through the
second-order information from the self-concordant barrier function. We derive the update rules for
QP (detailed derivation in Section F.2):
                                    δx = tM −1/2 (I − P )M −1/2 δµ ,
                                    δy = −t(AM −1 A⊤ )−1 AM −1 δµ ,
                                    δs = tδµ − t2 HM −1/2 (I − P )M −1/2 δµ ,
                        where       H = ∇2 ϕ(x),          M = Q + tH,
                                             −1/2
                                     P =M           A (AM −1 A⊤ )−1 AM −1/2 ,
                                                     ⊤

where δx , δy , δs , and δµ are the incremental steps for x, y, s, and µ, respectively.
The robust IPM approximates these updates rather than computing them exactly. It maintains
an approximate primal-dual solution pair (x, s) ∈ Rn × Rn and computes the steps using this
approximation. Provided the approximation is sufficiently accurate, it can be shown (see Section F
for more details) that the algorithm converges efficiently to the optimal solution along the robust
central path.
Therefore, the critical challenge lies in efficiently maintaining (x, s), an approximation to (x, s),
when (x, s) evolves following the robust central path steps. The primary difficulty is that explicitly
managing the primal-dual solution pair (x, s) is inefficient due to potential dense changes. Such
changes can lead to dense updates in H, slowing down the computation of steps. The innovative
aspect of robust IPM is recognizing that (x, s) are only required at the algorithm’s conclusion,
not during its execution. Instead, we can identify entries with significant changes and update the
approximation (x, s) correspondingly. With IPM’s lazy updates, only a nearly-linear number of
entries are adjusted throughout the algorithm:
                      T
                      X
                            ∥x(t) − x(t−1) ∥0 + ∥s(t) − s(t−1) ∥0 = O(n
                                                                    e log(1/ϵ))
                      t=1

where T = O(e √n log(1/ϵ)) is the number of iterations for IPM convergence. This indicates that, on
average, each entry of x and s is updated log(1/ϵ) times, facilitating rapid updates to these quantities
and, consequently, to H.
In the special case where Q = 0, the path reverts to the LP case, with M = tH being a diagonal ma-
trix, allowing for efficient computation and updates of M −1 . This simplifies maintaining AM −1 A⊤ ,
as updates to M −1 correspond to row and column scaling of A. However, in the QP scenario, where
M is symmetric positive semidefinite, maintaining the term AM −1 A⊤ becomes more complex.
Nevertheless, when the number of constraints is small, as in SVMs, this issue is less problematic.
Yet, even with this simplification, the challenge is far from trivial, given the presence of terms like
M −1/2 in the robust central path steps. While the matrix Woodbury identity could be considered, it
falls short when maintaining a square root term. Despite these hurdles, we construct efficient data
structures for M −1/2 maintenance when Q possesses succinct representations, such as low-rank.
Before diving into the particular techniques for low-rank QPs, we start by exploring the low-treewidth
QPs, which could be viewed as a structured sparsity condition. It provides valuable insights for the
low-rank scenario.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.2   L OW-T REEWIDTH S ETTING : H OW TO L EVERAGE S PARSITY

Treewidth is parameter for graphs that captures the sparsity pattern. Given a graph G = (V, E) with
n vertices and m edges, a tree decomposition of G arranges its vertices into bags, which collectively
form a tree structure. For any two bags Xi , Xj , if a vertex v is present in both, it must also be
included in all bags along the path between Xi and Xj . Additionally, each pair of adjacent vertices
in the graph must be present together in at least one bag. The treewidth τ is defined as the maximum
size of a bag minus one. Intuitively, a graph G with a small treewidth τ implies a structure akin to
a tree. For a formal definition, see Definition A.1. When relating this combinatorial structure to
linear algebra, we could treat the quadratic objective matrix Q as a generalized adjacency matrix,
where we put a vertex vi on i-th row of Q, and put an edge {vi , vj } whenever the entry Qi,j is
nonzero. The low-treewidth structure of the graph corresponds to a sparsity pattern that allows one to
compute a column-sparse Cholesky factorization of Q. Since M = Q + tH and H is diagonal, we
can decompose M = LL⊤ into sparse Cholesky factors4 .
Under any coordinate update to x, M is updated on only one diagonal entry, enabling efficient updates
to L. The remaining task is to use this Cholesky decomposition to maintain the central path step.
By expanding the central path equations and substituting M = LL⊤ , we derive
            δx = tM −1/2 (I − P )M −1/2 δµ
               = tM −1 δµ − tM −1 A⊤ (AM −1 A⊤ )−1 AM −1 δµ
               = tL−⊤ L−1 δµ − tL−⊤ L−1 A⊤ (AL−⊤ L−1 A⊤ )−1 AL−⊤ L−1 δµ ,
            δs = tδµ − t2 HM −1/2 (I − P )M −1/2 δµ
               = tδµ − t2 L−⊤ L−1 δµ + t2 L−⊤ L−1 A⊤ (AL−⊤ L−1 A⊤ )−1 AL−⊤ L−1 δµ .
Updates to the diagonal of M do not change L’s nonzero pattern, allowing for efficient utiliza-
tion of the sparse factor and maintenance of L−1 A⊤ ∈ Rn×m and L−1 δµ ∈ Rn . Terms like
(AL−⊤ L−1 A⊤ )−1 AL−⊤ L−1 δµ ∈ Rm can also be explicitly maintained.
With this approach, we propose the following implicit representation for maintaining (x, s):
                            b + H −1/2 W ⊤ (hβx − e
                          x=x                     hβex + ϵx ),                                           (4)
                          s = sb + H 1/2 cs βcs − H 1/2 W ⊤ (hβs − e
                                                                   hβes + ϵs ),                          (5)
                n           −1   1/2      n×n            −1       n           −1/2         n
      b, sb ∈ R , W = L H
where x                             ∈R     , h = L δ µ ∈ R , cs = H          δ µ ∈ R , βx , βs , βcs ∈
          −1 ⊤      n×m e e           m             n
R, h = L A ∈ R
   e                     , βx , βs ∈ R , ϵx , ϵs ∈ R . All quantities except for W can be explicitly
maintained. For linear programming, the implicit representation is as follows:
                              b + H −1/2 βx cx − H −1/2 W ⊤ (βx h + ϵx )
                            x=x
                            s = sb + H 1/2 W ⊤ (βs h + ϵs ),
with W = L−1 AH −1/2 maintained implicitly and the other terms explicitly.
The representation in (4) and (5) enables us to maintain the central path step using a combination of
                  hβex and “basis” W ⊤ . We need to detect entries of x that deviate significantly from x
“coefficients” h+ e
and capture these changes with ∥H 1/2 (x − x)∥2 . We maintain this vector using x0 + W ⊤ (h + e      hβex ).
Here, W ⊤ acts as a wavelet basis and the vector h + e     hβex as its multiscale coefficients. While
computing and maintaining W ⊤ h seems challenging, leveraging column-sparsity of L−1 is possible
through contraction with a vector v:
                                        v ⊤ W ⊤ = (Wv)⊤
                                                 = (L−1 H 1/2 v)⊤ .
By applying the Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform (JL) in place of v, we can quickly approximate
∥W ⊤ h∥2 by maintaining ΦW ⊤ for a JL matrix Φ. Similarly, we handle W ⊤ e    hβex by explicitly
            ⊤e                            −1
computing A βx and using the sparsity of L for hβx .
                                                e e
    4
      Note that adding a non-negative diagonal matrix to Q does not change its sparsity pattern, hence M also
retains the treewidth τ .


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We focus on entries significantly deviating from x0 , the heavy entries of W ⊤ (h + e     hβex ). Here, the
treewidth-τ decomposition enables quick computation of an elimination tree based on L−1 ’s sparsity,
facilitating efficient estimation of ∥(W ⊤ (h + e
                                                hβex ))χ(v) ∥2 for any subtree χ(v)5 . With an elimination
tree of height O(τ ), we can employ heavy-light decomposition (Sleator & Tarjan, 1981) for an
                  e
O(log n)-height tree.
Using these data structures, convergence is established using the robust IPM framework (Ye, 2020;
Lee & Vempala, 2021). While the framework is generally applicable to QPs, P      computing an initial
                                                                                   n
point remains a challenge. We propose a simpler objective x0 = arg minx∈Rn i=1 ϕi (xi ) with ϕi
as the log-barrier function, resembling the initial point reduction in Lee et al. (2019). This initial
point enables us to solve an augmented quadratic program that increases dimension by 1.

2.3      L OW-R ANK S ETTING : H OW TO U TILIZE S MALL FACTORIZATION

The low-treewidth structure can be considered a form of sparsity, allowing for a sparse factorization
M = LL⊤ . Another significant structure arises when the matrix Q admits a low-rank factorization.
Let Q = U V ⊤ where U, V ∈ Rn×k and k ≪ n, then M = Q + tH = U V ⊤ + tH. Although Q
has a low-rank structure, M may not be low-rank due to the diagonal matrix being dense. However,
in the central path equations, we need only handle M −1 , which can be efficiently maintained using
the matrix Woodbury identity:
                      M −1 = t−1 H −1 − t−2 H −1 U (I + t−1 V ⊤ H −1 U )−1 V ⊤ H −1 ,
Given that H is diagonal, the complex term (I + t−1 V ⊤ H −1 U )−1 can be quickly updated under
sparse changes to H −1 by simply scaling rows of U and V . With only a nearly-linear number of
                                               e √n log(1/ϵ)) iterations is bounded by O(nk
updates to H −1 , the total update time across O(                                      e    ω−1
                                                                                                +
 ω
k ). We modify the (x, s) implicit representation as follows:
                              x=x  b + H −1/2 hβx + H −1/2 b hβbx + H −1/2 e hβex ,                    (6)
                              s = sb + H 1/2 hβs + H 1/2 b
                                                         hβbs + H 1/2 e
                                                                      hβes ,                           (7)

where x, s ∈ Rn , h = H −1/2 δ µ ∈ Rn , bh = H −1/2 U ∈ Rn×k , and e    h = H −1/2 A⊤ ∈ Rn×m , with
βex , βes ∈ Rm and βx , βs ∈ R. The nontrivial terms to maintain are bh and e
                                                                            h, but both can be managed
                                 −1/2
straightforwardly: updates to H       correspond to scaling rows of U and A⊤ , and can be performed
in total O(nk)
           e      and O(nm)
                      e      time, respectively. The key observation is that we never explicitly form
    −1/2
M         , hence matrix Woodbury identity suffices for fast updates.
The remaining task is to design a data structure for detecting heavy entries. Instead of starting with an
elimination tree and re-balancing it through heavy-light decomposition, we construct a balanced tree
on n nodes, hierarchically dividing length-n vectors by their indices. Sampling is then performed by
traversing down to the tree’s leaves. While a heavy-hitter data structure could lead to improvements
in poly-logarithmic and sub-logarithmic factors, we primarily focus on polynomial dependencies on
various parameters and leave this enhancement for future exploration.

2.4      G AUSSIAN K ERNEL SVM: A LGORITHM AND H ARDNESS

Our specialized QP solvers provide fast implementations for linear SVMs when the data dimension
d is much smaller than n. However, for kernel SVM, forming the kernel matrix exactly would
take Θ(n2 ) time. Fortunately, advancements in kernel matrix algebra (Alman et al., 2020; Backurs
et al., 2021; Aggarwal & Alman, 2022; Bakshi et al., 2023) have enabled sub-quadratic algorithms
when the data dimension d is small or the kernel matrix has a relatively large minimum entry.
Both Alman et al. (2020) and Bakshi et al. (2023) introduce algorithms for spectral sparsification,
generating an approximate matrix K   e ∈ Rn×n such that (1 − ϵ) · K ⪯ K   e ⪯ (1 + ϵ) · K, with K   e
                 −2                                                                     1+o(1)
having only O(ϵ n log n) nonzero entries. Alman et al. (2020) achieves this in O(n             ) time
for multiplicatively Lipschitz kernels when d = O(log n), while Bakshi et al. (2023) overcomes
limitations for Gaussian kernels by basing their algorithm on KDE and the magnitude of the minimum
entry of the kernel matrix, parameterized by τ . Their algorithm for Gaussian kernels runs in time
   5
       Given any tree node v, we use χ(v) to denote the subtree rooted at v.


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        3.173+o(1)
O(nd/τ
e                  ). Unfortunately, spectral sparsifiers do not aid our primitives since a sparsifier
only reduces the number of nonzero entries, but not the rank of the kernel matrix.
Besides spectral sparsification, Alman et al. (2020); Aggarwal & Alman (2022) also demonstrate that
with d = d = O(log n) and suitable kernels, there exists an O(n1+o(1) ) time algorithm to multiply
the kernel matrix with an arbitrary vector v ∈ Rn . This operation is crucial in Batch KDE as shown
in Aggarwal & Alman (2022). Moreover, Aggarwal & Alman (2022) establishes an almost-quadratic
lower bound for this operation when the squared dataset radius B = ω(log n), assuming SETH.
These results rely on computing a rank-no(1) factorization for the Gaussian kernel matrix. The
function e−x can be approximated by a low-degree polynomial of degree
                                            p                         log(1/ϵ)
                                 q := Θ(max{ B log(1/ϵ),                          })
                                                                  log(log(1/ϵ)/B)
for x ∈ [0, B]. Using this polynomial, one can create matrices U, V with rank 2d+2q

                                                                                         2q   = no(1) in
time O(n1+o(1) ). Given this factorization, multiplying it with a vector v as U (V ⊤ v) takes O(n1+o(1) )
          e = U V ⊤ where K
time. Let K                   e i,j = f (∥xi − xj ∥2 ), we have for any (i, j) ∈ [n] × [n],
                                                   2

                                    |f (∥xi − xj ∥22 ) − exp(−∥xi − xj ∥22 )| ≤ ϵ,
and for any row i ∈ [n],
                                             n
                                             X
                    |(Kv)
                      e i − (Kv)i | = |            vj (f (∥xi − xj ∥22 ) − exp(−∥xi − xj ∥22 ))|
                                             j=1

                                        ≤ (max |f (∥xi − xj ∥22 ) − exp(−∥xi − xj ∥22 )|)∥v∥1
                                             j∈[n]

                                        ≤ ϵ∥v∥1 ,
                                                                                e − K)v, useful for
using Hölder’s inequality. This provides an ℓ∞ -guarantee of the error vector (K
Batch Gaussian KDE. Transforming this ℓ∞ -guarantee into a spectral approximator yields

                                        (1 − ϵn) · K ⪯ K
                                                       e ⪯ (1 + ϵn) · K.

Setting ϵ = 1/n2 , the low-rank factorization offers an adequate spectral approximation to the exact
kernel matrix K.
Given K e = U V ⊤ for U, V ∈ Rn×no(1) , we can solve program (3) with K    e using our low-rank QP
algorithm in time O(n1+o(1) log(1/ϵ)).6 This is the first almost-linear time algorithm for Gaussian
kernel SVM, even in low-precision settings, as prior works either lack machinery to approximately
form the kernel matrix efficiently, or do not possess faster convex optimization solvers for solving a
structured quadratic program associated with a kernel SVM.
The requirements d = O(log n) and B = o( logloglogn n ) may seem restrictive, but they are necessary, as
no sub-quadratic time algorithm exists for Gaussian kernel SVM without bias when d = Ω(log n) and
B = Ω(log2 n), and with bias when B = Ω(log6 n), assuming SETH. This is based on a reduction
from Bichromatic Closet Pair to Gaussian kernel SVM, as established by Backurs et al. (2017). Our
assumptions on d and B are therefore justified for seeking almost-linear time algorithms.
We note that in other variants of definitions for Gaussian kernels, one requires an additional parameter
                                                                         ∥x −x ∥2
called the kernel width, and the kernel function is defined as exp(− i2σ2j 2 ). In commonly used
                                            √
heuristics (Ramdas et al., 2015), σ = O( d), hence we could without loss of generality assuming
σ = 1 by requiring the squared radius to be B/d.

3       C ONCLUSION
On the algorithmic front, we introduce the first nearly-linear time algorithms for low-rank convex
quadratic programming, leading to nearly-linear time algorithms for linear SVMs. For Gaussian kernel
    6
        Additional requirement: B = o( logloglogn n ). See Section G for further discussion.


                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


SVMs, we utilize a low-rank approximation from Aggarwal & Alman (2022) when d = O(log n) and
the squared dataset radius is small, enabling an almost-linear time algorithm. On the hardness aspect,
we establish that when d = Ω(log n), if the squared dataset radius is sufficiently large (Ω(log2 n)
without bias and Ω(log6 n) with bias), then assuming SETH, no sub-quadratic algorithm exists. As
our work is theoretical in nature, we do not foresee any potential negative societal impact. Several
open problems arise from our work:

Better dependence on k for low-rank QPs. Our low-rank QP solver exhibits a dependence of
k (ω+1)/2 on the rank k. Given the precomputed factorization, can we improve the exponents on k?
Ideally, an algorithm with nearly-linear dependence on k would align more closely with input size.

Better dependence on m for general QPs. Focusing on SVMs with a few equality constraints,
our QP solvers do not exhibit strong dependence on the number of equality constraints m. Without
structural assumptions on the constraint matrix A, this is expected. However, many QPs, particularly
in graph contexts, involve large m. Is there a pathway to an algorithm with better dependence on m?
More broadly, can we achieve a result akin to that of Lee & Sidford (2019), where the number of
iterations depends on the square root of the rank of A, with minimal per iteration cost?

Stronger lower bound in terms of B for Gaussian kernel SVMs. We establish hardness results
for Gaussian kernel SVM when B = Ω(log2 n) without bias and B = Ω(log6 n) with bias. This
contrasts with our algorithm, which requires B to have sub-logarithmic dependence on n. For
Batch Gaussian KDE, Aggarwal & Alman (2022) demonstrated that fast algorithms are feasible for
B = o(log n), with no sub-quadratic time algorithms for B = ω(log n) assuming SETH. Can a
stronger lower bound be shown for SVM programs with a bias term, reflecting a more natural setting?

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Part of the work was done while Yuzhou Gu was supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. DMS-1926686. Lichen Zhang was supported in part by NSF CCF-1955217 and
NSF DMS-2022448.

R EFERENCES
Amol Aggarwal and Josh Alman. Optimal-degree polynomial approximations for exponentials
 and gaussian kernel density estimation. In Proceedings of the 37th Computational Complexity
 Conference, CCC ’22, Dagstuhl, DEU, 2022. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik.
Thomas D. Ahle, Michael Kapralov, Jakob Bæk Tejs Knudsen, Rasmus Pagh, Ameya Velingker,
  David P. Woodruff, and Amir Zandieh. Oblivious sketching of high-degree polynomial kernels. In
  Proceedings of the 2020 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pp. 141–160,
  2020.
Josh Alman, Timothy Chu, Aaron Schild, and Zhao Song. Algorithms and hardness for linear algebra
  on geometric graphs. In 2020 IEEE 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
  (FOCS), 2020.
Josh Alman, Ran Duan, Virginia Vassilevska Williams, Yinzhan Xu, Zixuan Xu, and Renfei Zhou.
  More asymmetry yields faster matrix multiplication. In Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM
  Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pp. 2005–2039, 2025.
Haim Avron, Huy L. Nguyen, and David P. Woodruff. Subspace embeddings for the polynomial
  kernel. In NeurIPS, 2014.
Arturs Backurs, Piotr Indyk, and Ludwig Schmidt. On the fine-grained complexity of empirical risk
  minimization: Kernel methods and neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 30, 2017.
Arturs Backurs, Moses Charikar, Piotr Indyk, and Paris Siminelakis. Efficient density evaluation
  for smooth kernels. In 2018 IEEE 59th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
  (FOCS), 2018.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Arturs Backurs, Piotr Indyk, Cameron Musco, and Tal Wagner. Faster kernel matrix algebra via
  density estimation. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2021.
Ainesh Bakshi, Piotr Indyk, Praneeth Kacham, Sandeep Silwal, and Samson Zhou. Sub-quadratic
  algorithms for kernel matrices via kernel density estimation. In International Conference on
  Learning Representation, ICLR’23, 2023.
Aaron Bernstein, Maximilian Probst Gutenberg, and Thatchaphol Saranurak. Deterministic decre-
  mental sssp and approximate min-cost flow in almost-linear time. In 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual
  Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 1000–1008. IEEE, 2022.
Bernhard E. Boser, Isabelle M. Guyon, and Vladimir N. Vapnik. A training algorithm for optimal
  margin classifiers. In Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Workshop on Computational Learning
  Theory, COLT ’92, 1992.
Jan van den Brand. A deterministic linear program solver in current matrix multiplication time. In
  Proceedings of the Thirty-First Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA
  ’20, 2020.
Jan van den Brand, Yin Tat Lee, Aaron Sidford, and Zhao Song. Solving tall dense linear programs
  in nearly linear time. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
  Computing, pp. 775–788, 2020.
Jair Cervantes, Farid Garcia Lamont, Lisbeth Rodriguez Mazahua, and Asdrubal Lopez. A com-
   prehensive survey on support vector machine classification: Applications, challenges and trends.
  Neurocomputing, 408:189–215, 2020.
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. Training ν-support vector classifiers: Theory and algorithms.
  Neural Comput., sep 2001.
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. Libsvm: A library for support vector machines. ACM Trans.
  Intell. Syst. Technol., may 2011.
Moses Charikar and Paris Siminelakis. Hashing-based-estimators for kernel density in high di-
 mensions. In 2017 IEEE 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
 2017.
Moses Charikar, Michael Kapralov, Navid Nouri, and Paris Siminelakis. Kernel density estimation
 through density constrained near neighbor search. In 2020 IEEE 61st Annual Symposium on
 Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS). IEEE Computer Society, 2020.
Moses Charikar, Michael Kapralov, and Erik Waingarten. A quasi-monte carlo data structure for
 smooth kernel evaluations. In Proceedings of the 2024 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
 Algorithms (SODA), pp. 5118–5144, 2024.
Michael B Cohen, Yin Tat Lee, and Zhao Song. Solving linear programs in the current matrix
 multiplication time. STOC, 2019.
Ronan Collobert and Samy Bengio. Svmtorch: Support vector machines for large-scale regression
  problems. Journal of machine learning research, 1(Feb):143–160, 2001.
Gerard Cornuejols and Reha Tütüncü. Optimization methods in finance, volume 5. Cambridge
  University Press, 2006.
Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. Support-vector networks. Mach. Learn., 1995.
George B Dantzig. Linear programming under uncertainty. Management science, 1(3-4):197–206,
 1955.
Timothy A Davis and William W Hager. Modifying a sparse cholesky factorization. SIAM Journal
  on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 20(3):606–627, 1999.
Frédéric Delbos and Jean Charles Gilbert. Global linear convergence of an augmented Lagrangian
  algorithm for solving convex quadratic optimization problems. PhD thesis, INRIA, 2003.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


James R Driscoll, Neil Sarnak, Daniel D Sleator, and Robert E Tarjan. Making data structures
  persistent. Journal of computer and system sciences, 38(1):86–124, 1989.
Ran Duan, Hongxun Wu, and Renfei Zhou. Faster matrix multiplication via asymmetric hashing. In
  FOCS, 2023.
Michael C Ferris and Todd S Munson. Interior-point methods for massive support vector machines.
 SIAM Journal on Optimization, 13(3):783–804, 2002.
Francois Le Gall. Faster rectangular matrix multiplication by combination loss analysis. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA’24,
  2024.
Nicholas IM Gould and Philippe L Toint. A quadratic programming bibliography. Numerical Analysis
  Group Internal Report, 1:32, 2000.
Nicholas IM Gould, Mary E Hribar, and Jorge Nocedal. On the solution of equality constrained
  quadratic programming problems arising in optimization. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing,
  23(4):1376–1395, 2001.
Yuzhou Gu and Zhao Song. A faster small treewidth sdp solver. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.06033,
  2022.
Baihe Huang, Shunhua Jiang, Zhao Song, Runzhou Tao, and Ruizhe Zhang. Solving sdp faster: A
  robust ipm framework and efficient implementation. In FOCS, 2022.
R. Impagliazzo, R. Paturi, and F. Zane. Which problems have strongly exponential complexity? In
  Proceedings 39th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 1998.
Russell Impagliazzo and Ramamohan Paturi. On the complexity of k-sat. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 62:
  367–375, mar 2001.
Haotian Jiang, Tarun Kathuria, Yin Tat Lee, Swati Padmanabhan, and Zhao Song. A faster interior
  point method for semidefinite programming. In 2020 IEEE 61st annual symposium on foundations
  of computer science (FOCS), pp. 910–918. IEEE, 2020.
Shunhua Jiang, Zhao Song, Omri Weinstein, and Hengjie Zhang. A faster algorithm for solving
  general lps. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing,
  pp. 823–832, 2021.
Shunhua Jiang, Bento Natura, and Omri Weinstein. A faster interior-point method for sum-of-
  squares optimization. In 49th EATCS International Conference on Automata, Languages, and
  Programming, LIPIcs. Leibniz Int. Proc. Inform., 2022.
Thorsten Joachims. Making large-scale support vector machine learning practical. In Advances in
  kernel methods: support vector learning, pp. 169. MIT press, 1999.
Thorsten Joachims. Training linear svms in linear time. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD
  international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 217–226, 2006.
William B Johnson and Joram Lindenstrauss. Extensions of lipschitz mappings into a hilbert space.
 Contemporary mathematics, 26(189-206):1, 1984.
Narendra Karmarkar. A new polynomial-time algorithm for linear programming. In Proceedings of
  the sixteenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 302–311, 1984.
Mikhail K Kozlov, Sergei Pavlovich Tarasov, and Leonid Genrikhovich Khachiyan. Polynomial
 solvability of convex quadratic programming. In Doklady Akademii Nauk, pp. 1049–1051. Russian
 Academy of Sciences, 1979.
Yin Tat Lee and Aaron Sidford. Solving linear programs with sqrt (rank) linear system solves. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1910.08033, 2019.
Yin Tat Lee and Santosh S. Vempala. Tutorial on the robust interior point method, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yin Tat Lee, Zhao Song, and Qiuyi Zhang. Solving empirical risk minimization in the current matrix
  multiplication time. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2140–2157. PMLR, 2019.
K.-R. Muller, S. Mika, G. Ratsch, K. Tsuda, and B. Scholkopf. An introduction to kernel-based
  learning algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 12, 2001.
Katta G Murty. Linear complementarity, linear and nonlinear programming, volume 3. Citeseer,
 1988.
Yurii Nesterov. Introductory lectures on convex programming volume i: Basic course. Lecture notes,
  3(4):5, 1998.
Panos M Pardalos and Stephen A Vavasis. Quadratic programming with one negative eigenvalue is
  np-hard. Journal of Global optimization, 1(1):15–22, 1991.
John Platt. Sequential minimal optimization: A fast algorithm for training support vector machines.
  MSR-TR-98-14, 1998.
Marco Propato and James G Uber. Booster system design using mixed-integer quadratic programming.
 Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management, 130(4):348–352, 2004.
Lianke Qin, Zhao Song, Lichen Zhang, and Danyang Zhuo. An online and unified algorithm for
  projection matrix vector multiplication with application to empirical risk minimization. In AISTATS,
  2023.
Aaditya Ramdas, Sashank J. Reddi, Barnabás Póczos, Aarti Singh, and Larry Wasserman. On the
  decreasing power of kernel and distance based nonparametric hypothesis tests in high dimensions.
  In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI’15, pp.
  3571–3577. AAAI Press, 2015. ISBN 0262511290.
James Renegar. A polynomial-time algorithm, based on newton’s method, for linear programming.
  Math. Program., 40(1–3):59–93, jan 1988.
Aviad Rubinstein. Hardness of approximate nearest neighbor search. In Proceedings of the 50th
  Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2018, pp. 1260–1268, New
  York, NY, USA, 2018. Association for Computing Machinery.
Sartaj Sahni. Computationally related problems. SIAM Journal on computing, 3(4):262–279, 1974.
Robert Schreiber. A new implementation of sparse gaussian elimination. ACM Transactions on
  Mathematical Software (TOMS), 8(3):256–276, 1982.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Yoram Singer, Nathan Srebro, and Andrew Cotter. Pegasos: primal estimated
  sub-gradient solver for svm. Math. Program., 127, 2011.
Daniel D Sleator and Robert Endre Tarjan. A data structure for dynamic trees. In Proceedings of the
  thirteenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 114–122, 1981.
Zhao Song and Zheng Yu. Oblivious sketching-based central path method for linear programming.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9835–9847. PMLR, 2021.
Zhao Song, David Woodruff, Zheng Yu, and Lichen Zhang. Fast sketching of polynomial kernels of
  polynomial degree. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9812–9823. PMLR,
  2021.
Zhao Song, Xin Yang, Yuanyuan Yang, and Lichen Zhang. Sketching meets differential privacy: fast
  algorithm for dynamic kronecker projection maintenance. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), pp. 32418–32462. PMLR, 2023.
Pravin M Vaidya. Speeding-up linear programming using fast matrix multiplication. In 30th Annual
  Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 332–337. IEEE, 1989.
Virginia Vassilevska Williams, Yinzhan Xu, Zixuan Xu, and Renfei Zhou. New bounds for matrix
  multiplication: from alpha to omega. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual ACM-SIAM
  Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA’24, 2024.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Philip Wolfe. The simplex method for quadratic programming. Econometrica: Journal of the
  Econometric Society, pp. 382–398, 1959.
David Woodruff and Amir Zandieh. Leverage score sampling for tensor product matrices in input
  sparsity time. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu,
  and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2022.
Stephen J Wright. Continuous optimization (nonlinear and linear programming). Foundations of
  Computer-Aided Process Design, 1999.
Guanghao Ye. Fast algorithm for solving structured convex programs. The University of Washington,
  Master Thesis, 2020.
Amir Zandieh, Insu Han, Haim Avron, Neta Shoham, Chaewon Kim, and Jinwoo Shin. Scaling
 neural tangent kernels via sketching and random features. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang,
 and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Roadmap. In Section A, we present some basic definitions and tools that will be used in the
reminder of the paper. In Section B, we introduce a few more SVM formulations, including classi-
fication and distribution estimation. In Section C, we show convex quadratic programming can be
reduced to convex empirical risk minimization, and therefore can be solved in the current matrix
multiplication time owing to Lee et al. (2019). In Section D and E, we prove results on low-treewidth
and low-rank QPs, respectively. In Section F, we present a robust IPM framework for QPs, generalize
beyond LPs and convex ERMs with linear objective. In Section G, we present our algorithms for
Gaussian kernel SVMs, with complementary lower bound.

A     P RELIMINARY

A.1    N OTATIONS

For a positive integer n, we use [n] to denote the set {1, 2, · · · , n}. For a matrix A, we use A⊤ to
denote its transpose. For a matrix A, we define ∥A∥p→q := supx ∥Ax∥q /∥x∥p . When p = q = 2,
we recover the spectral norm.
We define the entrywise ℓp -norm of a matrix A as ∥A∥p := ( i,j |Ai,j |p )1/p .
                                                                P

For any function f : N → N and n ∈ N, we use O(f   e (n)) to denote O(f (n) poly log f (n)). We use
1{E} to denote the indicator for event E, i.e., if E happens, 1{E} = 1 and otherwise it’s 0.

A.2    T REEWIDTH

Treewidth captures the sparsity and tree-like structures of a graph.
Definition A.1 (Tree Decomposition and Treewidth). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, a tree decomposi-
tion of G is a tree T with b vertices, and b sets J1 , . . . , Jb ⊆ V (called bags), satisfying the following
properties:

       • For every edge (u, v) ∈ E, there exists j ∈ [b] such that u, v ∈ Jj ;
       • For every vertex v ∈ V , {j ∈ [b] : v ∈ Jj } is a non-empty subtree of T .

The treewidth of G is defined as the minimum value of max{|Jj | : j ∈ [b]} − 1 over all tree
decompositions.

A near-optimal tree decomposition of a graph can be computed in almost linear time.
Theorem A.2 (Bernstein et al. (2022)). Given a graph G, there is an O(m1+o(1) ) time algorithm
that produces a tree decomposition of G of maximum bag size O(τ log3 n), where τ is the actual
(unknown) treewidth of G.

Therefore, when τ = mΘ(1) , we can compute an O(τ  e )-size tree decomposition in time O(mτ o(1) ),
which is negligible in the final running time of Theorem D.1.

A.3    S PARSE C HOLESKY D ECOMPOSITION

In this section we state a few results on sparse Cholesky decomposition. Fast sparse Cholesky
decomposition algorithms are based on the concept of elimination tree, introduced in Schreiber
(1982).
Definition A.3 (Elimination tree). Let G be an undirected graph on n vertices. An elimination tree T
is a rooted tree on V (G) together with an ordering π of V (G) such that for any vertex v, its parent is
the smallest (under π) element u such that there exists a path P from v to u, such that π(w) ≤ π(v)
for all w ∈ P − u.

The following lemma relates the elimination tree and the structure of Cholesky factors.
Lemma A.4 (Schreiber (1982)). Let M be a PSD matrix and T be an elimination tree of the
adjacency graph of M (i.e., (i, j) ∈ E(G) iff Mi,j ̸= 0) together with an elimination ordering π.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let P be the permutation matrix Pi,v = 1{v = π(i)}. Then the Cholesky factor L of P M P ⊤ (i.e.,
P M P ⊤ = LL⊤ ) satisfies Li,j ̸= 0 only if π(i) is an ancestor of π(j).
The following result is the current best result for computing a sparse Cholesky decomposition.
Lemma A.5 ((Gu & Song, 2022, Lemma 8.4)). Let M ∈ Rn×n be a PSD matrix whose adjacency
graph has treewidth τ . Then we can compute the Cholesky factorization M = LL⊤ in O(nτ  e      ω−1
                                                                                                   )
time.
The following result is the current best result for updating a sparse Cholesky decomposition.
Lemma A.6 (Davis & Hager (1999)). Let M ∈ Rn×n be a PSD matrix whose adjacency graph
has treewidth τ . Assume that we are given the Cholseky factorization M = LL⊤ . Let w ∈ Rn be a
vector such that M + ww⊤ has the same adjacency graph as M . Then we can compute ∆L ∈ Rn×n
such that L + ∆L is the Cholesky factor of M + ww⊤ in O(τ 2 ) time.
Throughout our algorithm, we need to compute matrix-vector multiplications involving Cholesky
factors. We use the following results from Gu & Song (2022).
Lemma A.7 ((Gu & Song, 2022, Lemma 4.7)). Let M ∈ Rn×n be a PSD matrix whose adjacency
graph has treewidth τ . Assume that we are given the Cholseky factorization M = LL⊤ . Then we
have the following running time for matrix-vector multiplications.
       (i) For v ∈ Rn , computing Lv, L⊤ v, L−1 v, L−⊤ v takes O(nτ ) time.
      (ii) For v ∈ Rn , computing Lv takes O(∥v∥0 τ ) time.
      (iii) For v ∈ Rn , computing L−1 v takes O(∥L−1 v∥0 τ ) time.
      (iv) For v ∈ Rn , if v is supported on a path in the elimination tree, then computing L−1 v takes
           O(τ 2 ) time.
    (v) For v ∈ Rn , computing W ⊤ v takes O(nτ ) time, where W = L−1 H 1/2 with H ∈ Rn×n is
         a non-negative diagonal matrix.
Lemma A.8 ((Gu & Song, 2022, Lemma 4.8)). Let M ∈ Rn×n be a PSD matrix whose adjacency
graph has treewidth τ . Assume that we are given the Cholseky factorization M = LL⊤ . Then we
have the following running time for matrix-vector multiplications, when we only need result for a
subset of coordinates.
       (i) Let S be a path in the elimination tree whose one endpoint is the root. For v ∈ Rn ,
           computing (L−⊤ v)S takes O(τ 2 ) time.
      (ii) For v ∈ Rn , for i ∈ [n], computing (W ⊤ v)i takes O(τ 2 ) time, where W = L−1 H 1/2 with
           H ∈ Rn×n be a non-negative diagonal matrix.

A.4     J OHNSON -L INDENTRAUSS L EMMA

We recall the Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma, a powerful algorithmic primitive that reduces dimension
while preserving ℓ2 norms.
Lemma A.9 (Johnson & Lindenstrauss (1984)). Let ϵ ∈ (0, 1) be the precision parameter. Let
δ ∈ (0, 1) be the failure probability. Let A ∈ Rm×n be a real matrix. Let r = ϵ−2 log(mn/δ). For
R ∈ Rr×n whose entries are i.i.d N (0, 1r ), the following holds with probability at least 1 − δ:
                         (1 − ϵ)∥ai ∥2 ≤ ∥Rai ∥2 ≤ (1 + ϵ)∥ai ∥2 , ∀i ∈ [m],
where for a matrix A, a⊤
                       i denotes the i-th row of matrix A ∈ R
                                                              m×n
                                                                  .

A.5     H EAVY-L IGHT D ECOMPOSITION

Heavy-light decomposition is useful when one wants to re-balance a binary tree with height O(log n).
Lemma A.10 (Sleator & Tarjan (1981)). Given a rooted tree T with n vertices, we can construct
in O(n) time an ordering π of the vertices such that (1) every path in T can be decomposed into
O(log n) contiguous subseqeuences under π, and (2) every subtree in T is a single contiguous
subsequence under π.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     SVM F ORMULATIONS
In this section, we review a list of formulations of SVM. These formulations have been implemented
in the LIBSVM library Chang & Lin (2011).
Throughout this section, we use ϕ : Rd → Rs to denote the feature mapping, K to denote the
associated kernel function and K ∈ Rn×n to denote the kernel matrix. For linear SVM, ϕ is just
the identity mapping. We will focus on the dual quadratic program formulation as usual. We will
also assume for each problem, a dataset X ∈ Rn×d is given together with binary labels y ∈ Rn . Let
Q := (yy ⊤ ) ◦ K.

B.1   C-S UPPORT V ECTOR C LASSIFICATION

This formulation is also referred as the soft-margin SVM. It can be viewed as imposing a regularization
on the primal program to allow mis-classification.
Definition B.1 (C-Support Vector Classification). Given a parameter C > 0, the C-support vector
classification (C-SVC) is defined as
                                                        1 ⊤
                                         maxn 1⊤  n α − α Qα
                                         α∈R            2
                                            s.t. α⊤ y = 0,
                                                 0 ≤ α ≤ C · 1n .

B.2   ν-S UPPORT V ECTOR C LASSIFICATION

The C-SVC (Definition B.1) penalizes large values of α by limiting the magnitude of it. The ν-SVC
(Definition B.2) turns 1⊤
                        n α from an objective into a constraint on ℓ1 norm.
Definition B.2 (ν-Support Vector Classification). Given a parameter ν > 0, the ν-support vector
classification (ν-SVC) is defined as
                                             1 ⊤
                                      min      α Qα
                                     α∈Rn 2

                                        s.t. α⊤ y = 0,
                                              1⊤
                                               n α = ν,
                                                       1
                                              0 ≤ α ≤ · 1n .
                                                       n
One can interpret this formulation as to find a vector that lives in the orthogonal complement of y
that is non-negative, each entry is at most n1 and its ℓ1 norm is ν. Clearly, we must have ν ∈ (0, 1].
More specifically, let k+ be the number of positive labels and k− be the number of negative labels. It
is shown by Chang & Lin (2001) that the above problem is feasible if and only if
                                              2 min{k− , k+ }
                                        ν≤                    .
                                                    n

B.3   D ISTRIBUTION E STIMATION

SVM is widely-used for predicting binary labels. It can also be used to estimate the support of a
high-dimensional distribution. The formulation is similar to ν-SVC, except the PSD matrix Q is
label-less.
Definition B.3 (Distribution Estimation). Given a parameter ν > 0, the ν-distribution estimation
problem is defined as
                                              1 ⊤
                                       min      α Kα
                                       α∈Rn   2
                                                       1
                                         s.t. 0 ≤ α ≤    · 1n ,
                                                       n
                                              1⊤
                                               n α = ν.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.4   ϵ-S UPPORT V ECTOR R EGRESSION

In addition to classification, support vector framework can also be adapted for regression.
Definition B.4 (ϵ-Support Vector Regression). Given parameters ϵ, C > 0, the ϵ-support vector
regression (ϵ-SVR) is defined as
                             1
                    min        (α − α∗ )⊤ K(α − α∗ ) + ϵ1⊤        ∗      ⊤
                                                         n (α + α ) + y (α − α )
                                                                                  ∗
                     ∗
                  α,α ∈R n   2
                        s.t. 1⊤        ∗
                              n (α − α ) = 0,
                             0 ≤ α ≤ C · 1n ,
                             0 ≤ α ∗ ≤ C · 1n .

B.5   ν-S UPPORT V ECTOR R EGRESSION

One can similar adapt the parameter ν to control the ℓ1 norm of the regression.
Definition B.5 (ν-Support Vector Regression). Given parameters ν, C > 0, the ν-support vector
regression (ν-SVR) is defined as
                                   1
                          min        (α − α∗ )⊤ K(α − α∗ ) + y ⊤ (α − α∗ )
                        α,α∗ ∈Rn 2

                              s.t. 1⊤        ∗
                                    n (α − α ) = 0,
                                   1⊤       ∗
                                    n (α + α ) = Cν,
                                            C
                                   0≤α≤       · 1n ,
                                            n
                                             C
                                   0 ≤ α∗ ≤     · 1n .
                                             n

B.6   O NE E QUALITY C ONSTRAINT

We classify C-SVC (Definition B.1), ϵ-SVR (Definition B.4) and ν-distribution estimation (Defini-
tion B.3) into the following generic form:

                                              1 ⊤
                                       minn     α Qα + p⊤ α
                                       α∈R    2
                                         s.t. α⊤ y = ∆
                                              0 ≤ α ≤ C · 1n .

Note that C-SVC (Definition B.1) and distribution estimation (Definition B.3) are readily in this form.
For ϵ-SVR (Definition B.4), we need to perform a simple transformation:

           α
    b = ∗ ∈ R2n , then it can be written as
Set α
          α
                                                                     ⊤
                                  1 ⊤ Q −Q                 ϵ1n + y
                           min      α                 α
                                                      b+                α
                                         −Q Q              ϵ1n − y
                                    b                                   b
                          b∈R2n 2
                          α
                                          ⊤
                                     1n
                             s.t.           α
                                            b=0
                                   −1n
                                   0≤α
                                     b ≤ C · 12n .

B.7   T WO E QUALITY C ONSTRAINTS

Both ν-SVC (Definition B.2) and ν-SVR (Definition B.5) require one extra constraint. They can be
formulated as follows:
                                         1 ⊤
                                   min    α Qα + p⊤ α
                                   α∈Rn 2


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           s.t. 1⊤
                                                 n α = ∆1 ,
                                               y ⊤ α = ∆2 ,
                                               0 ≤ α ≤ C · 1n .
For ν-SVR (Definition B.5), one can leverage a similar transformation as ϵ-SVR (Definition B.4).
Remark B.6. All variants of SVM-related quadratic programs can all be solved using our QP solvers
for three cases:
                                                        (ω+1)/2
       • Linear SVM with n ≫ d, we can solve it in O(nd
                                                   e            log(1/ϵ)) time;
       • Linear SVM with a small treewidth decomposition with width τ on XX ⊤ , we can solve it
                 (ω+1)/2
         in O(nτ
            e            log(1/ϵ)) time;

       • Gaussian kernel SVM with d = Θ(log n) and B = o( logloglogn n ), we can solve it in
         O(n1+o(1) log(1/ϵ)) time.

Even though our solvers have relatively bad dependence on the number of equality constraints, for all
these SVM formulations, at most 2 equality constraints are presented and thus can be solved very
fast.

C     A LGORITHMS FOR G ENERAL QP
In this section, we discuss algorithms for general (convex) quadratic programming. We show that
they can be solved in the current matrix multiplication time via reduction to linear programming with
convex constraints Lee et al. (2019).

C.1    LCQP IN THE C URRENT M ATRIX M ULTIPLICATION T IME
                                                                                          e ω+
Proposition C.1. There is an algorithm that solves LCQP (Definition 1.1) up to ϵ error in O((n
  2.5−α/2     2+1/6
n         +n        ) log(1/ϵ)) time, where ω ≤ 2.373 is the matrix multiplication constant and
α ≥ 0.32 is the dual matrix multiplication constant.

Proof. Let Q = P DP ⊤ be an eigen-decomposition of Q where D is diagonal and P is orthogonal.
    e := P −1 x. Then it suffices to solve
Let x
                                              1 ⊤
                                       min x    e Dex + c⊤ P x
                                                             e
                                              2
                                         s.t. AP xe=b
                                              Pxe ≥ 0.

By adding n non-negative variables and n constraints x = P x e we can make all constraints equality
constraints. There are n non-negative variables and n unconstrained variables. If we want to ensure
all variables are non-negative, we need to split every coordinate of xe into two. In this way the
coefficient matrix Q will be block diagonal with block size 2.
We perform the above reduction, and assume that we have a program of form (1) where Q is diagonal.
Let qi := Qi,i be the i-th element on the diagonal. Then the QP is equivalent to the following
program
                                     min c⊤ x + q ⊤ t
                                      s.t. Ax = b
                                               1
                                           ti ≥ x2i        ∀i ∈ [n]
                                               2
                                           x≥0
Note that the set {(xi , ti ) ∈ R2 : ti ≥ 12 x2i } is a convex set. So we can apply Lee et al. (2019) here
with n variables, each in the convex set {(a, b) ∈ R2 : a ≥ 0, b ≥ 12 a2 }.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   A LGORITHM FOR QCQP

Our algorithm for LCQP in the previous section can be generalized to quadratically constrained
quadratic programs (QCQP). QCQP is defined as follows.
Definition C.2 (QCQP). Let Q0 , . . . , Qm ∈ Rn×n be PSD matrices. Let q0 , . . . , qm ∈ Rn . Let
r ∈ Rm . Let A ∈ Rd×n , b ∈ Rd . The quadratically constrained quadratic programming (QCQP)
problem asks the solve the following program.
                                 1 ⊤
                           minn    x Q0 x + q0⊤ x
                           x∈R   2
                                 1
                             s.t. x⊤ Qi x + qi⊤ x + ri ≤ 0        ∀i ∈ [m]
                                 2
                                 Ax = b
                                 x≥0
Proposition C.3. There is an algorithm that solves QCQP (Definition C.2) up to ϵ error in
          ω
O(((mn)
e           + (mn)2.5−α/2 + (mn)2+1/6 ) log(1/ϵ)) time, where ω ≤ 2.373 is the matrix multi-
plication constant and α ≥ 0.32 is the dual matrix multiplication constant.

Proof. We first rewrite the program as following.
                          min − r0
                               1
                           s.t. x⊤ Qi x + qi⊤ x + ri ≤ 0        ∀0 ≤ i ≤ m
                               2
                               Ax = b
                               x≥0

Write Qi = Pi Di Pi⊤ be an eigen-decomposition of Qi where Di is diagonal and Pi is orthogonal.
                          ei := Pi−1 x. Then we can rewrite the program as
    ei ∈ Rn be defined as x
Let x
                       min − r0
                            1 ⊤
                        s.t. x
                             e Di xei + qi⊤ Pi x
                                               ei + ri ≤ 0        ∀0 ≤ i ≤ m
                            2 i
                            Ax = b
                              ei = Pi−1 x
                              x
                              x≥0

For 0 ≤ i ≤ m and j ∈ [n], define variable ti,j ∈ R. Then we can rewrite the program as
                    min − r0
                          X
                     s.t.    Di,(j,j) ti,j + qi⊤ Pi x
                                                    ei + ri ≤ 0      ∀0 ≤ i ≤ m
                           j∈[n]

                          Ax = b
                          ei = Pi−1 x
                          x
                                 e2i,j
                          ti,j ≥ x
                          x≥0

                 xi,j , ti,j )0≤i≤m,j∈[n] as (m + 1)n variables in the convex set {(a, b) : b ≥ 12 a2 }.
We can consider (e
Then we can apply Lee et al. (2019).

D     A LGORITHM FOR L OW-T REEWIDTH QP
In this section we present a nearly-linear time algorithm for solving low-treewidth QP with small
number of linear constraints. We briefly describe the outline of this section.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        • In Section D.1, we present the main statement of Section D.
        • In Section D.2, we present the main data structure C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE.
        • In Section D.3, we present several data structures used in C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE,
          including E XACT DS (Section D.3.1), A PPROX DS (Section D.3.2), BATCH S KETCH (Sec-
          tion D.3.3), V ECTOR S KETCH (Section D.3.4), BALANCED S KETCH (Section D.3.5).
        • In Section D.4, we prove correctness and running time of C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE
          data structure.
        • In Section D.5, we prove the main result (Theorem D.1).

D.1     M AIN S TATEMENT

We consider programs of the form (16), i.e.,
                                          1 ⊤
                                    min     x Qx + c⊤ x
                                    x∈Rn  2
                                     s.t. Ax = b
                                          xi ∈ Ki   ∀i ∈ [n]
where Q ∈ S ntot , c ∈ Rntot , A ∈ Rm×ntot , b ∈ Rm , Ki ⊂ Rni is a convex set. For simplicity, we
assume that ni = O(1) for all i ∈ [n].
Theorem D.1. Consider the convex program (16). Let ϕi : Ki → R be a νi -self-concordant barrier
for all i ∈ [n]. Suppose the program satisfies the following properties:

        • Inner radius r: There exists z ∈ Rntot such that Az = b and B(z, r) ∈ K.
        • Outer radius R: K ⊆ B(0, R) where 0 ∈ Rntot .
        • Lipschitz constant L: ∥Q∥2→2 ≤ L, ∥c∥2 ≤ L.
       • Treewidth τ : Treewidth (Definition A.1) of the adjacency graph of Q is at most τ .

Let (wi )i∈[n] ∈ Rn≥1 and κ = i∈[n] wi νi . Given any 0 < ϵ ≤ 12 , we can find an approximate
                                P

solution x ∈ K satisfiying

                 1 ⊤                             1 ⊤
                   x Qx + c⊤ x ≤ min               x Qx + c⊤ x + ϵLR(R + 1),
                 2                  Ax=b,x∈K 2

                      ∥Ax − b∥1 ≤ 3ϵ(R∥A∥1 + ∥b∥1 ),
in expected time
              √ −1/2
          O((
           e    κn   + log(R/(rϵ))) · n(τ 2 m + τ m2 )1/2 (τ ω−1 + τ m + mω−1 )1/2 ).

When maxi∈[n] νi = O(1),
                   e                 e ω−2 ), the running time simplifies to
                         wi = 1, m = O(τ
                                      (ω+1)/2 1/2
                                 O(nτ
                                 e           m log(R/(rϵ))).

D.2     A LGORITHM S TRUCTURE AND C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE

Our algorithm is based on the robust Interior Point Method (robust IPM). Details of the robust
IPM will be given in Section F. During the algorithm, we maintain a primal-dual solution pair
(x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot on the robust central path. In addition, we maintain a sparsely-changing
approximation (x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot to (x, s). In each iteration, we implicitly perform update
                                    −1/2                −1/2
                        x ← x + tBw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ
                                           2     −1/2              −1/2
                        s ← s + tδµ − t Hw,x Bw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ
where
                            Hw,x = ∇2 ϕw (x)                                         (see Eq. (24))


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Bw,x,t = Q + tHw,x                                                (see Eq. (25))
                                              −1/2    −1                         −1/2
                                Pw,x,t = Bw,x,t A⊤ (ABw,x,t A⊤ )−1 ABw,x,t                       (see Eq. (26))

and explicitly maintain (x, s) such that they remain close to (x, s) in ℓ∞ -distance.
This task is handled by the C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE data structure, which is our main data
structure. The robust IPM algorithm (Algorithm 19, 20) directly calls it in every iteration.
The C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE data structure (Algorithm 1) has two main sub data structures,
E XACT DS (Algorithm 2, 3) and A PPROX DS (Algorithm 4, 5). E XACT DS is used to maintain (x, s),
and A PPROX DS is used to maintain (x, s).

Algorithm 1 Our main data structure for low-treewidth QP solver.
 1: data structure C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE                                                  ▷ Theorem D.2
 2: private : member
 3:    E XACT DS exact                                                                       ▷ Algorithm 2, 3
 4:    A PPROX DS approx                                                                       ▷ Algorithm 4
 5:    ℓ∈N
 6: end members
 7: procedure I NITIALIZE(x, s ∈ Rntot , t ∈ R+ , ϵ ∈ (0, 1))
 8:    exact.I NITIALIZE(x, s, x, s, t)                                                         ▷ Algorithm 2
 9:    ℓ←0                √
10:    w ← νmax , N ← κ log n log nκR   ϵr
11:    q ← n1/2 (τ 2 m + τ m2 )−1/2 (τ ω−1 + τ m + mω−1 )1/2
12:    ϵapx,x ← ϵ, ζx ← 2α, δapx ← N1
13:    ϵapx,s ← ϵ · t, ζs ← 3αt
14:
                                                                      1/2    −1/2
                    approx.I NITIALIZE(x, s, h, e
                                                h, ϵx , ϵs , Hw,x x
                                                                  b, Hw,x sb, cs , βx , βs , βcs ,
                    βex , βes , q, &exact, ϵapx,x , ϵapx,s , δapx )

15:               ▷ Algorithm 4.Parameters from x to βes come from exact. &exact is pointer to exact
16: end procedure
17: procedure M ULTIPLYA ND M OVE(t ∈ R+ )
18:    ℓ←ℓ+1
19:    if |t − t| > t · ϵt or ℓ > q then
20:         x, s ← exact.O UTPUT()                                                   ▷ Algorithm 2
21:         I NITIALIZE(x, s, t, ϵ)
22:    end if
23:    βx , βs , βcs , βex , βes ← exact.M OVE()                                     ▷ Algorithm 2
24:    δx , δs ← approx.M OVE A ND Q UERY(βx , βs , βcs , βex , βes )                ▷ Algorithm 4
25:    δh , δeh , δϵx , δϵs , δH 1/2 xb, δH −1/2 sb, δcs ← exact.U PDATE(δx , δs )   ▷ Algorithm 3
                               w,x      w,x
26:    approx.U PDATE(δx , δh , δeh , δϵx , δϵs , δH 1/2 xb, δH −1/2 sb, δcs )                  ▷ Algorithm 4
                                                    w,x        w,x
27: end procedure
28: procedure O UTPUT()
29:    return exact.O UTPUT()                                                                   ▷ Algorithm 2
30: end procedure
31: end data structure


Theorem D.2. Data structure C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE (Algorithm 1) implicitly maintains
the central path primal-dual solution pair (x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot and explicitly maintains its
approximation (x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot using the following functions:

        • I NITIALIZE(x ∈ Rntot , s ∈ Rntot , t0 ∈ R>0 , ϵ ∈ (0, 1)): Initializes the data structure
          with initial primal-dual solution pair (x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot , initial central path timestamp
                               ω−1
          t0 ∈ R>0 in O(n(τ
                         e         + τ m + mω−1 )) time.


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        • M ULTIPLYA ND M OVE(t ∈ R>0 ): It implicitly maintains
                                            −1/2             −1/2
                          x ← x + tBw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ (x, s, t)
                                               2      −1/2                −1/2
                             s ← s + tδµ − t Hw,x Bw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ (x, s, t)

          where Hw,x , Bw,x,t , Pw,x,t are defined in Eq. (24)(25)(26) respectively, and t is some
          timestamp satisfying |t − t| ≤ ϵt · t.
          It also explicitly maintains (x, s) ∈ Rntot ×ntot such that ∥xi − xi ∥xi ≤ ϵ and ∥si − si ∥∗xi ≤
          tϵwi for all i ∈ [n] with probability at least 0.9.
          Assuming the function is called at most N times and t decreases from tmax to tmin , the total
          running time is
               O((N
               e    n−1/2 + log(tmax /tmin )) · n(τ 2 m + τ m2 )1/2 (τ ω−1 + τ m + mω−1 )1/2 ).

        • O UTPUT: Computes (x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot exactly and outputs them in O(nτ
                                                                               e    m) time.

D.3     DATA S TRUCTURES U SED IN C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE

In this section we present several data structures used in C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE, including:

        • E XACT DS (Section D.3.1): This data structure maintains an implicit representation of the
          primal-dual solution pair (x, s). This is directly used by C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE.
        • A PPROX DS (Section D.3.2): This data structure explicitly maintains an approximation
          (x, s) of (x, s). This data structure is directly used by C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE.
        • BATCH S KETCH (Section D.3.3): This data structure maintains a sketch of (x, s). This data
          structure is used by A PPROX DS.
        • V ECTOR S KETCH (Section D.3.4): This data structure maintains a sketch of sparsely-
          changing vectors. This data structure is used by BATCH S KETCH.
        • BALANCED S KETCH (Section D.3.5): This data structure maintains a sketch of vectors of
          form W ⊤ v, where v is sparsely-changing. This data structure is used by BATCH S KETCH.

Notation: In this section, for simplicity, we write Bx for Bw,x,t , and Lx for the Cholesky factor of
Bx , i.e., Bx = Lx L⊤
                    x.

D.3.1    E XACT DS
In this section we present the data structure E XACT DS. It maintains an implicit representation of the
primal-dual solution pair (x, s) by maintaining several sparsely-changing vectors (see Eq. (8)(9)).
This data structure has a similar spirit as E XACT DS in Gu & Song (2022), but we have a different
representation from the previous works because we are working with quadratic programming rather
than linear programming.
Theorem D.3. Data structure E XACT DS (Algorithm 2, 3) implicitly maintains the primal-dual pair
(x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot , computable via the expression
                                −1/2
                           b + Hw,x W ⊤ (hβx − e
                         x=x                   hβex + ϵx ),                                            (8)
                                    1/2           1/2
                          s = sb + Hw,x cs βcs − Hw,x W ⊤ (hβs − e
                                                                 hβes + ϵs ),                          (9)
                                      1/2                                               −1/2
where x  b, sb ∈ Rntot , W = Lx−1 Hw,x ∈ Rntot ×ntot , h = L−1 x δµ ∈ R
                                                                          ntot
                                                                               , cs = Hw,x δ µ ∈ Rntot
βx , βs , βc ∈ R, e
          s
                   h = L−1 A⊤ ∈ Rntot ×m , βex , βes ∈ Rm , ϵx , ϵs ∈ Rntot .
                         x

The data structure supports the following functions:

        • I NITIALIZE(x, s, x, s ∈ Rntot , t ∈ R>0 ): Initializes the data structure in O(nτ
                                                                                        e    ω−1
                                                                                                 +nτ m+
          nmω−1 ) time, with initial value of the primal-dual pair (x, s), its initial approximation
          (x, s), and initial approximate timestamp t.


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • M OVE(): Performs robust central path step
                        x ← x + tBx−1 δµ − tBx−1 A⊤ (ABx−1 A⊤ )−1 ABx−1 δµ ,                         (10)
                                              2    2
                        s ← s + tδµ − t Bx−1 δµ + t Bx−1 A⊤ (ABx−1 A⊤ )−1 ABx−1 δµ                   (11)
         in O(mω ) time by updating its implicit representation.
       • U PDATE(δx , δs ∈ Rntot ): Updates the approximation pair (x, s) to (xnew = x + δx ∈
         Rntot , snew = s + δs ∈ Rntot ) in O((τ
                                               e 2 m + τ m2 )(∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 )) time, and output the
         changes in variables δH 1/2 xb, δh , δβx , δeh , δβex , δϵx , δH −1/2 sb, δβs , δβes , δϵs .
                                     w,x                             w,x


         Furthermore, h, ϵx , ϵs change in O(τ (∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 )) coordinates, e    h changes in
                                                    1/2     −1/2
         O(τ m(∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 )) coordinates, and Hx x
         e                                              b, Hx    sb, cs change in O(∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 )
         coordinates.
       • O UTPUT(): Output x and s in O(nτ
                                      e    m) time.
                                        e 2 m) time. This function is used by A PPROX DS.
       • Q UERYx(i ∈ [n]): Output xi in O(τ
                                        e 2 m) time. This function is used by A PPROX DS.
       • Q UERYs(i ∈ [n]): Output si in O(τ

Proof of Theorem D.3. By combining Lemma D.4 and D.5.
Lemma D.4. E XACT DS correctly maintains an implicit representation of (x, s), i.e., invariant
                                       −1/2
                          b + Hw,x W ⊤ (hβx − e
                        x=x                   hβex + ϵx ),
                                  1/2           1/2
                        s = sb + Hw,x cs βcs − Hw,x W ⊤ (hβs − e
                                                               hβes + ϵs ),
                                                         −1/2
                        h = L−1
                             x δµ ,               cs = Hw,x δ µ ,    h = L−1
                                                                     e       ⊤
                                                                          x A ,

                        u
                        e=eh⊤ e
                              h,      u=e h⊤ h,
                           X                λ
                        α=      wi−1 cosh2 ( γi (x, s, t)),
                                            wi
                             i∈[n]

                        δ µ = α1/2 δµ (x, s, t)
always holds after every external call, and return values of the queries are correct.

Proof. I NITIALIZE: By checking the definitions we see that all invariants are satisfied after I NITIAL -
IZE .

M OVE: By comparing the implicit representation (8)(9) and the robust central path step (10)(11), we
see that M OVE updates (x, s) correctly.
U PDATE: We would like to prove that U PDATE correctly updates the values of h, cs , e
                                                                                     h, u
                                                                                        e, u, α, δ µ ,
while preserving the values of (x, s).
First note that Hw,x , Bx , Lx are updated correctly. The remaining updates are separated into two
steps: U PDATEh and U PDATEh.
Step U PDATEh: The first few lines of U PDATEh updates α and δ µ correctly.
             new                                                                      new
We define Hw,x   := Hw,x + ∆Hw,x , Bxnew := Bx + ∆Bx , Lnewx := Lx + ∆Lx , δ µ              := δ µ + δδµ ,
and so on. Immediately after Algorithm 3, Line 26, we have
               h + δh = Lx−1 δ µ + Lx−1 δδµ − (Lx + ∆Lx )−1 ∆Lx (Lx−1 δ µ + Lx−1 δδµ )
                                                                    new
                       = (Lx−1 − (Lx + ∆Lx )−1 ∆Lx L−1
                                                    x )δ µ
                                 new
                       = Lnew
                          x δµ ,
                            −1/2                                    −1/2
              cs + δcs = Hw,x δ µ + ∆H −1/2 (δ µ + δδµ + Hw,x δδµ
                                                  w,x


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 The E XACT DS data structure used in Algorithm 1.
 1: data structure E XACT DS                                                             ▷ Theorem D.3
 2: members
 3:    x, s ∈ Rntot , t ∈ R+ , Hw,x , Bx , Lx ∈ Rntot ×ntot
 4:    x                                h ∈ Rntot ×m , βx , βs , βcs ∈ R, βex , βes ∈ Rm
       b, sb, h, ϵx , ϵs , cs ∈ Rntot , e
               m×m
 5:    e∈R
       u                        m
                       , u ∈ R , α ∈ R, δ µ ∈ Rn
 6:    k∈N
 7: end members
 8: procedure I NITIALIZE(x, s, x, s ∈ Rntot , t ∈ R+ )
 9:    x ← x, x ← s, t ← t
10:    b ← x, sb ← s, ϵx ← 0, ϵs ← 0, βx ← 0, βs ← 0, βex ← 0, βes ← 0, βcs ← 0
       x
11:    Hw,x ← ∇2 ϕw (x), Bx ← Q + tHw,x
12:    Compute lower Cholesky factor Lx where Lx Lx⊤ = Bx
13:    I NITIALIZEh(x, s, Hw,x , Lx )
14: end procedure
15: procedure I NITIALIZEh(x, s ∈ Rntot , Hw,x , Lx ∈ Rntot ×ntot )
16:    for i ∈ [n] do
                          α sinh( wλ γi (x,s,t))
17:         (δ µ )i ← − γi (x,s,t)
                                   i
                                      · µi (x, s, t)
                     −1      2 λ
18:         α ← α + wi cosh ( wi γi (x, s, t))
19:    end for
                                                 −1/2
20:    h ← Lx−1 δ µ , e
                      h ← Lx−1 A⊤ , cs ← Hw,x δ µ
21:    e←e
       u    h⊤ eh, u ← e  h⊤ h
22: end procedure
23: procedure M OVE()
24:    βx ← βx + t · (α)−1/2
25:    βex ← βex + t · (α)−1/2 · u   e−1 u
                             −1/2
26:    βcs ← βs + t · (α)
                     2
27:    βs ← βs + t · (α)−1/2
                     2
28:    βes ← βes + t · (α)−1/2 · u    e−1 u
29:    return βx , βs , βcs , βx , βs
                              e    e
30: end procedure
31: procedure O UTPUT()
                       −1/2                                    1/2             1/2
32:    return xb + Hw,x W ⊤ (hβx − e        hβex + ϵx ), sb + Hw,x cs βcs − Hw,x W ⊤ (hβs − e
                                                                                            hβes + ϵs )
33: end procedure
34: procedure Q UERYx(i ∈ [n])
                        −1/2
35:    return xbi + Hw,x,(i,i) (W ⊤ (hβx − e     hβex + ϵx ))i
36: end procedure
37: procedure Q UERYs(i ∈ [n])
                        1/2                    1/2
38:    return sbi + Hw,x,(i,i) cs,i βcs + Hw,x,(i,i) (W ⊤ (hβs − e    hβes + ϵs ))i
39: end procedure
40: end data structure


                           new −1/2           new
                       = (Hw,x )    δµ ,
               h + δeh = Lx−1 A⊤ − (Lx + ∆Lx )−1 ∆Lx A⊤
               e
                       = (L−1
                           x − (Lx + ∆Lx )
                                          −1
                                             ∆Lx L−1
                                                  x )A
                                                       ⊤

                       = Lxnew A⊤ .

So h, cs , e
           h are updated correctly. Also

                   u         h⊤ e
                   e + δue = e  h + δeh⊤ (e           h⊤ δeh = (e
                                          h + δeh ) + e         h + δeh )⊤ (e
                                                                            h + δeh ),
                            h⊤ h + δeh⊤ (h + δh ) + e
                   u + δu = e                       h⊤ δh = (e
                                                             h + δeh )⊤ (h + δh ).


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 Algorithm 2 continued.
 1: data structure E XACT DS                                                               ▷ Theorem D.3
 2: procedure U PDATE(δx , δs ∈ Rntot )
 3:    ∆Hw,x ← ∇2 ϕw (x + δx ) − Hw,x ▷ ∆Hw,x is non-zero only for diagonal blocks (i, i) for
    which δx,i ̸= 0
 4:    Compute ∆Lx where (Lx + ∆Lx )(Lx + ∆Lx )⊤ = Bx + t∆Hw,x
 5:    U PDATEh(δx , δs , ∆Hw,x , ∆Lx )
 6:    U PDATEW(∆Hw,x , ∆Lx )
 7:    x ← x + δx , s ← s + δs
 8:    Hw,x ← Hw,x + ∆Hw,x , Bx ← Bx + t∆Hw,x , Lx ← Lx + ∆Lx
 9:    return δh , δeh , δϵx , δϵs , δH 1/2 xb, δH −1/2 sb, δcs
                                       w,x        w,x
10: end procedure
11: procedure U PDATEh(δx , δs ∈ Rntot , ∆Hw,x , ∆Lx ∈ Rntot ×ntot )
12:    S ← {i ∈ [n] | δx,i ̸= 0 or δs,i ̸= 0}
13:    δδ µ ← 0
14:    for i ∈ S do
15:         Let γi = γi (x, s, t), γinew = γi (x + δx , s + δs , t), µnew
                                                                        i = µi (x + δx , s + δs , t)
16:         α ← α − wi−1 cosh2 ( wλi γi ) + wi−1 cosh2 ( wλi γinew )
17:         δδµ ,i ← −α sinh( wλi γinew ) · γ new  1
                                                       · µnew
                                                            i   − δ µ,i
                                                  i
18:    end for
19:    δh ← L−1   x δδ µ − (Lx + ∆Lx )
                                              −1
                                                 ∆Lx (h + Lx−1 δδµ )
                                         −1/2
20:     δcs ← ∆H −1/2 (δ µ + δδµ ) + Hw,x δδµ
                     w,x

21:     δeh ← −(Lx + ∆Lx )−1 ∆Lx e  h
22:     δsb ← −δδµ βcs
23:     δϵx ← −δh βx + δeh βex
24:     δϵs ← −δh βs + δeh βes
25:     δue ← δ ⊤ (e
                 h
                 e         h  h⊤ δe
                   h + δe ) + e     h
26:                           h⊤ δh
        δu ← δeh⊤ (h + δh ) + e
27:    δ µ ← δ µ + δδ µ , h ← h + δh , e
                                       h←e
                                         h + δeh , ϵx ← ϵx + δϵx , ϵs ← ϵs + δϵs , u
                                                                                   e←u
                                                                                     e + δue ,
    u ← u + δu
28: end procedure
29: procedure U PDATEW(∆Hw,x , ∆Lx ∈ Rntot )
                    −⊤
30:    δ ϵ x ← ∆⊤
                Lx Lx (hβx − hβx + ϵx )
                                ee
                    −⊤
31:    δ ϵ s ← ∆⊤
                Lx Lx (hβs − hβs + ϵs )
                               ee
32:    ϵx ← ϵx + δϵx , ϵs ← ϵs + δϵs
33: end procedure
34: end data structure


So u
   e and u are maintained correctly. Furthermore, immediately after Algorithm 3, Line 26, we have

               x + L−⊤
              (b    x (h
                          new
                              βx − ehnew βex + ϵnew     x + L−⊤
                                                x )) − (b    x (hβx − hβx + ϵx ))
                                                                      ee
            = L−⊤ (δh βx − δe βes + δϵ )
                 x              h        x

            = 0.
Therefore, after U PDATEh finishes, we have

                                      b + Lx−⊤ (hβx − e
                                    x=x               hβex + ϵx ).
For s, we have

                      snew + (Hw,x
                     (b            ) cs βcs − L−⊤
                               new 1/2 new
                                               x (h
                                                   new
                                                            hnew βes + ϵnew
                                                       βs − e           s   ))
                             1/2
                        s + Hw,x cs βcs − Lx−⊤ (hβs − e
                     − (b                             hβes + ϵs ))


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 = δsb + δδ βcs − L−⊤
                                   x (δh βs − δe
                                               h βs + δϵs )
                                                 e
                 = 0.
Therefore, after U PDATEh finishes, we have
                          s = sb + (Hw,x ) cs βcs − L−⊤
                                     new 1/2
                                                     x (hβs − hβs + ϵs ).
                                                              ee

So x and s are both updated correctly. This proves the correctness of U PDATEh.
Step U PDATEW: Define ϵnew
                       x   := ϵx + δϵx , ϵnew
                                          s   := ϵs + δϵs . Immediately after Algorithm 3, Line 31,
we have
              x + (Lnew )−⊤ (hβx − e
             (b           x         hβex + ϵnew )) − (b
                                                    x  x + L−⊤ (hβx − e
                                                                     x    hβex + ϵx ))
              = ((Lxnew )−⊤ − L−⊤                           new −⊤
                                 x )(hβx − hβx + ϵx ) + (Lx )
                                            ee                     δϵx
              = 0,
                 s + (H new )1/2 cs βc − (Lnew )−⊤ (hβs − e
                (b        w,x          s       x          hβes + ϵnew )) s

                 − (b
                    s + (Hw,x ) cs βcs − L−⊤
                          new 1/2
                                          x (hβs − hβs + ϵs ))
                                                   ee

              = (−(Lnew
                    x )
                        −⊤
                           + L−⊤                       new −⊤
                              x )(hβs − hβs + ϵs ) − (Lx )
                                        ee                    δϵs
              = 0.
Therefore, after U PDATEW finishes, we have
                          b + (Lxnew )−⊤ (hβx − e
                        x=x                     hβex + ϵx ),
                        s = sb + (Hw,x ) cs βcs − (Lxnew )−⊤ (hβs − e
                                   new 1/2
                                                                    hβes + ϵs ).
So x and s are both updated correctly. This proves the correctness of U PDATEW.
Lemma D.5. We bound the running time of E XACT DS as following.
                                                          ω−1
     (i) E XACT DS.I NITIALIZE (Algorithm 2) runs in O(nτ
                                                     e        + nτ m + nmω−1 ) time.
                                                e ω ) time.
     (ii) E XACT DS.M OVE (Algorithm 2) runs in O(m

    (iii) E XACT DS.O UTPUT (Algorithm 2) runs in O(nτ
                                                  e    m) time and correctly outputs (x, s).
                                                                       e 2 m) time and
    (iv) E XACT DS.Q UERYx and E XACT DS.Q UERYs (Algorithm 2) runs in O(τ
         returns the correct answer.
     (v) E XACT DS.U PDATE (Algorithm 2) runs in O((τ e 2 m + τ m2 )(∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 )) time. Further-
         more, h, ϵx , ϵs change in O(τ (∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 )) coordinates, e              e m(∥δx ∥0 +
                                                                         h changes in O(τ
                                      1/2     −1/2
         ∥δs ∥0 )) coordinates, and Hx x  b, Hx    sb, cs change in O(∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 ) coordinates.

                                         ω−1
Proof.       (i) Computing Lx takes O(nτ
                                       e     ) time by Lemma A.5. Computing h and e  h takes
                                     7                                             ω−1
         O(nτ m) by Lemma A.7(i). Computing u
         e                                     e and u takes Tmat (m, n, m) = O(nm
                                                                              e        ) time.
         All other operations are cheap.

                    e−1 takes O(m
     (ii) Computing u         e ω ) time. All other operations take O(m2 ) time.

    (iii) Running time is by Lemma A.7(v). Correctness is by Lemma D.4.
    (iv) Running time is by Lemma A.8(ii). Correctness is by Lemma D.4.

     (v) Computing ∆Lx takes O(τe 2 ∥δx ∥0 ) time by Lemma A.6. It is easy to see that nnz(∆H ) =
                                                                                             w,x
                                      e 2 ∥δx ∥0 ). It remains to analyze U PDATEh and U PDATEW.
         O(∥δx ∥0 ) and nnz(∆Lx ) = O(τ
         For simplicity, we write k = δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 in this proof only.
   7
     Here we compute e h by computing eh∗,i = Lx−1 (Ai,∗ )⊤ for i ∈ [m] independently. Using fast rectangular
matrix multiplication is possible to improve this running time and other similar places. We keep the current
bounds for simplicity.


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              • U PDATEh: Updating α and computing δδµ takes O(k) time. Also, ∥δδµ ∥0 = O(k).
                Computing δh takes O(τe 2 k) time by Lemma A.7(i). Also, δh is supported on O(k)
                paths in the elimination tree, so ∥δh ∥0 = O(τ
                                                           e k). Similarly we see that computing δe
                                                                                                  h
                     e 2 mk) time and nnz(δe ) = O(τ
                take O(τ                               e mk).
                                                           h
                Computing δcs and δsb takes O(τ 2 k) time and ∥δcs ∥0 , ∥δsb∥0 = O(k).
                Computing δϵx and δϵs takes O(τ mk) time after computing δh and δeh . Furthermore,
                ∥δϵx ∥0 , ∥δϵs ∥0 = O(τ k).
                Computing δue takes Tmat (m, τ k, m) = O(τ   e m2 k) time. Computing δu takes O(τ  e mk)
                time.
              • U PDATEW: To compute δϵx and δϵs , we first compute L−⊤          x (hβx − hβx + ϵx ) and
                                                                                            ee
                  −⊤
                Lx (hβs −e    hβes +ϵs ), where S ⊆ [ntot ] is the row support of ∆Lx , which can be decom-
                posed into at most O(∥δx ∥0 ) paths. This takes O(τ   e 2 m∥δx ∥0 ) time by Lemma A.8(i)
                (the extra m factor is due to h).
                                                e

           Combining everything we finish the proof of running time of E XACT DS.U PDATE.

D.3.2     A PPROX DS
In this section we present the data structure A PPROX DS. Given BATCH S KETCH, a data structure
maintaining a sketch of the primal-dual pair (x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot , A PPROX DS maintains a sparsely-
changing ℓ∞ -approximation of (x, s). This data structure is a slight variation of A PPROX DS in Gu &
Song (2022).

Algorithm 4 The A PPROX DS data structure used in Algorithm 1.
 1: data structure A PPROX DS                                                                                   ▷ Theorem D.6
 2: private : members
 3:     ϵapx,x , ϵapx,s ∈ R
 4:     ℓ∈N
                                                                               1/2               −1/2
 5:     BATCH S KETCH bs                    ▷ This maintains a sketch of Hw,x x and Hw,x s. See Algorithm 6, 7, 8.
 6:     E XACT DS* exact           ▷ This is a pointer to the E XACT DS (Algorithm 2, 3) we maintain in parallel to
    A PPROX DS.
 7:     e, se ∈ Rntot
        x                   ▷ (e
                               x, se) is a sparsely-changing approximation of (x, s). They have the same value as
    (x, s), but for these local variables we use (e   x, se) to avoid confusion.
 8: end members
                                                                                                         1/2      −1/2
 9: procedure I NITIALIZE(x, s ∈ Rntot , h ∈ Rntot , e               h ∈ Rntot ×m , ϵx , ϵs , Hw,x x         b, Hw,x sb, cs ∈
    Rntot , βx , βs , βcs ∈ R, βex , βes ∈ Rm , q ∈ N, E XACT DS* exact, ϵapx,x , ϵapx,s , δapx ∈ R)
10:     ℓ ← 0, q ← q
11:     ϵapx,x ← ϵapx,x , ϵapx,s ← ϵapx,s
                                               1/2     −1/2
12:     bs.I NITIALIZE(x, h, e  h, ϵx , ϵs , Hw,x xb, Hw,x sb, cs , βx , βs , βcs , βex , βes , δapx /q)         ▷ Algorithm 6
13:     e ← x, se ← s
        x
14:     exact ← exact
15: end procedure
16: procedure U PDATE(δx ∈ Rntot , δh ∈ Rntot , δhe ∈ Rntot ×m , δϵx , δϵs , δH 1/2 xb , δH −1/2 sb, δcs ∈ Rntot )
                                                                                         w,x       w,x
17:      bs.U PDATE(δx , δh , δhe , δϵx , δϵs , δH 1/2 xb , δH −1/2 sb, δcs )                                ▷ Algorithm 7
                                                    w,x        w,x
18:    ℓ←ℓ+1
19: end procedure
20: procedure M OVE A ND Q UERY(βx , βs , βcs ∈ R, βex , βes ∈ Rm )
21:    bs.M OVE(βx , βs , βcs , βex , βes )                                          ▷ Algorithm 7. Do not update ℓ yet
22:    δxe ← Q UERYx(ϵapx,x /(2 log q + 1))                                                             ▷ Algorithm 5
23:    δse ← Q UERYs(ϵapx,s /(2 log q + 1))                                                             ▷ Algorithm 5
24:    e←x
       x    e + δxe , se ← se + δse
25:    return (δxe , δse)
26: end procedure
27: end data structure

Theorem D.6. Given parameters ϵapx,x , ϵapx,s ∈ (0, 1), δapx ∈ (0, 1), ζx , ζs ∈ R such that
                 1/2                 1/2                                  −1/2         −1/2
             ∥Hw,x(ℓ) x(ℓ) − Hw,x(ℓ) x(ℓ+1) ∥2 ≤ ζx , ∥Hw,x(ℓ) s(ℓ) − Hw,x(ℓ) s(ℓ+1) ∥2 ≤ ζs


                                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 5 A PPROX DS Algorithm 4 continued.
 1: data structure A PPROX DS                                                             ▷ Theorem D.6
 2: private:
 3: procedure Q UERYx(ϵ ∈ R)
 4:     I←0
 5:     for j = 0 → ⌊log2 ℓ⌋ do
 6:         if ℓ mod 2j = 0 then
 7:              I ← I ∪ bs.Q UERYx(ℓ − 2j + 1, ϵ)                                          ▷ Algorithm 8
 8:         end if
 9:     end for
10:     δxe ← 0
11:     for all i ∈ I do
12:         xi ← exact.Q UERYx(i)                                                           ▷ Algorithm 2
13:         if ∥e
                xi − xi ∥xei > ϵ then
14:              δxe,i ← xi − x
                              ei
15:         end if
16:     end for
17:     return δxe
18: end procedure
19: procedure Q UERYs(ϵ ∈ R)
20:                                              e, · · · with s, se, · · · , and replacing “∥e
        Same as Q UERYx, except for replacing x, x                                            xi − xi ∥xei ”
    in Line 13 with “∥e si − si ∥∗xei ”.
21: end procedure
22: end data structure


for all ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , q − 1}, data structure A PPROX DS (Algorithm 4 and Algorithm 5) supports the
following operations:
                                                                                   1/2      −1/2
       • I NITIALIZE(x, s ∈ Rntot , h ∈ Rntot , e        h ∈ Rntot ×m , ϵx , ϵs , Hw,x x
                                                                                       b, Hw,x sb, cs ∈
         Rntot , βx , βs , βcs ∈ R, βex , βes ∈ Rm , q ∈ N, E XACT DS* exact, ϵapx,x , ϵapx,s , δapx ∈ R):
                                                  ω−1
         Initialize the data structure in O(nτe        + nτ m) time.

       • M OVE A ND Q UERY(βx , βs , βcs ∈ R, βex , βes ∈ Rm ): Update values of βx , βs , βcs , βex , βes
         by calling BATCH S KETCH.M OVE. This effectively moves (x(ℓ) , s(ℓ) ) to (x(ℓ+1) , s(ℓ+1) )
         while keeping x(ℓ) unchanged.
                                  (ℓ)   (ℓ)
         Then return two sets Lx , Ls ⊂ [n] where
                                                  1/2        (ℓ)   1/2    (ℓ+1)
                         L(ℓ)
                          x ⊇ {i ∈ [n] : ∥Hw,x(ℓ) xi − Hw,x(ℓ) xi                 ∥2 ≥ ϵapx,x },
                                                  −1/2       (ℓ)   −1/2   (ℓ+1)
                         L(ℓ)
                          s ⊇ {i ∈ [n] : ∥Hw,x(ℓ) si − Hw,x(ℓ) si                 ∥2 ≥ ϵapx,s },
         satisfying
                                              X
                                                   |L(ℓ)   e −2 2 2
                                                     x | = O(ϵapx,x ζx q ),
                                        0≤ℓ≤q−1
                                              X
                                                              e −2
                                                   |Ls(ℓ) | = O(ϵ        2 2
                                                                  apx,s ζs q ).
                                         0≤ℓ≤q−1


         For every query, with probability at least 1 − δapx /q, the return values are correct.
         Furthermore, total time cost over all queries is at most
                                        e (ϵ−2     2    −2     2 2 2

                                        O   apx,x ζx + ϵapx,s ζs )q τ m .


       • U PDATE(δx ∈ Rntot , δh ∈ Rntot , δeh ∈ Rntot ×m , δϵx , δϵs , δH 1/2 xb, δH −1/2 sb, δcs ∈ Rntot ):
                                                                                  w,x     w,x
                                 1/2                     −1/2
         Update sketches of Hw,x(ℓ) x(ℓ+1) and Hw,x(ℓ) s(ℓ+1) by calling BATCH S KETCH.U PDATE.


                                                        29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          This effectively moves x(ℓ) to x(ℓ+1) while keeping (x(ℓ+1) , s(ℓ+1) ) unchanged. Then ad-
          vance timestamp ℓ.
          Each update costs
          e 2 (∥δx ∥0 + ∥δh ∥0 + ∥δe ∥0 + ∥δϵ ∥0 + ∥δϵ ∥0 ) + ∥δ 1/2 ∥0 + ∥δ −1/2 ∥0 + ∥δc ∥0 )
          O(τ                      h         x        s         H   x
                                                                    b    w,xH    s
                                                                                 b        s
                                                                                        w,x


          time.

Proof. The proof is essentially the same as proof of (Gu & Song, 2022, Theorem 4.18). For the
running time claims, we plug in Theorem D.8 when necessary.

D.3.3    BATCH S KETCH
                                                                                                  1/2
In this section we present the data structure BATCH S KETCH. It maintains a sketch of Hx x and
  −1/2
Hx      s. It is a variation of BATCH S KETCH in Gu & Song (2022).
We recall the following definition from Gu & Song (2022).
Definition D.7 (Partition tree). A partition tree (S, χ) of Rn is a constant degree rooted tree S =
(V, E) and a labeling of the vertices χ : V → 2[n] , such that

        • χ(root) = [n];
        • if v is a leaf of S, then |χ(v)| = 1;
        • for any non-leaf node v ∈ V , the set {χ(c) : c is a child of v} is a partition of χ(v).

Algorithm 6 The BATCH S KETCH data structure used by Algorithm 4 and 5.
 1: data structure BATCH S KETCH                                                               ▷ Theorem D.8
 2: members
 3:    Φ ∈ Rr×ntot                                  ▷ All sketches need to share the same sketching matrix
 4:    S, χ partition tree
 5:    ℓ∈N                                                                               ▷ Current timestamp
 6:    BALANCED S KETCH sketchW ⊤ h, sketchW ⊤ e             h, sketchW ⊤ ϵx , sketchW ⊤ ϵs ▷ Algorithm 10
                                         1/2              −1/2
 7:    V ECTOR S KETCH sketchHw,x x          b, sketchHw,x sb, sketchcs                         ▷ Algorithm 9
 8:    βx , βs , βcs ∈ R, βex , βes ∈ Rm
 9:    (history[t])t≥0                                 ▷ Snapshot of data at timestamp t. See Remark D.9.
10: end members
                                                                                         1/2      −1/2
11: procedure I NITIALIZE(x ∈ Rntot , h ∈ Rntot , e            h ∈ Rntot ×m , ϵx , ϵs , Hw,x x
                                                                                             b, Hw,x sb, cs ∈
    Rntot , βx , βs , βcs ∈ R, βex , βes ∈ Rm , δapx ∈ R)
12:    Construct partition tree (S, χ) as in Definition D.11
13:    r ← Θ(log3 (ntot ) log(1/δapx ))
14:    Initialize Φ ∈ Rr×ntot with iid N (0, 1r )
15:    βx ← βx , βs ← βs , βcs ← βcs , βex ← βex , βes ← βes
16:    sketchW ⊤ h.I NITIALIZE(S, χ, Φ, x, h)                                                  ▷ Algorithm 10
17:    sketchW ⊤ e    h.I NITIALIZE(S, χ, Φ, x, e   h)                                         ▷ Algorithm 10
18:    sketchW ⊤ ϵx .I NITIALIZE(S, χ, Φ, x, ϵx )                                              ▷ Algorithm 10
19:    sketchW ⊤ ϵs .I NITIALIZE(S, χ, Φ, x, ϵs )                                              ▷ Algorithm 10
                   1/2                               1/2
20:    sketchHw,x x    b.I NITIALIZE(S, χ, Φ, Hw,x x     b)                                     ▷ Algorithm 9
                  −1/2                             −1/2
21:    sketchHw,x sb.I NITIALIZE(S, χ, Φ, Hw,x sb)                                            ▷ Algorithm 9
22:    sketchcs .I NITIALIZE(S, χ, Φ, cs )                                                    ▷ Algorithm 9
23:    ℓ ← 0. Make snapshot history[ℓ]                                                        ▷ Remark D.9
24: end procedure
25: end data structure

Theorem D.8. Data structure BATCH S KETCH (Algorithm 6, 8) supports the following operations:


                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 7 BATCH S KETCH Algorithm 6 continued.
 1: data structure BATCH S KETCH                                                         ▷ Theorem D.8
                                       ex , βes ∈ Rm )
 2: procedure M OVE(βx , βs , βcs ∈ R, β
 3:    βx ← βx , βs ← βs , βcs ← βcs , βex ← βex , βes ← βes                  ▷ Do not update ℓ yet
 4: end procedure
 5: procedure U PDATE(δx ∈ Rntot , δh ∈ Rntot , δeh ∈ Rntot ×m , δϵx , δϵs , δH 1/2 xb , δH −1/2 sb, δcs ∈
                                                                                                     w,x         w,x
    Rntot )
 6:    sketchW ⊤ h.U PDATE(δx , δh )                                                                           ▷ Algorithm 11
 7:    sketchW ⊤ e
                 h.U PDATE(δx , δeh )                                                                          ▷ Algorithm 11
 8:    sketchW ⊤ ϵx .U PDATE(δx , δϵx )                                                                        ▷ Algorithm 11
 9:    sketchW ⊤ ϵs .U PDATE(δx , δϵs )                                                                        ▷ Algorithm 11
              1/2
10:               b.U PDATE(δH 1/2 xb)
       sketchHw,x x                                                                                             ▷ Algorithm 9
                                       w,x
                  −1/2
11:     sketchHw,x sb.U PDATE(δH −1/2 sb)                                                                      ▷ Algorithm 9
                                        w,x
12:    sketchcs .U PDATE(δcs )                                                                                 ▷ Algorithm 9
13:    ℓ←ℓ+1
14:    Make snapshot history[ℓ]                                                                                 ▷ Remark D.9
15: end procedure
16: end data structure


                                                                               1/2     −1/2
       • I NITIALIZE(x ∈ Rntot , h ∈ Rntot , e       h ∈ Rntot ×m , ϵx , ϵs , Hw,x x
                                                                                   b, Hw,x sb, cs ∈
         Rntot , βx , βs , βcs ∈ R, βex , βes ∈ Rm , δapx ∈ R): Initialize the data structure in
               ω−1
         O(nτ
          e           + nτ m) time.

       • M OVE(βx , βs , βcs ∈ R, βex , βes ∈ Rm ): Update values of βx , βs , βcs , βex , βes in O(m) time.
         This effectively moves (x(ℓ) , s(ℓ) ) to (x(ℓ+1) , s(ℓ+1) ) while keeping x(ℓ) unchanged.
       • U PDATE(δx ∈ Rntot , δh ∈ Rntot , δeh ∈ Rntot ×m , δϵx , δϵs , δH 1/2 xb, δH −1/2 sb, δcs ∈ Rntot ):
                                                                                             w,x     w,x
                              1/2               −1/2
         Update sketches of Hw,x(ℓ) x(ℓ+1) and Hw,x(ℓ) s(ℓ+1) . This effectively moves x(ℓ) to x(ℓ+1)
                         (ℓ+1) (ℓ+1)
         while keeping (x        ,s          ) unchanged. Then advance timestamp ℓ.
         Each update costs
         e 2 (∥δx ∥0 + ∥δh ∥0 + ∥δe ∥0 + ∥δϵ ∥0 + ∥δϵ ∥0 ) + ∥δ 1/2 ∥0 + ∥δ −1/2 ∥0 + ∥δc ∥0 )
         O(τ                      h         x        s         H   x
                                                                   b       H    s
                                                                                b        s
                                                                                       w,x               w,x

         time.
       • Q UERYx(ℓ′ ∈ N, ϵ ∈ R): Given timestamp ℓ′ , return a set S ⊆ [n] where
                                                       1/2        (ℓ′ )        1/2     (ℓ+1)
                            S ⊇ {i ∈ [n] : ∥Hw,x(ℓ′ ) xi                  − Hw,x(ℓ) xi         ∥2 ≥ ϵ},
         and
                                                       1/2                    1/2
                                        X                                                            X
         |S| = O(ϵ−2 (ℓ − ℓ′ + 1)                ∥Hw,x(t) x(t) − Hw,x(t) x(t+1) ∥22 +                           ∥x(t) − x(t+1) ∥2,0 )
                                       ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ                                                     ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ−1

         where ℓ is the current timestamp.
         For every query, with probability at least 1 − δ, the return values are correct, and costs at
         most
                                            1/2          1/2
                                  X                                        X
          e 2 · (ϵ−2 (ℓ − ℓ′ + 1)
         O(τ                            ∥H (t) x(t) − H (t) x(t+1) ∥22 +          ∥x(t) − x(t+1) ∥2,0 ))
                                                   x                      x
                                      ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ                                                ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ−1

         running time.
       • Q UERYs(ℓ′ ∈ N, ϵ ∈ R): Given timestamp ℓ′ , return a set S ⊆ [n] where
                                                        −1/2      (ℓ′ )         −1/2   (ℓ+1)
                             S ⊇ {i ∈ [n] : ∥Hw,x(ℓ′ ) si                 − Hw,x(ℓ) si         ∥2 ≥ ϵ}


                                                             31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 8 BATCH S KETCH Algorithm 6, 7 continued.
 1: data structure BATCH S KETCH                                                              ▷ Theorem D.8
 2: private:
                                                                                         1/2
 3: procedure Q UERYxS KETCH(v ∈ S)                        ▷ Return the value of Φχ(v) (Hw,x x)χ(v)
                          1/2
 4:       return sketchHw,x x b.Q UERY(v) + sketchW ⊤ h.Q UERY(v) · βx − sketchW ⊤ eh.Q UERY(v) ·
      βex + sketchW ⊤ ϵx .Q UERY(v)                                              ▷ Algorithm 9, 10
 5: end procedure
                                                                                                     −1/2
 6: procedure Q UERYsS KETCH(v ∈ S)                             ▷ Return the value of Φχ(v) (Hw,x s)χ(v)
                          −1/2
 7:    return sketchHw,x sb.Q UERY(v) + sketchcs .Q UERY(v) · βcs − sketchW ⊤ h.Q UERY(v) ·
    βs + sketchW ⊤ e  h.Q UERY(v) · βes − sketchW ⊤ ϵs .Q UERY(v)            ▷ Algorithm 9, 10
 8: end procedure
 9: public:
10: procedure Q UERYx(ℓ′ ∈ N, ϵ ∈ R)
11:    L0 = {root(S)}
12:    S←∅
13:    for d = 0 → ∞ do
14:        if Ld = ∅ then
15:            return S
16:        end if
17:        Ld+1 ← ∅
18:        for v ∈ Ld do
19:            if v is a leaf node then
20:                 S ← S ∪ {v}
21:            else
22:                 for u child of v do
23:                     if ∥Q UERYxS KETCH(u) − history[ℓ′ ].Q UERYxS KETCH(u)∥2 > 0.9ϵ then
24:                         Ld+1 ← Ld+1 ∪ {u}
25:                     end if
26:                 end for
27:            end if
28:        end for
29:    end for
30: end procedure
31: procedure Q UERYs(ℓ′ ∈ N, ϵ ∈ R)
32:    Same as Q UERYx, except for replacing Q UERYxS KETCH in Line 23 with Q UERYsS KETCH.
33: end procedure
34: end structure


          and
                                                  −1/2           −1/2
                                      X                                                 X
          |S| = O(ϵ−2 (ℓ − ℓ′ + 1)             ∥Hw,x(t) s(t) − Hw,x(t) s(t+1) ∥22 +               ∥x(t) − x(t+1) ∥2,0 )
                                     ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ                                          ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ−1

          where ℓ is the current timestamp.
          For every query, with probability at least 1 − δ, the return values are correct, and costs at
          most
                                             1/2          1/2
                                   X                                        X
           e 2 · (ϵ−2 (ℓ − ℓ′ + 1)
          O(τ                            ∥Hx(t) s(t) − Hx(t) x(t+1) ∥22 +          ∥x(t) − x(t+1) ∥2,0 ))
                                   ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ                                    ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ−1

          running time.

Proof. The proof is essentially the same as proof of (Gu & Song, 2022, Theorem 4.21). For the
running time claims, we plug in Lemma D.10 and D.12 when necessary.
Remark D.9 (Snapshot). As in previous works, we use persistent data structures (e.g., Driscoll et al.
(1989)) to keep a snapshot of the data structure after every update. This allows us to support query to


                                                      32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


historical data. This incurs an O(log ntot ) = O(1)
                                               e    multiplicative factor in all running times, which
we ignore in our analysis.

D.3.4    V ECTOR S KETCH
V ECTOR S KETCH is a data structure used to maintain sketches of sparsely-changing vectors. It is a
direct application of segment trees. For completeness, we include code (Algorithm 9) from (Gu &
Song, 2022, Algorithm 10).

Algorithm 9 (Gu & Song, 2022, Algorithm 10). Used in Algorithm 6, 7, 8.
 1: data structure V ECTOR S KETCH                                                 ▷ Lemma D.10
 2: private: members
 3:     Φ ∈ Rr×ntot
 4:     Partition tree (S, χ)
 5:     x ∈ Rntot
 6:     Segment tree T on [n] with values in Rr
 7: end members
 8: procedure I NITIALIZE(S, χ : partition tree, Φ ∈ Rr×ntot , x ∈ Rntot )
 9:     (S, χ) ← (S, χ), Φ ← Φ
10:     x←x
11:     Order leaves of S (variable blocks) such that every node χ(v) corresponds to a contiguous
    interval ⊆ [n].
12:     Build a segment tree T on [n] such that each segment tree interval I ⊆ [n] maintains
    ΦI x I ∈ Rr .
13: end procedure
14: procedure U PDATE(δx ∈ Rntot )
15:     for all i ∈ [ntot ] such that δx,i ̸= 0 do
16:         Let j ∈ [n] be such that i is in j-th block
17:         Update T at j-th coordinate Φj xj ← Φj xj + Φi · δx,i .
18:         xi ← xi + δx,i
19:     end for
20: end procedure
21: procedure Q UERY(v ∈ V (S))
22:     Find interval I corresponding to χ(v)
23:     return range sum of T on interval I
24: end procedure
25: end data structure

Lemma D.10 ((Gu & Song, 2022, Lemma 4.23)). Given a partition tree (S, χ) of Rn , and a
JL sketching matrix Φ ∈ Rr×ntot , the data structure V ECTOR S KETCH (Algorithm 9) maintains
Φχ(v) xχ(v) for all nodes v in the partition tree implicitly through the following functions:

        • I NITIALIZE(S, χ, Φ): Initializes the data structure in O(rntot ) time.
        • U PDATE(δx ∈ Rntot ): Maintains the data structure for x ← x + δx in O(r∥δx ∥0 log n)
          time.
        • Q UERY(v ∈ V (S)): Outputs Φχ(v) xχ(v) in O(r log n) time.

D.3.5    BALANCED S KETCH
In this section, we present data structure BALANCED S KETCH. It is a data structure for maintaining a
                                                    1/2
sketch of a vector of form W ⊤ h, where W = L−1 x Hw,x and h ∈ R
                                                                   ntot
                                                                        is a sparsely-changing vector.
This is a variation of B LOCK BALANCED S KETCH in Gu & Song (2022).
We use the following construction of a partition tree.
Definition D.11 (Construction of Partition Tree). We fix an ordering π of [n] using the heavy-light
decomposition (Lemma A.10). Let S be a complete binary tree with leaf set [n] and ordering π. Let
χ map a node to the set of leaves in its subtree. Then (S, χ) is a valid partition tree.


                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 10 The BALANCED S KETCH data structure is used in Algorithm 6, 7, 8.
 1: data structure BALANCED S KETCH                                                  ▷ Lemma D.12
 2: private: members
 3:    Φ ∈ Rr×ntot
 4:    Partition tree (S, χ) with balanced binary tree B
 5:    t∈N
 6:    h ∈ Rntot , x ∈ Rntot , Hw,x ∈ Rntot ×ntot
 7:    {L[t] ∈ Rntot ×ntot }t≥0
 8:    {Jv ∈ Rr×ntot }v∈S
 9:    {Zv ∈ Rr×ntot }v∈B
10:    {yv▽ ∈ Rr }v∈B
11:    {tv ∈ N}v∈B
12: end members
13: procedure I NITIALIZE(S, χ : partition tree, Φ ∈ Rr×ntot , x ∈ Rntot , h ∈ Rntot ×k )
14:    (S, χ) ← (S, χ), Φ ← Φ
15:    t ← 0, h ← h
16:    Hw,x ← ∇2 ϕ(x), Bx ← Q + tHw,x
17:    Compute lower Cholesky factor Lx [t] of Bx
18:    for all v ∈ S do
                           1/2
19:        Jv ← Φχ(v) Hw,x
20:    end for
21:    for all v ∈ B do
22:        Zv ← Jv Lx [t]−⊤
23:        yv▽ ← Zv (I − IΛ(v) )h
24:        tv ← t
25:    end for
26: end procedure
27: procedure Q UERY(v ∈ S)
28:    if v ∈ S\B then
29:        return Jv · Lx [t]−⊤ h
30:    end if
31:    ∆Lx ← (Lx [t] − Lx [tv ]) · IΛ(v)
32:    δZv ← −(Lx [t]−1 · ∆Lx · Zv⊤ )⊤
33:    Zv ← Zv + δZv
34:    δyv▽ ← δZv · (I − IΛ(v) )h
35:    yv▽ ← yv▽ + δyv▽
36:    tv ← t
37:    yv△ ← Zv · IΛ(v) · h
38:    return yv△ + yv▽
39: end procedure
40: end data structure


Lemma D.12. Given an elimination tree T with height η, a JL matrix Φ ∈ Rr×ntot , and a partition
tree (S, χ) constructed as in Definition D.11 with height O(1),
                                                          e     the data structure BALANCED S KETCH
(Algorithm 10, 11, 12), maintains Φχ(v) (W ⊤ h)χ(v) for each v ∈ V (S) through the following
operations

       • I NITIALIZE((S, χ) : partition tree, Φ ∈ Rntot , x ∈ Rntot , h ∈ Rntot ×k ): Initializes the
                                  ω−1
         data structure in O(r(nτ
                           e          + nτ k)) time.
       • U PDATE(δx ∈ Rntot , δh ∈ Rntot ×k ): Updates all sketches in S implicitly to reflect (W, h)
         updating to (W new , hnew ) in O(rτ
                                        e 2 k) time.

       • Q UERY(v ∈ S): Outputs Φχ(v) (W ⊤ h)χ(v) in O(rτ
                                                     e 2 k) time.

Proof. The proof is almost same as the proof of (Gu & Song, 2022, Lemma 4.24). (In fact, our W is
simpler than the one used in Gu & Song (2022).)


                                                 34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 11 BALANCED S KETCH Algorithm 10 continued. This is used in Algorithm 6, 7, 8.
 1: data structure BALANCED S KETCH
 2: procedure U PDATE(δx ∈ Rntot , δh ∈ Rntot ×k )
 3:    for i ∈ [n] where δx,i ̸= 0 do
 4:        U PDATEx(δx,i )
 5:    end for
 6:    for all δh,i ̸= 0 do
 7:        v ← Λ◦ (i)
 8:        for all u ∈ P B (v) do
 9:             yu▽ ← yv▽ + Zu · I{i} · δh
10:        end for
11:    end for
12:    h ← h + δh
13: end procedure
14: procedure U PDATEx(δx,i ∈ Rni )
15:    t←t+1
16:    xi ← xi + δx,i
17:    ∆Hw,x ,(i,i) ← ∇2 ϕi (xi ) − Hw,x,(i,i)
18:    Compute ∆Lx such that Lx [t] ← Lx [t − 1] + ∆Lx is the lower Cholesky factor of A(Hw,x +
    ∆Hw,x )−1 A⊤
19:    S ← P B (Λ◦ (lowT (i)))
20:    U PDATEL(S, ∆Lx )
21:    U PDATEH(i, ∆Hw,x ,(i,i) )
22: end procedure
23: end data structure


                                                                                  ω−1
For I NITIALIZE running time, we note that computing Zv for all v ∈ B takes O(rnτ
                                                                            e         ) time by
(Gu & Song, 2022, Lemma 8.3). Because Zv is supported on the path from v to the root in T , we
know that nnz(Z) = O(rnτ ). Therefore computing yv▽ for all v ∈ B takes O(rnτ
                                                                         e    k) time.
Remaining claims follow from combining proof of (Gu & Song, 2022, Lemma 4.24) and (Gu & Song,
2022, Lemma 8.3).

D.4     A NALYSIS OF C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE

Lemma D.13 (Correctness of C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE). Algorithm 1 implicitly maintains
the primal-dual solution pair (x, s) via representation Eq. (8)(9). It also explicitly maintains (x, s) ∈
Rntot × Rntot such that ∥xi − xi ∥xi ≤ ϵ and ∥si − si ∥x∗ i ≤ tϵwi for all i ∈ [n] with probability at
least 0.9.

Proof. We correctly maintain the implicit representation because of correctness of exact.U PDATE
(Theorem D.3).
We show that ∥xi − xi ∥xi ≤ ϵ and ∥si − si ∥x∗ i ≤ tϵwi for all i ∈ [n] (c.f. Algorithm 20, Line 16).
                                                1/2
approx maintains an ℓ∞ approximation of Hw,x x. For ℓ ≤ q, we have

                            1/2               1/2                     9
                         ∥Hw,x x(ℓ+1) − Hw,x x(ℓ) ∥2 = ∥δx ∥w,x ≤       α ≤ ζx
                                                                      8
where the first step from definition of ∥ · ∥w,x , the second step follows from Lemma F.11, the third
step follows from definition of ζx .
                                                                                                 1/2
By Theorem D.6, with probability at least 1 − δapx , approx correctly maintains x such that ∥Hw,x x −
  1/2
Hw,x x∥∞ ≤ ϵapx,x ≤ ϵ. Then
                                       −1/2         1/2    1/2          −1/2
                     ∥xi − xi ∥xi ≤ wi        ∥Hw,x x − Hw,x x∥∞ ≤ wi          ϵ ≤ ϵ.


                                                      35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 12 BALANCED S KETCH Algorithm 10, 11 continued. This is used in Algorithm 6, 7, 8.
 1: data structure BALANCED S KETCH                                          ▷ Lemma D.12
 2: private:
 3: procedure U PDATEL(S ⊂ B, ∆Lx ∈ Rntot ×ntot )
 4:    for all v ∈ S do
 5:        δZv ← −(Lx [t − 1]−1 (Lx [t − 1] − Lx [tv ]) · IΛ(v) · Zv⊤ )⊤
             ′
 6:        δZ  v
                 ← −(Lx [t]−1 · ∆Lx · (Zv + δZv )⊤ )⊤
                                 ′
 7:        Zv ← Zv + δZv + δZ      v
                            ′
 8:        δyv▽ ← (δZv + δZv )(I − IΛ(v) )h
 9:        yv▽ ← yv▽ + δyv▽
10:        tv ← t
11:    end for
12: end procedure
13: private:
14: procedure U PDATEH(i ∈ [n], ∆Hw,x ,(i,i) ∈ Rni ×ni )
15:    Find u such that χ(u) = {i}
                                                          1/2
16:    ∆H 1/2 ,(i,i) ← (Hw,x,(i,i) + ∆Hw,x ,(i,i) )1/2 − Hw,x,(i,i)
            w,x
17:     δJu ← Φi · ∆H 1/2 ,(i,i)
                          w,x

18:    for all v ∈ P S (u) do
19:        Jv ← Jv + δJu
20:        if v ∈ B then
21:             δZv ← δJv · Lx [tv ]−⊤
22:             Zv ← Zv + δZv
23:             δyv▽ ← δZv · (I − IΛ(v) ) · h
24:             yv▽ ← yv▽ + δyv▽
25:        end if
26:    end for
27:    Hw,x ← Hw,x + ∆Hw,x ,(i,i)
28: end procedure
29: end data structure


                                                     1/2
Note that the last step is loose by a factor of wi . When wi s are large, we could improve running
time by using a tighter choice of ϵapx,x , as did in Gu & Song (2022). Here we use a loose bound for
simplicity of presentation. Same remark applies to s.
The proof for s is similar. We have
                                       −1/2                   17
                                 ∥Hw,x δs ∥2 = ∥δs ∥∗w,x ≤       α · t ≤ ζs
                                                              8
and
                                   1/2        −1/2     −1/2          1/2
                  ∥si − si ∥∗xi ≤ wi     ∥Hw,x s − Hw,x s∥∞ ≤ wi           ϵapx,s ≤ ϵ · t · wi .
Lemma D.14. We bound the running time of C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE as following.
                                                            ω−1
       • C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE .I NITIALIZE takes O(nτ
                                                       e        + nτ m + nmω−1 ) time.
       • If C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE .M ULTIPLYA ND M OVE is called N times, then it has
         total running time
              O((N
              e    n−1/2 + log(tmax /tmin )) · n(τ 2 m + τ m2 )1/2 (τ ω−1 + τ m + mω−1 )1/2 ).

       • C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE .O UTPUT takes O(nτ
                                                   e    m) time.

Proof. I NITIALIZE part: By Theorem D.3 and D.6.
O UTPUT part: By Theorem D.3.


                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M ULTIPLYA ND M OVE part: Between two restarts, the total size of |Lx | returned by approx.Q UERY
              e 2 ζx2 /ϵ2apx,x ) by Theorem D.6. By plugging in ζx = 2α, ϵapx,x = ϵ, we have
is bounded by O(q
P        (ℓ)   e 2 ). Similarly, for s we have P        (ℓ)     e 2 ).
       |Lx | = O(q
    ℓ∈[q]                                            |Ls | = O(q
                                                         ℓ∈[q]

Update time: By Theorem D.3 and D.6, in a sequence of q updates, total cost for update is
e 2 (τ 2 m + τ m2 )). So the amortized update cost per iteration is O(q(τ
O(q                                                                 e     2
                                                                            m + τ m2 )). The total
update cost is
                                                               e q(τ 2 m + τ m2 )).
                   number of iterations · time per iteration = O(N

Init/restart time: We restart the data structure whenever k > q or |t − t| > tϵt , so there are
O(N/q + log(tmax /tmin )ϵ−1
                         t ) restarts in total. By Theorem D.3 and D.6, time cost per restart is
       ω−1
O(n(τ
 e         + τ m + mω−1 )). So the total initialization time is

number of restarts · time per restart = O((N/q
                                        e      + log(tmax /tmin )ϵ−1
                                                                  t ) · n(τ
                                                                            ω−1
                                                                                + τ m + mω−1 )).

Combine everything: Overall running time is
            e q(τ 2 m + τ m2 ) + (N/q + log(tmax /tmin )ϵ−1
            O(N                                          t ) · n(τ
                                                                   ω−1
                                                                       + τ m + mω−1 )).
Taking ϵt = 21 ϵ, the optimal choice for q is

                        q = n1/2 (τ 2 m + τ m2 )−1/2 (τ ω−1 + τ m + mω−1 )1/2 ,
achieving overall running time
            O((N
            e    n−1/2 + log(tmax /tmin )) · n(τ 2 m + τ m2 )1/2 (τ ω−1 + τ m + mω−1 )1/2 ).

Proof of Theorem D.2. Combining Lemma D.13 and D.14.

D.5     P ROOF OF M AIN S TATEMENT



Proof of Theorem D.1. Use C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE (Algorithm 1) as the maintenance data
structure in Algorithm 20. Combining Theorem D.2 and Theorem F.1 finishes the proof.

E     A LGORITHM FOR L OW-R ANK QP
In this section we present a nearly-linear time algorithm for solving low-rank QP with small number
of linear constraints. We briefly describe the outline of this section.

        • In Section E.1, we present the main statement of Section E.
        • In Section E.2, we present the main data structure C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE.
        • In Section E.3, we present several data structures used in C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE,
          including E XACT DS (Section E.3.1), A PPROX DS (Section E.3.2), BATCH S KETCH (Sec-
          tion E.3.3).
        • In Section E.4, we prove correctness and running time of C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE
          data structure.
        • In Section E.5, we prove the main result (Theorem E.1).

E.1     M AIN S TATEMENT

We consider programs of the form (16), i.e.,
                                                1 ⊤
                                      min         x Qx + c⊤ x
                                     x∈Rn       2

                                                    37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         s.t. Ax = b
                                              xi ∈ Ki       ∀i ∈ [n]
              ntot        ntot          m×ntot
where Q ∈ S        ,c∈R ,A∈R                 , b ∈ R , Ki ⊂ Rni is a convex set. For simplicity, we
                                                        m

assume that ni = O(1) for all i ∈ [n].
Theorem E.1. Consider the convex program (16). Let ϕi : Ki → R be a νi -self-concordant barrier
for all i ∈ [n]. Suppose the program satisfies the following properties:

        • Inner radius r: There exists z ∈ Rntot such that Az = b and B(z, r) ∈ K.
        • Outer radius R: K ⊆ B(0, R) where 0 ∈ Rntot .
        • Lipschitz constant L: ∥Q∥2→2 ≤ L, ∥c∥2 ≤ L.
       • Low rank: We are given a factorization Q = U V ⊤ where U, V ∈ Rntot ×k .

Let (wi )i∈[n] ∈ Rn≥1 and κ = i∈[n] wi νi . Given any 0 < ϵ ≤ 12 , we can find an approximate
                              P

solution x ∈ K satisfiying

                 1 ⊤        ⊤                  1 ⊤        ⊤
                   x Qx + c x ≤ min              x Qx + c x + ϵLR(R + 1),
                 2                 Ax=b,x∈K 2

                      ∥Ax − b∥1 ≤ 3ϵ(R∥A∥1 + ∥b∥1 ),
in expected time
                             √ −1/2
                         O((
                         e    κn    + log(R/(rϵ))) · n(k + m)(ω+1)/2 ).
When maxi∈[n] νi = O(1),
                   e     wi = 1, the running time simplifies to
                                    O(n(k
                                    e     + m)(ω+1)/2 ) log(R/(rϵ))).

E.2     A LGORITHM S TRUCTURE AND C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE

Similar to the low-treewidth case, our algorithm is based on the robust IPM. Details of the robust
IPM will be given in Section F. During the algorithm, we maintain a primal-dual solution pair
(x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot on the robust central path. In addition, we maintain a sparsely-changing
approximation (x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot to (x, s). In each iteration, we implicitly perform update
                                        −1/2                −1/2
                         x ← x + tBw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ
                                            2       −1/2                −1/2
                         s ← s + tδµ − t Hw,x Bw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ
where
                                 Hw,x = ∇2 ϕw (x)                                        (see Eq. (24))
                            Bw,x,t = Q + tHw,x                                           (see Eq. (25))
                                       −1/2        −1             −1/2
                             Pw,x,t = Bw,x,t A⊤ (ABw,x,t A⊤ )−1 ABw,x,t                  (see Eq. (26))
and explicitly maintain (x, s) such that they remain close to (x, s) in ℓ∞ -distance.
This task is handled by the C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE data structure, which is our main data
structure. The robust IPM algorithm (Algorithm 19, 20) directly calls it in every iteration.
The C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE data structure (Algorithm 13) has two main sub data structures,
E XACT DS (Algorithm 14, 15) and A PPROX DS (Algorithm 16). E XACT DS is used to maintain (x, s),
and A PPROX DS is used to maintain (x, s).
Theorem E.2. Data structure C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE (Algorithm 13) implicitly maintains
the central path primal-dual solution pair (x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot and explicitly maintains its
approximation (x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot using the following functions:

        • I NITIALIZE(x ∈ Rntot , s ∈ Rntot , t0 ∈ R>0 , ϵ ∈ (0, 1)): Initializes the data structure
          with initial primal-dual solution pair (x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot , initial central path timestamp
                               ω−1
          t0 ∈ R>0 in O(n(k
                         e         + mω−1 )) time.


                                                    38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 13 Main algorithm for low-rank QP.
 1: data structure C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE                                                   ▷ Theorem E.2
 2: private : members
 3:    E XACT DS exact                                                                     ▷ Algorithm 14, 15
 4:    A PPROX DS approx                                                                      ▷ Algorithm 16
 5:    ℓ∈N
 6: end members
 7: procedure I NITIALIZE(x, s ∈ Rntot , t ∈ R+ , ϵ ∈ (0, 1))
 8:    exact.I NITIALIZE(x, s, x, s, t)                                                         ▷ Algorithm 14
 9:    ℓ←0                √
10:    w ← νmax , N ← κ log n log nκR   ϵr
11:    q ← n1/2 (k 2 + m2 )−1/2 (dω−1 + mω−1 )1/2
12:    ϵapx,x ← ϵ, ζx ← 2α, δapx ← N1
13:    ϵapx,s ← ϵ · t, ζs ← 3αt
14:
                                               1/2     −1/2
            approx.I NITIALIZE(x, s, h, b
                                        h, e
                                           h, Hw,x x
                                                   b, Hw,x sb, βx , βs , βbx , βbs , βex , βes , q, &exact,
            ϵapx,x , ϵapx,s , δapx )

15:             ▷ Algorithm 16.Parameters from x to βes come from exact. &exact is pointer to exact
16: end procedure
17: procedure M ULTIPLYA ND M OVE(t ∈ R+ )
18:    ℓ←ℓ+1
19:    if |t − t| > t · ϵt or ℓ > q then
20:         x, s ← exact.O UTPUT()                                                 ▷ Algorithm 15
21:         I NITIALIZE(x, s, t, ϵ)
22:    end if
23:    βx , βs , βbx , βbs , βex , βes ← exact.M OVE()                             ▷ Algorithm 14
24:    δx , δs ← approx.M OVE A ND Q UERY(βx , βs , βbx , βbs , βex , βes )        ▷ Algorithm 16
25:    δh , δbh , δeh , δH 1/2 xb, δH −1/2 sb ← exact.U PDATE(δx , δs )            ▷ Algorithm 15
                         w,x        w,x
26:    approx.U PDATE(δx , δh , δbh , δeh , δH 1/2 xb, δH −1/2 sb)                              ▷ Algorithm 16
                                              w,x        w,x
27: end procedure
28: procedure O UTPUT()
29:    return exact.O UTPUT()                                                                   ▷ Algorithm 15
30: end procedure
31: end data structure



       • M ULTIPLYA ND M OVE(t ∈ R>0 ): It implicitly maintains

                                            −1/2                     −1/2
                               x ← x + tBw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ (x, s, t)
                                                2         −1/2                 −1/2
                               s ← s + tδµ − t Hw,x Bw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ (x, s, t)

          where Hw,x , Bw,x,t , Pw,x,t are defined in Eq. (24)(25)(26) respectively, and t is some
          timestamp satisfying |t − t| ≤ ϵt · t.
          It also explicitly maintains (x, s) ∈ Rntot ×ntot such that ∥xi − xi ∥xi ≤ ϵ and ∥si − si ∥∗xi ≤
          tϵwi for all i ∈ [n] with probability at least 0.9.
          Assuming the function is called at most N times and t decreases from tmax to tmin , the total
          running time is

                            O((N
                            e    n−1/2 + log(tmax /tmin )) · n(k (ω+1)/2 + m(ω+1)/2 )).


       • O UTPUT: Computes (x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot exactly and outputs them in O(n(k
                                                                              e     + m)) time.


                                                        39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.3     DATA S TRUCTURES U SED IN C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE

In this section we present several data structures used in C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE, including:

        • E XACT DS (Section E.3.1): This data structure maintains an implicit representation of the
          primal-dual solution pair (x, s). This is directly used by C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE.
        • A PPROX DS (Section E.3.2): This data structure explicitly maintains an approximation (x, s)
          of (x, s). This data structure is directly used by C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE.
        • BATCH S KETCH (Section E.3.3): This data structure maintains a sketch of (x, s). This data
          structure is used by A PPROX DS.

E.3.1    E XACT DS
In this section we present the data structure E XACT DS. It maintains an implicit representation of the
primal-dual solution pair (x, s) by maintaining several sparsely-changing vectors (see Eq. (12)(13)).
Theorem E.3. Data structure E XACT DS (Algorithm 14, 15) implicitly maintains the primal-dual
pair (x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot , computable via the expression
                                           −1/2            −1/2       −1/2
                            x=x
                              b + Hw,x hβx + Hw,x b
                                                  hβbx + Hw,x e
                                                              hβex ,                               (12)
                                       1/2        1/2 b      1/2 e
                             s = sb + Hw,x hβs + Hw,x b
                                                      hβs + Hw,x e
                                                                 hβs ,                             (13)
                              −1/2                             −1/2               −1/2
where x                                        h = Hw,x U ⊤ ∈ Rntot ×k , e
        b, sb ∈ Rntot , h = Hw,x δ µ ∈ Rntot , b                         h = Hw,x A⊤ ∈ Rntot ×m ,
βx , βs ∈ R, βbx , βbs ∈ Rk , βex , βes ∈ Rm .
The data structure supports the following functions:

        • I NITIALIZE(x, s, x, s ∈ Rntot , t ∈ R>0 ): Initializes the data structure in O(n(k
                                                                                        e     ω
                                                                                                + mω ))
          time, with initial value of the primal-dual pair (x, s), its initial approximation (x, s), and
          initial approximate timestamp t.
        • M OVE(): Performs robust central path step
                           x ← x + tBx−1 δµ − tBx−1 A⊤ (ABx−1 A⊤ )−1 ABx−1 δµ ,                    (14)
                                             2                 2
                           s ← s + tδµ − t Bx−1 δµ + t Bx−1 A⊤ (ABx−1 A⊤ )−1 ABx−1 δµ              (15)
                 ω      ω
          in O(k + m ) time by updating its implicit representation.
        • U PDATE(δx , δs ∈ Rntot ): Updates the approximation pair (x, s) to (xnew = x + δx ∈
          Rntot , snew = s + δs ∈ Rntot ) in O((k
                                                e 2 + m2 )(∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 )) time, and output the
                                         1/2     −1/2
          changes in variables h, b
                                  h, e
                                     h, Hw,x x
                                             b, Hw,x sb.
                            1/2      −1/2
          Furthermore, h, Hw,x xb, Hw,x sb changes in O(∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 ) coordinates, b
                                                                                       h changes in
          O(k(∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 )) coordinates, h changes in O(m(∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 )) coordinates.
                                              e

        • O UTPUT(): Output x and s in O(n(k
                                       e     + m)) time.

        • Q UERYx(i ∈ [n]): Output xi in O(k
                                         e + m) time. This function is used by A PPROX DS.

        • Q UERYs(i ∈ [n]): Output si in O(k
                                         e + m) time. This function is used by A PPROX DS.

Proof of Theorem E.3. By combining Lemma E.4 and E.5.
Lemma E.4. E XACT DS correctly maintains an implicit representation of (x, s), i.e., invariant
                −1/2       −1/2 b     −1/2 e
         x=x
           b + Hw,x hβx + Hw,x b
                               hβx + Hw,x e
                                          hβx ,
                     1/2             1/2            1/2
         s = sb + Hw,x hβs + Hw,x b
                                  hβbs + Hw,x e
                                              hβes ,
                 −1/2                        −1/2                       −1/2
                                h = Hw,x U ⊤ ∈ Rntot ×d , e
         h = Hw,x δ µ ∈ Rntot , b                         h = Hw,x A⊤ ∈ Rntot ×m ,


                                                          40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 14 This is used in Algorithm 13.
 1: data structure E XACT DS                                                                   ▷ Theorem E.3
 2: members
 3:    x, s ∈ Rntot , t ∈ R+ , Hw,x ∈ Rntot ×ntot
 4:                     h ∈ Rntot ×k , e
       b, sb, ∈ Rntot , b
       x                               h ∈ Rntot ×m , βx , βs ∈ R, βbx , βbs ∈ Rd , βex , βes ∈ Rm
 5:    u1 , u2 ∈ Rk×m , u3 ∈ Rm×m , u4 ∈ Rm , u5 ∈ Rd , u6 ∈ Rk×k
 6:    α ∈ R, δ µ ∈ Rn
 7:    K∈N
 8: end members
 9: procedure I NITIALIZE(x, s, x, s ∈ Rntot , t ∈ R+ )
10:    x ← x, x ← s, t ← t
11:    b ← x, sb ← s, βx ← 0, βs ← 0, βbx ← 0, βbs ← 0, βex ← 0, βes ← 0
       x
12:    Hw,x ← ∇2 ϕw (x)
13:    I NITIALIZEh(x, s, Hw,x )
14: end procedure
15: procedure I NITIALIZEh(x, s ∈ Rntot , Hw,x ∈ Rntot ×ntot )
16:    for i ∈ [n] do
                          α sinh( wλ γi (x,s,t))
17:         (δ µ )i ← − γi (x,s,t)
                                   i
                                      · µi (x, s, t)
                     −1      2 λ
18:         α ← α + wi cosh ( wi γi (x, s, t))
19:    end for
               −1/2                   −1/2             −1/2
20:    h ← Hw,x δ µ , b   h ← Hw,x U ⊤ , e       h ← Hw,x A⊤
                  −1 ⊤                        −1 ⊤            −1 ⊤
21:    u1 ← U Hw,x    A , u2 ← V Hw,x           A , u3 ← AHw,x  A
                  −1                         −1             −1 ⊤
22:    u4 ← AHw,x δ µ , u5 ← V Hw,x δ µ , u6 ← V Hw,x U
23: end procedure
24: procedure M OVE()
                   −1
25:    v0 ← I + t u6 ∈ Rk×k
              −1          −2          −1
26:    v1 ← t u3 − t u⊤         1 v0 u2 ∈ R
                                                 m×m
              −1          −2 ⊤ −1
27:    v2 ← t u4 − t u1 v0 u5 ∈ Rm
28:    βx ← βx + (α)−1/2
                                      −1                     −1
29:    βbx ← βbx − (α)−1/2 · t v0−1 u5 + (α)−1/2 · t v0−1 u2 v1−1 v2
30:    βex ← βex − (α)−1/2 · v1−1 v2
31:    βs ← βs
32:    βbs ← βbs + (α)−1/2 · v0−1 u5 − (α)−1/2 · v0−1 u2 v1−1 v2
33:    βes ← βes + (α)−1/2 · tv1−1 v2
34:    return βx , βs , βbx , βbs , βex , βes
35: end procedure
36: end data structure


                 −1 ⊤                   −1 ⊤                  −1 ⊤
         u1 = U Hw,x A ∈ Rd×m , u2 = V Hw,x A ∈ Rd×m , u3 = AHw,x A ∈ Rm×m ,
                −1                      −1                     −1 ⊤
         u4 = AHw,x δ µ ∈ Rm , u5 = V Hw,x  δ µ ∈ Rd , u6 = V Hw,x U ∈ Rd×d ,
             X               λ
         α=     wi−1 cosh2 ( γi (x, s, t)),
                            wi
              i∈[n]

         δ µ = α1/2 δµ (x, s, t)
always holds after every external call, and return values of the queries are correct.

Proof. I NITIALIZE: By checking the definitions we see that all invariants are satisfied after I NITIAL -
IZE .

M OVE: By the invariants, we have
                           −1      −1 ⊤
              v0 = I + t        V Hw,x U ,


                                                    41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 15 Algorithm 14 continued.
 1: data structure E XACT DS                                                                    ▷ Theorem E.3
 2: procedure O UTPUT()
                       −1/2             −1/2 b           −1/2 e               1/2         1/2 b           1/2 e
 3:    return x  b + Hw,x hβx + Hw,x b       hβx + Hw,x e     hβx , sb + Hw,x hβs + Hw,x b     hβs + Hw,x e  hβs
 4: end procedure
 5: procedure Q UERYx(i ∈ [n])
                        −1/2               −1/2                −1/2
 6:    return x  bi + Hw,x hi,∗ βx + Hw,x b      hi,∗ βbx + Hw,x e    hi,∗ βex
 7: end procedure
 8: procedure Q UERYs(i ∈ [n])
                       1/2               1/2               1/2
 9:    return sbi + Hw,x hi,∗ βs + Hw,x b    hi,∗ βbs + Hw,x e hi,∗ βes
10: end procedure
11: procedure U PDATE(δx , δs ∈ Rntot )
12:    ∆Hw,x ← ∇2 ϕw (x + δx ) − Hw,x ▷ ∆Hw,x is non-zero only for diagonal blocks (i, i) for
    which δx,i ̸= 0
13:    S ← {i ∈ [n] | δx,i ̸= 0 or δs,i ̸= 0}
14:    δδ µ ← 0
15:    for i ∈ S do
16:         Let γi = γi (x, s, t), γinew = γi (x + δx , s + δs , t), µnewi     = µi (x + δx , s + δs , t)
17:         α ← α − wi−1 cosh2 ( wλi γi ) + wi−1 cosh2 ( wλi γinew )
18:                                            1
            δδµ ,i ← −α sinh( wλi γinew ) · γ new   · µnew
                                                       i   − δ µ,i
                                              i
19:    end for
                                          −1/2
20:    δh ← ∆H −1/2 (δ µ + δδµ ) + Hw,x δδµ
                        w,x

21:       δbh ← ∆H −1/2 U ⊤
                        w,x

22:       δeh ← ∆H −1/2 A⊤
                        w,x

23:       δxb ← −(δh βx + δbh βbx + δeh βex )
24:       δsb ← −(δh βs + δbh βbs + δeh βes )
25:       h ← h + δh , b
                       h←b             h←e
                             h + δbh , e                b←x
                                              h + δeh , x b + δxb, sb ← sb + δsb
                                  ⊤
26:       u1 ← u1 + U ∆H −1 A
                                 w,x

27:       u2 ← u2 + V ∆H −1 A⊤
                                 w,x

28:       u3 ← u3 + A∆H −1 A⊤
                                 w,x
                                            −1
29:       u4 ← u4 + A(∆H −1 (δ µ + δδµ ) + Hw,x δδ µ )
                                     w,x
                                             −1
30:       u5 ← u5 + V (∆H −1 (δ µ + δδµ ) + Hw,x δδ µ )
                                     w,x

31:    u6 ← u6 + V ∆H −1 U ⊤
                              w,x
32:    x ← x + δx , s ← s + δs
33:    Hw,x ← Hw,x + ∆Hw,x
34:    return δh , δbh , δeh , δH 1/2 xb, δH −1/2 sb
                                  w,x       w,x
35: end procedure
36: end data structure

                          −1     −1 ⊤           −1     −1 ⊤           −1      −1 ⊤ −1
                v1 = t         AHw,x A −t            AHw,x U (I + t        V Hw,x U ) V Hw,x A⊤
                    = ABx−1 A⊤
                          −1     −1             −1     −1 ⊤         −1      −1 ⊤ −1
                v2 = t         AHw,x δµ − t          AHw,x U (I + t      V Hw,x U ) V Hw,x δ µ
                = ABx−1 δ µ .
By implicit representation (12),
       −1/2             −1/2 b        −1/2 e
δx = H    w,xhδβ + Hx
                             hδ b + H
                               w,x         hδ e
                                           βx    w,x      βx
         −1
      = Hw,x δ µ · (α)−1/2
            −1 ⊤                       −1 −1
         + Hw,x U · (α)−1/2 t            v0 (−u5 + u2 v1−1 v2 )


                                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            −1 ⊤
         − Hw,x A · (α)−1/2 v1−1 v2
       −1
    = Hw,x δµ
            −1 ⊤         −1             −1      −1 ⊤ −1      −1          −1 ⊤
         + Hw,x U t           (I + t         V Hw,x U ) (−V Hw,x δµ + V Hw,x A (ABx−1 A⊤ )−1 ABx−1 δµ )
            −1 ⊤
         − Hw,x A (ABx−1 A⊤ )−1 ABx−1 δµ
               −1    −1       −2    −1 ⊤                   −1      −1 ⊤ −1    −1
    = t · (t        Hw,x −t        Hw,x U (I + t                V Hw,x U ) V Hw,x )δµ
               −1    −1         −2 −2     −1 ⊤                   −1      −1 ⊤ −1    −1
         − t(t      Hw,x −t         t    Hw,x U (I + t                V Hw,x U ) V Hw,x )A⊤ (ABx−1 A⊤ )−1 ABx−1 δµ
    = tBx−1 δµ − tBx−1 A⊤ (ABx−1 A⊤ )−1 ABx−1 δµ .
Comparing with the robust central path step (14), we see that x is updated correctly.
For s, from implicit representation 13 we have
                           1/2                   1/2               1/2
                                          hδβbx + Hw,x e
                    δs = Hw,x hδβx + Hw,x b            hδβex
                      = − U ⊤ · (α)−1/2 · v0−1 (−u5 + u2 v1−1 v2 ) + A⊤ · (α)−1/2 · tv1−1 v2
                                   2                   2
                      = tδµ − t Bx−1 δµ + t Bx−1 A⊤ (ABx−1 A⊤ )−1 ABx−1 δµ .
Comparing with robust central path step (15), we see that s is updated correctly.
U PDATE: We would like to prove that U PDATE correctly updates the values of x                             b, sb, h, b
                                                                                                                     h, e
                                                                                                                        h,
u1 , u2 , u3 , u4 , u5 , u6 , α, δ µ , while preserving the values of (x, s). In fact, by checking the defi-
nitions, it is easy to see that h, b    h, e
                                           h, u1 , u2 , u3 , u4 , u5 , u6 , α, δ µ are updated correctly. Furthermore

                                             δx = δxb + δh βx + δbh βbx + δeh βex = 0,
                                             δs = δsb + δh βs + δb βbs + δe βes = 0.
                                                                        h      h

So values of (x, s) are preserved.

Lemma E.5. We bound the running time of E XACT DS as following.
                                                             ω−1
      (i) E XACT DS.I NITIALIZE (Algorithm 14) runs in O(n(k
                                                       e         + mω−1 )) time.
                                                 e ω + mω ) time.
     (ii) E XACT DS.M OVE (Algorithm 14) runs in O(k

    (iii) E XACT DS.O UTPUT (Algorithm 15) runs in O(n(k
                                                   e     + m)) time and correctly outputs (x, s).


     (iv) E XACT DS.Q UERYx and E XACT DS.Q UERYs (Algorithm 15) runs in O(k
                                                                         e + m) time and
          returns the correct answer.
      (v) E XACT DS.U PDATE (Algorithm 15) runs in O((k  e 2 + m2 )(∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 )) time. Fur-
          thermore, ∥δh ∥0 , ∥δxb∥0 , ∥δsb∥0 = O(∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 ), nnz(b
                                                                        h) = O(d(∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 )),
              h) = O(m(∥δx ∥0 + ∥δs ∥0 )).
          nnz(e

                                                                                           ω−1
Proof.         (i) E XACT DS.I NITIALIZE: Computing u1 and u2 takes Tmat (k, n, m) = O(n(k
                                                                                     e         +
               ω−1                                                    ω−1
           m      )) time. Computing u3 takes Tmat (m, n, m) = O(nm
                                                                  e        ) time. Computing u4
           takes O(nm) time. Computing u5 takes O(nk) time. Computing u6 takes Tmat (k, n, k) =
                  ω−1
           O(nk
            e         ) time. All other computations are cheaper.

     (ii) E XACT DS.M OVE: Computing v0−1 takes O(k
                                                e ω ) time. Computing v −1 takes O(m
                                                                       1
                                                                                 e ω ) time.
          All other computations are cheaper.

    (iii) E XACT DS.O UTPUT: Takes O(n(k
                                   e     + m)) time.

     (iv) E XACT DS.Q UERYx and E XACT DS.Q UERYs: Takes O(k
                                                         e + m) time.


                                                                      43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (v) E XACT DS.U PDATE: For simplicity, write t = ∥δx ∥0 + ∥δx ∥0 . Computing δh takes O(t)
                                                                                               e
          time. Computing δbh takes O(tk) time. Computing δeh takes O(tm) time. Computing δxb and
                                    e                                e
          δsb takes O(t(k
                    e     + m)) time. The sparsity statements follow directly. Computing u1 and u2
                                                         2
          takes O(tkm) time. Computing u3 takes O(tm
                 e                                  e      ) time. Computing u4 takes O(tm)
                                                                                       e      time.
                                                                     2
          Computing u5 takes O(tk) time. Computing u6 takes O(tk ) time.
                               e                                e

E.3.2     A PPROX DS
In this section we present the data structure A PPROX DS. Given BATCH S KETCH, a data structure
maintaining a sketch of the primal-dual pair (x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot , A PPROX DS maintains a
sparsely-changing ℓ∞ -approximation of (x, s).

Algorithm 16 This is used in Algorithm 13.
 1: data structure A PPROX DS                                                                                ▷ Theorem E.6
 2: private : members
 3:     ϵapx,x , ϵapx,s ∈ R
 4:     ℓ∈N
                                                                             1/2               −1/2
 5:     BATCH S KETCH bs                ▷ This maintains a sketch of Hw,x x and Hw,x s. See Algorithm 17 and 18.
 6:     E XACT DS* exact ▷ This is a pointer to the E XACT DS (Algorithm 14, 15) we maintain in parallel to
    A PPROX DS.
 7:     e, se ∈ Rntot
        x                  ▷ (e x, se) is a sparsely-changing approximation of (x, s). They have the same value as
    (x, s), but for these local variables we use (e   x, se) to avoid confusion.
 8: end members
                                                                                                           1/2     −1/2
 9: procedure I NITIALIZE(x, s ∈ Rntot , h ∈ Rntot , b            h ∈ Rntot ×k , e         h ∈ Rntot ×m , Hw,x x
                                                                                                               b, Hw,x sb ∈
    Rntot , βx , βs ∈ R, βbx , βbs ∈ Rd , βex , βes ∈ Rm , q ∈ N, E XACT DS* exact, ϵapx,x , ϵapx,s , δapx ∈ R)
10:     ℓ ← 0, q ← q
11:     ϵapx,x ← ϵapx,x , ϵapx,s ← ϵapx,s
                                           1/2      −1/2
12:     bs.I NITIALIZE(x, h, b   h, eh, Hw,x x b, Hw,x sb, βx , βs , βbx , βbs , βex , βes , δapx /q)        ▷ Algorithm 17
13:     e ← x, se ← s
        x
14:     exact ← exact
15: end procedure
16: procedure U PDATE(δx ∈ Rntot , δh ∈ Rntot , δhb ∈ Rntot ×k , δhe ∈ Rntot ×m , δH 1/2 xb , δH −1/2 sb ∈ Rntot )
                                                                                              w,x      w,x
17:      bs.U PDATE(δx , δh , δhb , δhe , δH 1/2 xb , δH −1/2 sb)                                        ▷ Algorithm 17
                                              w,x       w,x
18:    ℓ←ℓ+1
19: end procedure
20: procedure M OVE A ND Q UERY(βx , βs ∈ R, βbx , βbs ∈ Rd , βex , βes ∈ Rm )
21:    bs.M OVE(βx , βs , βbx , βbs , βex , βes )                          ▷ Algorithm 17. Do not update ℓ yet
22:    δxe ← Q UERYx(ϵapx,x /(2 log q + 1))                                                   ▷ Algorithm 16
23:    δse ← Q UERYs(ϵapx,s /(2 log q + 1))                                                   ▷ Algorithm 16
24:    e←x
       x    e + δxe , se ← se + δse
25:    return (δxe , δse)
26: end procedure
27: procedure Q UERYx(ϵ ∈ R)
28:    Same as Algorithm 5, Q UERYx.
29: end procedure
30: procedure Q UERYs(ϵ ∈ R)
31:    Same as Algorithm 5, Q UERYs.
32: end procedure
33: end data structure

Theorem E.6. Given parameters ϵapx,x , ϵapx,s ∈ (0, 1), δapx ∈ (0, 1), ζx , ζs ∈ R such that
                 1/2                 1/2                             −1/2            −1/2
            ∥Hw,x(ℓ) x(ℓ) − Hw,x(ℓ) x(ℓ+1) ∥2 ≤ ζx , ∥Hw,x(ℓ) s(ℓ) − Hw,x(ℓ) s(ℓ+1) ∥2 ≤ ζs

for all ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , q − 1}, data structure A PPROX DS (Algorithm 16) supports the following
operations:

        • I NITIALIZE(x, s        ∈     Rntot , h  ∈    Rntot , b
                                                                h   ∈       Rntot ×k , e
                                                                                       h  ∈
             ntot ×m    1/2     −1/2       ntot                       k e e             m
          R                 b, Hw,x sb ∈ R , βx , βs ∈ R, βx , βs ∈ R , βx , βs ∈ R , q ∈
                     , Hw,x x                             b    b


                                                                44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          N, E XACT DS* exact, ϵapx,x , ϵapx,s , δapx ∈ R): Initialize the data structure in O(n(k
                                                                                             e     +m))
          time.
        • M OVE A ND Q UERY(βx , βs ∈ R, βbx , βbs ∈ Rd , βex , βes ∈ Rm ): Update values of
          βx , βs , βbx , βbs , βex , βes by calling BATCH S KETCH.M OVE. This effectively moves (x(ℓ) , s(ℓ) )
          to (x(ℓ+1) , s(ℓ+1) ) while keeping x(ℓ) unchanged.
                                    (ℓ)   (ℓ)
          Then return two sets Lx , Ls ⊂ [n] where
                                                     1/2        (ℓ)       1/2     (ℓ+1)
                           L(ℓ)
                            x ⊇ {i ∈ [n] : ∥Hw,x(ℓ) xi − Hw,x(ℓ) xi                       ∥2 ≥ ϵapx,x },
                                                     −1/2       (ℓ)       −1/2    (ℓ+1)
                           L(ℓ)
                            s ⊇ {i ∈ [n] : ∥Hw,x(ℓ) si − Hw,x(ℓ) si                       ∥2 ≥ ϵapx,s },
          satisfying
                                                X
                                                      |L(ℓ)   e −2 2 2
                                                        x | = O(ϵapx,x ζx q ),
                                           0≤ℓ≤q−1
                                                X
                                                                 e −2 ζ 2 q 2 ).
                                                      |Ls(ℓ) | = O(ϵ apx,s s
                                           0≤ℓ≤q−1

          For every query, with probability at least 1 − δapx /q, the return values are correct.
          Furthermore, total time cost over all queries is at most
                                    e (ϵ−2 ζ 2 + ϵ−2 ζ 2 )q 2 (k + m) .

                                    O           apx,x x         apx,s s

        • U PDATE(δx ∈ Rntot , δh ∈ Rntot , δbh ∈ Rntot ×d , δeh ∈ Rntot ×m , δH 1/2 xb, δH −1/2 sb ∈ Rntot ):
                                                                                               w,x     w,x
                                   1/2                      −1/2
          Update sketches of Hw,x(ℓ) x(ℓ+1) and Hw,x(ℓ) s(ℓ+1) by calling BATCH S KETCH.U PDATE.
          This effectively moves x(ℓ) to x(ℓ+1) while keeping (x(ℓ+1) , s(ℓ+1) ) unchanged. Then ad-
          vance timestamp ℓ.
          Each update costs
                        e h ∥0 + nnz(δb ) + nnz(δe ) + ∥H 1/2 x        −1/2
                       O(∥δ                      h            b∥0 + ∥H
                                                                  h         sb∥0 )
                                                                            w,x               w,x
          time.

Proof. The proof is essentially the same as proof of (Gu & Song, 2022, Theorem 4.18). For the
running time claims, we plug in Theorem E.7 when necessary.

E.3.3    BATCH S KETCH
                                                                                                             1/2
In this section we present the data structure BATCH S KETCH. It maintains a sketch of Hx x and
  −1/2
Hx      s. It is a variation of BATCH S KETCH in Gu & Song (2022).
Theorem E.7. Data structure BATCH S KETCH (Algorithm 17, 18) supports the following operations:
                                                                                                     1/2     −1/2
        • I NITIALIZE(x ∈ Rntot , h ∈ Rntot , bh ∈ Rntot ×k , e
                                                              h ∈ Rntot ×m , Hw,x x
                                                                                  b, Hw,x sb ∈
             ntot                     k e e         m
          R , βx , βs ∈ R, βx , βs ∈ R , βx , βs ∈ R , δapx ∈ R): Initialize the data structure
                             b  b
          in O(n(k
              e     + m)) time.

        • M OVE(βx , βs ∈ R, βbx , βbs ∈ Rk , βex , βes ∈ Rm ): Update values of βx , βs , βbx , βbs , βex , βes in
          O(k + m) time. This effectively moves (x(ℓ) , s(ℓ) ) to (x(ℓ+1) , s(ℓ+1) ) while keeping x(ℓ)
          unchanged.
        • U PDATE(δx ∈ Rntot , δh ∈ Rntot , δbh ∈ Rntot ×k , δeh ∈ Rntot ×m , δH 1/2 xb, δH −1/2 sb ∈ Rntot ):
                                                                                               w,x     w,x
                                   1/2                      −1/2
          Update sketches of Hw,x(ℓ) x(ℓ+1) and Hw,x(ℓ) s(ℓ+1) . This effectively moves x(ℓ) to x(ℓ+1)
          while keeping (x(ℓ+1) , s(ℓ+1) ) unchanged. Then advance timestamp ℓ.
          Each update costs
                        e h ∥0 + nnz(δb ) + nnz(δe ) + ∥H 1/2 x        −1/2
                       O(∥δ                     h             b∥0 + ∥H
                                                                 h          sb∥0 ).
                                                                           w,x                w,x


                                                           45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 17 This is used by Algorithm 16.
 1: data structure BATCH S KETCH                                                              ▷ Theorem E.7
 2: members
 3:    Φ ∈ Rr×ntot                                   ▷ All sketches need to share the same sketching matrix
 4:    S, χ partition tree
 5:    ℓ∈N                                                                              ▷ Current timestamp
                                       1/2                −1/2
 6:    V ECTOR S KETCH sketchHw,x x         b, sketchHw,x sb, sketchh, sketchb   h, sketcheh ▷ Algorithm 9
                                    d e e            m
 7:    βx , βs ∈ R, βx , βs ∈ R , βx , βs ∈ R
                      b    b
 8:    (history[t])t≥0                                  ▷ Snapshot of data at timestamp t. See Remark D.9.
 9: end members
                                                                                            1/2     −1/2
10: procedure I NITIALIZE(x ∈ Rntot , h ∈ Rntot , b         h ∈ Rntot ×k , e
                                                                           h ∈ Rntot ×m , Hw,x xb, Hw,x sb ∈
    Rntot , βx , βs ∈ R, βbx , βbs ∈ Rd , βex , βes ∈ Rm , δapx ∈ R)
11:    Construct any valid partition tree (S, χ)
12:    r ← Θ(log3 (ntot ) log(1/δapx ))
13:    Initialize Φ ∈ Rr×ntot with iid N (0, 1r )
14:    βx ← βx , βs ← βs , βbx ← βbx , βbs ← βbs , βex ← βex , βes ← βes
                  1/2                              1/2
15:     sketchHw,x x
                   b.I NITIALIZE(S, χ, Φ, Hw,x x
                                               b)                                                    ▷ Algorithm 9
               −1/2                         −1/2
16:     sketchHw,x sb.I NITIALIZE(S, χ, Φ, Hw,x sb)                                    ▷ Algorithm 9
17:    sketchh.I NITIALIZE(S, χ, Φ, h)                                                 ▷ Algorithm 9
18:    sketchbh.I NITIALIZE(S, χ, Φ, b
                                     h) ▷ Algorithm 9. Here we construct one sketch for b        h∗,i for
    every i ∈ [k].
19:    sketcheh.I NITIALIZE(S, χ, Φ, e
                                     h) ▷ Algorithm 9. Here we construct one sketch for e        h∗,i for
    every i ∈ [m].
20:    ℓ←0
21:    Make snapshot history[ℓ]                                                        ▷ Remark D.9
22: end procedure
23: procedure M OVE(βx , βs ∈ R, β bx , βbs ∈ Rk , βex , βes ∈ Rm )
24:    βx ← βx , βs ← βs , βbx ← βbx , βbs ← βbs , βex ← βex , βes ← βes      ▷ Do not update ℓ yet
25: end procedure
26: procedure U PDATE(δx ∈ Rntot , δh ∈ Rntot , δbh ∈ Rntot ×k , δeh ∈ Rntot ×m , δH 1/2 xb , δH −1/2 sb ∈
                                                                                                    w,x       w,x
    Rntot )
              1/2
27:    sketchHw,x x
                  b.U PDATE(δH 1/2 xb)                                                               ▷ Algorithm 9
                                     w,x
               −1/2
28:     sketchHw,x sb.U PDATE(δH −1/2 sb)                                                            ▷ Algorithm 9
                                w,x
29:    sketchh.U PDATE(δh )                                                                          ▷ Algorithm 9
30:    sketchb
             h.U PDATE(δbh )                                                                         ▷ Algorithm 9
31:    sketche
             h.U PDATE(δeh )                                                                         ▷ Algorithm 9
32:    ℓ←ℓ+1
33:    Make snapshot history[ℓ]                                                                         ▷ Remark D.9
34: end procedure
35: end data structure



       • Q UERYx(ℓ′ ∈ N, ϵ ∈ R): Given timestamp ℓ′ , return a set S ⊆ [n] where

                                                   1/2        (ℓ′ )       1/2    (ℓ+1)
                            S ⊇ {i ∈ [n] : ∥Hw,x(ℓ′ ) xi              − Hw,x(ℓ) xi       ∥2 ≥ ϵ},

         and
                                                  1/2                   1/2
                                      X                                                       X
         |S| = O(ϵ−2 (ℓ − ℓ′ + 1)              ∥Hw,x(t) x(t) − Hw,x(t) x(t+1) ∥22 +                     ∥x(t) − x(t+1) ∥2,0 )
                                     ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ                                                ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ−1


         where ℓ is the current timestamp.


                                                         46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 18 BATCH S KETCH Algorithm 17 continued. This is used by Algorithm 16.
 1: data structure BATCH S KETCH                                              ▷ Theorem E.7
 2: private:
                                                                                   1/2
 3: procedure Q UERYxS KETCH(v ∈ S)                  ▷ Return the value of Φχ(v) (Hw,x x)χ(v)
                      1/2
 4:    return sketchH x   b.Q UERY(v) + sketchh.Q UERY(v) · βx + sketchb
                         w,x                                             h.Q UERY(v) · βbx +
          h.Q UERY(v) · βex
    sketche                                                                                          ▷ Algorithm 9
 5: end procedure
                                                                                                        −1/2
 6: procedure Q UERYsS KETCH(v ∈ S)                  ▷ Return the value of Φχ(v) (Hw,x s)χ(v)
                       −1/2
 7:     return sketchHw,x sb.Q UERY(v) + sketchh.Q UERY(v) · βs + sketchb  h.Q UERY(v) · βbs +
    sketcheh.Q UERY(v) · βes                                                    ▷ Algorithm 9
 8: end procedure
 9: public:
10: procedure Q UERYx(ℓ′ ∈ N, ϵ ∈ R)
11:     Same as Algorithm 7, Q UERYx, using Q UERYxS KETCH defined here instead of the one in
    Algorithm 7.
12: end procedure
13: procedure Q UERYs(ℓ′ ∈ N, ϵ ∈ R)
14:     Same as Algorithm 7, Q UERYs, using Q UERYsS KETCH defined here instead of the one in
    Algorithm 7.
15: end procedure
16: end structure


        For every query, with probability at least 1 − δ, the return values are correct, and costs at
        most
                                                  1/2          1/2
                                        X                                        X
        O((k
         e    + m) · (ϵ−2 (ℓ − ℓ′ + 1)        ∥H (t) x(t) − H (t) x(t+1) ∥2 +
                                                        x                x         2    ∥x(t) − x(t+1) ∥2,0 ))
                                         ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ                                          ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ−1

         running time.
       • Q UERYs(ℓ′ ∈ N, ϵ ∈ R): Given timestamp ℓ′ , return a set S ⊆ [n] where
                                                   −1/2     (ℓ′ )       −1/2   (ℓ+1)
                           S ⊇ {i ∈ [n] : ∥Hw,x(ℓ′ ) si             − Hw,x(ℓ) si       ∥2 ≥ ϵ}

         and
                                                 −1/2                 −1/2
                                     X                                                     X
         |S| = O(ϵ−2 (ℓ − ℓ′ + 1)             ∥Hw,x(t) s(t) − Hw,x(t) s(t+1) ∥22 +                   ∥x(t) − x(t+1) ∥2,0 )
                                    ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ                                              ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ−1

         where ℓ is the current timestamp.
        For every query, with probability at least 1 − δ, the return values are correct, and costs at
        most
                                                  1/2          1/2
                                        X                                        X
        O((k
         e    + m) · (ϵ−2 (ℓ − ℓ′ + 1)        ∥H (t) s(t) − H (t) x(t+1) ∥22 +
                                                        x               x
                                                                                       ∥x(t) − x(t+1) ∥2,0 ))
                                         ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ                                          ℓ′ ≤t≤ℓ−1

         running time.

Proof. The proof is essentially the same as proof of (Gu & Song, 2022, Theorem 4.21).

E.4   A NALYSIS OF C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE

Lemma E.8 (Correctness of C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE). Algorithm 13 implicitly maintains
the primal-dual solution pair (x, s) via representation Eq. (12)(13). It also explicitly maintains
(x, s) ∈ Rntot × Rntot such that ∥xi − xi ∥xi ≤ ϵ and ∥si − si ∥x∗ i ≤ tϵwi for all i ∈ [n] with
probability at least 0.9.

Proof. Same as proof of Lemma D.13.


                                                     47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma E.9. We bound the running time of C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE as following.
                                                              ω−1
        • C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE .I NITIALIZE takes O(n(k
                                                        e         + mω−1 )) time.
        • If C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE .M ULTIPLYA ND M OVE is called N times, then it has
          total running time

                             O((N
                             e    n−1/2 + log(tmax /tmin )) · n(k + m)(ω+1)/2 ).

        • C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE .O UTPUT takes O(n(k
                                                    e     + m)) time.

Proof. I NITIALIZE part: By Theorem E.3 and E.6.
O UTPUT part: By Theorem E.3.
M ULTIPLYA ND M OVE part: Between two restarts, the total size of |Lx | returned by approx.Q UERY
              e 2 ζx2 /ϵ2apx,x ) by Theorem E.6. By plugging in ζx = 2α, ϵapx,x = ϵ, we have
is bounded by O(q
P        (ℓ)   e 2 ). Similarly, for s we have P        (ℓ)     e 2 ).
       |Lx | = O(q
    ℓ∈[q]                                            |Ls | = O(q
                                                      ℓ∈[q]

                                                                                          e 2 (k 2 +
Update time: By Theorem E.3 and E.6, in a sequence of q updates, total cost for update is O(q
 2                                                       2    2
m )). So the amortized update cost per iteration is O(q(k + m )). The total update cost is
                                                    e

                                                                e q(k 2 + m2 )).
                    number of iterations · time per iteration = O(N

Init/restart time: We restart the data structure whenever K > q or |t − t| > tϵt , so there are
O(N/q + log(tmax /tmin )ϵ−1
                          t ) restarts in total. By Theorem E.3 and E.6, time cost per restart is
       ω−1
O(n(k
 e         + mω−1 )). So the total initialization time is

      number of restarts · time per restart = O((N/q
                                              e      + log(tmax /tmin )ϵ−1
                                                                        t ) · n(k
                                                                                  ω−1
                                                                                      + mω−1 )).

Combine everything: Overall running time is
                e q(k 2 + m2 ) + (N/q + log(tmax /tmin )ϵ−1
                O(N                                      t ) · n(k
                                                                   ω−1
                                                                       + mω−1 )).

Taking ϵt = 21 ϵ, the optimal choice for q is

                            q = n1/2 (k 2 + m2 )−1/2 (k ω−1 + mω−1 )1/2 ,
achieving overall running time

                 O((N
                 e    n−1/2 + log(tmax /tmin )) · n(k 2 + m2 )1/2 (k ω−1 + mω−1 )1/2 )
               = O((N
                 e    n−1/2 + log(tmax /tmin )) · n(k + m)(ω+1)/2 ).

Proof of Theorem E.2. Combining Lemma E.8 and E.9.

E.5     P ROOF OF M AIN S TATEMENT



Proof of Theorem E.1. Use C ENTRAL PATH M AINTENANCE (Algorithm 13) as the maintenance data
structure in Algorithm 20. Combining Theorem E.2 and Theorem F.1 finishes the proof.

F      ROBUST IPM A NALYSIS
In this section we present a robust IPM algorithm for quadratic programming. The algorithm is a
modification of previous robust IPM algorithms for linear programming Lee et al. (2019); Lee &
Vempala (2021).


                                                 48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                           P
Convention: Variables are in n blocks of dimension ni (i ∈ [n]). Total dimension is ntot = i∈[n] ni .
We write x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ Rntot where xi ∈ Rni . We consider programs of the following form:
                                              1
                                        minn x⊤ Qx + c⊤ x                                        (16)
                                       x∈R    2
                                         s.t. Ax = b
                                              xi ∈ Ki     ∀i ∈ [n]
where Q ∈ S ntot , c ∈ Rntot , A ∈ Rm×ntot , b ∈ Rm , Ki ⊂ Rni is a convex set. Let K = i∈[n] Ki .
                                                                                           Q

Theorem F.1. Consider the convex program (16). Let ϕi : Ki → R be a νi -self-concordant barrier
for all i ∈ [n]. Suppose the program satisfies the following properties:

       • Inner radius r: There exists z ∈ Rntot such that Az = b and B(z, r) ∈ K.
       • Outer radius R: K ⊆ B(0, R) where 0 ∈ Rntot .
       • Lipschitz constant L: ∥Q∥2→2 ≤ L, ∥c∥2 ≤ L.

Let (wi )i∈[n] ∈ Rn≥1 and κ = i∈[n] wi νi . For any 0 < ϵ ≤ 12 , Algorithm 19 outputs an approximate
                             P
                 √
solution x in O( κ log n log nκR
                               ϵr ) steps, satisfying

                  1 ⊤                             1 ⊤
                    x Qx + c⊤ x ≤ min               x Qx + c⊤ x + ϵLR(R + 1),
                  2                  Ax=b,x∈K 2

                       ∥Ax − b∥1 ≤ 3ϵ(R∥A∥1 + ∥b∥1 ),
                                x ∈ K.

Algorithm 19 Our main algorithm
 1: procedure ROBUST QPIPM(Q ∈ S ntot , c ∈ Rntot , A ∈ Rm×ntot , b ∈ Rm , (ϕi : Ki →
    R)i∈[n] , w ∈ Rn )
 2:    /* Initial point reduction */
       ρ ← LR(R + 1), x(0) ← arg minx i∈[n] wi ϕi (xi ), s(0) ← ϵρ(c + Qx(0) )
                                               P
 3:

                x(0)          s(0)         ϵρQ 0
 4:    x←             ,s←           ,Q←              , A ← A | b − Ax(0)
                  1            1              0    0

                w
 5:    w←           , ϕi = ϕi ∀i ∈ [n], ϕn+1 (x) := − log x − log(2 − x)
                 1
                                                                              2
                                                                            ϵ
 6:    (x, s) ← C ENTERING(Q, A, (ϕi )i∈[n+1] , w, x, s, tstart = 1, tend = 4κ )
 7:    return (x1:n , s1:n )
 8: end procedure


F.1   P RELIMINARIES

Previous works on linear programming (e.g. Lee et al. (2019), Lee & Vempala (2021)) use the
following path:
                                        s/t + ∇ϕw (x) = µ,
                                                  Ax = b,
                                             A⊤ y + s = c
                  Pn
where ϕw (x) :=     i=1 wi ϕi (xi ).

For quadratic programming, we modify the above central path as following:
                                         s/t + ∇ϕw (x) = µ,
                                                   Ax = b,
                                       −Qx + A⊤ y + s = c.

We make the following definitions.


                                                 49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 20 Subroutine used by Algorithm 19
 1: procedure C ENTERING(Q ∈ S ntot , A ∈ Rm×ntot , (ϕi : Ki → R)i∈[n] , w ∈ Rn , x ∈
    Rntot , s ∈ Rntot , tstart ∈ R>0 , tend ∈ R>0 )
 2:    /* Parameters */ P
                                                 1
 3:    λ = 64 log(256n i∈[n] wi ), ϵ = 1440        λ, α = 2ϵ
 4:    ϵt = 4ϵ (mini∈[n] wiw+ν i
                                 i
                                   ), h = 64α√κ
 5:    /* Definitions
                    P */
 6:    ϕw (x) := i∈[n] wi ϕi (xi )
 7:    µi (x, s, t) := s/t + wi ∇ϕi (xi ), ∀i ∈ [n]                         ▷ Eq. (17)
 8:    γi (x, s, t) ← ∥µti (x, s)∥∗xi , ∀i ∈ [n]                            ▷ Eq. (18)
                                      sinh( wλ γi (x,s,t))
 9:     ci (x, s, t) :=             qP        i
                                                −1
                                                                          , ∀i ∈ [n]         ▷ Eq. (22)
                          γi (x,s,t)   j∈[n] wj    cosh2 ( wλ γj (x,s,t))
                                                           j

10:     Hw,x := ∇2 ϕw (x)                                                                    ▷ Eq. (24)
11:     Bw,x,t := Q + tHw,x                                                                  ▷ Eq. (25)
                    −1/2 ⊤         −1      ⊤ −1       −1/2
12:     Pw,x,t := Bw,x,t A (ABw,x,t A ) ABw,x,t                                              ▷ Eq. (26)
13:     /* Main loop */
14:     t ← t ← tstart , x ← x, s ← s
15:     while t > tend do
16:         Maintain x, s, t such that ∥xi − xi ∥xi ≤ ϵ, ∥si − si ∥x∗ i ≤ tϵwi and |t − t| ≤ ϵt t
17:         δµ,i ← −α · ci (x, s, t) · µi (x, s, t), ∀i ∈ [n]                                ▷ Eq. (21)
18:         Pick δx and δs such that Aδx = 0, δs − Qδx ∈ Range(A⊤ ) and
                                                       −1/2                     −1/2
                                           ∥δx − tBw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ ∥w,x ≤ ϵα,
                          −1                          −1/2                      −1/2
                     ∥t        δs − (δµ − tHw,x Bw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ )∥∗w,x ≤ ϵα.

19:        t ← max{(1 − h)t, tend }, x ← x + δx , s ← s + δs
20:    end while
21:    return (x, s)
22: end procedure



Definition F.2. For each i ∈ [n], we define the i-th coordinate error
                                                           si
                                         µi (x, s, t) :=      + wi ∇ϕi (xi )                      (17)
                                                           t

We define µi ’s norm as
                                          γi (x, s, t) := ∥µi (x, s, t)∥∗xi .                     (18)

We define the soft-max function by
                                                         m
                                                         X               ri
                                            Ψλ (r) :=           cosh(λ      )                     (19)
                                                         i=1
                                                                         wi

for some λ > 0 and the potential function is the soft-max of the norm of the error of each coordinate
                                           Φ(x, s, t) = Ψλ (γ(x, s, t))                           (20)

We choose the step direction δµ as
                                       δµ,i := −α · ci (x, s, t) · µi (x, s, t)                   (21)
where
                                                      sinh( wλi γi (x, s, t))
                     ci (x, s, t) :=                 qP                                           (22)
                                                                −1        2 λ
                                        γi (x, s, t)    j∈[n] wj cosh ( wj γj (x, s, t))



                                                           50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We define induced norms as following. Note that we include the weight vector w in the subscript to
avoid confusion.
Definition F.3. For each block Ki , we define
                                      ∥v∥xi := ∥v∥∇2 ϕi (xi ) ,
                                      ∥v∥∗xi := ∥v∥(∇2 ϕi (xi ))−1
for v ∈ Rni .
                              Qn
For the whole domain K =        i=1 Ki , we define

                                                 Xn
                       ∥v∥w,x := ∥v∥∇2 ϕw (x) = (   wi ∥vi ∥2xi )1/2 ,
                                                      i=1
                                                              n
                                                              X
                       ∥v∥∗w,x := ∥v∥(∇2 ϕw (x))−1 = (              wi−1 (∥vi ∥∗xi )2 )1/2
                                                              i=1

for v ∈ Rntot .

The Hessian matrices of the barrier functions appear a lot in the computation.
Definition F.4. We define matrices Hx,i ∈ Rni ×ni and Hw,x ∈ Rntot ×ntot as
                                          Hx,i := ∇2 ϕi (xi ),                                  (23)
                                                          2
                                         Hw,x := ∇ ϕw (x).                                      (24)

From the definition, we see that
                                         Hw,x,(i,i) = wi Hx,i .

The following equations are immediate from definition.
Claim F.5. Let Hw,x ∈ Rntot ×ntot be defined as Definition F.4. For v ∈ Rntot , we have
                                                   1/2
                                        ∥v∥w,x = ∥Hw,x v∥2 ,
                                        ∥v∥∗w,x = ∥Hw,x
                                                    −1/2
                                                         v∥2 .


Claim F.6. For each i ∈ [n], let Hx,i be defined as Definition F.4. For v ∈ Rni , i ∈ [n], we have
                                                          1/2
                                        ∥v∥xi = ∥Hx,i v∥2 ,
                                                          −1/2
                                        ∥v∥∗xi = ∥Hx,i v∥2 .


We define matrices B and P used in the algorithm.
Definition F.7. Let A, Q denote two fixed matrices. Let Hw,x ∈ Rntot ×ntot be defined as Defini-
tion F.4. We define matrix Bw,x,t ∈ Rntot ×ntot as
                                       Bw,x,t := Q + t · Hw,x                                   (25)
We define projection matrix Pw,x,t ∈ Rntot ×ntot as
                                        −1/2       −1                          −1/2
                             Pw,x,t ← Bw,x,t A⊤ (ABw,x,t A⊤ )−1 ABw,x,t .                       (26)

F.2   D ERIVING THE C ENTRAL PATH S TEP

In this section we explain how to derive the central path step.
We follow the central path
                                           s/t + ∇ϕw (x) = µ


                                                     51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Ax = b
                                                          ⊤
                                              −Qx + A y + s = c


We perform gradient descent on µ with step δµ . Then Newton step gives
                                              1
                                                δs + ∇2 ϕw (x)δx = δµ                                (27)
                                              t
                                                            Aδx = 0                                  (28)
                                                         ⊤
                                            −Qδx + A δy + δs = 0                                     (29)
where δx (resp. δy , δs ) is the step taken by x (resp. y, s).
For simplicity, we define H ∈ Rntot ×ntot to represent ∇2 ϕw (x).8
From Eq. (27) we get
                                                 δs = tδµ − tHδx .                                   (30)
Plug the above equation into Eq. (29) we get

                                       −Qδx + A⊤ δy + tδµ − tHδx = 0.                                (31)

Let B = Q + tH, multiply by AB −1 we get

                                    −Aδx + AB −1 A⊤ δy + tAB −1 δµ = 0.
Using Eq. (28) we get

                                         AB −1 A⊤ δy + tAB −1 δµ = 0.

Solve for δy (assuming that AB −1 A is invertible), we get

                                        δy = −t(AB −1 A⊤ )−1 AB −1 δµ .
Plug into Eq. (31) we get

                               −Bδx − tA⊤ (AB −1 A⊤ )−1 AB −1 δµ + tδµ = 0.
Solve for δx we get

                              δx = tB −1 δµ − tB −1 A⊤ (AB −1 A⊤ )−1 AB −1 δµ
                                  = tB −1/2 (I − P )B −1/2 δµ

where P = B −1/2 A⊤ (AB −1 A⊤ )−1 AB −1/2 is the projection matrix. Solve for δs in Eq. (30) we
get

                                   δs = tδµ − t2 HB −1/2 (I − P )B −1/2 δµ .

In summary, we have

                                   δx = tB −1/2 (I − P )B −1/2 δµ ,
                                   δy = −t(AB −1 A⊤ )−1 AB −1 δµ ,
                                    δs = tδµ − t2 HB −1/2 (I − P )B −1/2 δµ ,
                                    P = B −1/2 A⊤ (AB −1 A⊤ )−1 AB −1/2 .

These equations will guide the design of our actual algorithm.
   8
       In this section, and in this section only, we omit the subscript in H, B, P for simplicity.


                                                          52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.3   B OUNDING M OVEMENT OF P OTENTIAL F UNCTION

The goal of this section is to bound the movement of potential function during the robust IPM
algorithm.
In robust IPM, we do not need to follow the ideal central path exactly over the entire algorithm.
Instead, we only use an approximate version. For convenience of analysis we state two assumptions
(see Algorithm 20, Line 18).
Assumption F.8. We make the following assumptions on δx ∈ Rntot and δs ∈ Rntot .
                                                           −1/2                    −1/2
                                         ∥δx − tBw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ ∥w,x ≤ ϵα,
                      −1                                  −1/2                 −1/2
                   ∥t      δs − (δµ − tHw,x Bw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ )∥∗w,x ≤ ϵα.

The following lemma bounds the movement of potential function Ψ assuming bound on δγ .
Lemma F.9 ((Ye, 2020, Lemma A.5)). For any r ∈ Rntot , and w ∈ Rn≥1
                                                                  tot
                                                                      . Let α and λ denote the
                                        1
parameters that are satisfying 0 ≤ α ≤ 8λ .
Let ϵr ∈ Rntot denote a vector satisfying
                                                   n
                                                   X
                                               (         wi−1 ϵ2r,i )1/2 ≤ α/8.
                                                   i=1
                              ntot
Suppose that vector r ∈ R             is satisfying the following property
                                                          wi
                                             |ri − ri | ≤    , ∀i ∈ [n]
                                                          8λ

We define vector δr ∈ Rntot as follows:
                                                         −α · sinh( wλi ri )
                                 δr,i := qP                                         + ϵr,i .
                                                     n    −1    2 λ
                                                     j=1 wj cosh ( wj r j )

Then, we have that
                                                    n                          n
                                               αλ X −1           ri          X
             Ψλ (r + δr ) ≤ Ψλ (r) −              (   wi cosh2 (λ ))1/2 + αλ(     wi−1 )1/2
                                                2 i=1            wi           i=1


The following lemma bounds the norm of δµ .
Lemma F.10 (Bounding norm of δµ ).
                                                   ∥δµ (x, s, t)∥∗w,x ≤ α.

Proof.
                                 n
                                 X
      (∥δµ (x, s, t)∥∗w,x )2 =         wi−1 (∥δµ,i (x, s, t)∥∗xi )2
                                 i=1
                                      X
                             = α2             wi−1 c2i (x, s, t) · ∥µi (x, s, t)∥x2 i
                                      i∈[n]
                                                                        −1/2
                                      X
                             =α   2
                                              wi−1 c2i (x, s, t) · ∥Hx,i µi (x, s, t)∥22
                                      i∈[n]
                                      X
                             =α   2
                                              wi−1 c2i (x, s, t) · γi2 (x, s, t)
                                      i∈[n]

                                      X                 wi−1 sinh2 ( wλi γi (x, s, t))
                             = α2            2 (x, s, t) ·
                                                           P        −1         2 λ                · γi2 (x, s, t)
                                           γ
                                      i∈[n] i
                                                                 w
                                                            j∈[n] j      cosh   (    γ
                                                                                  wj j (x, s, t))


                                                                  53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                         P        −1    2 λ
                                     2     j∈[n] wj sinh ( wj γj (x, s, t))
                                =α       P        −1    2 λ
                                          j∈[n] wj cosh ( wj γj (x, s, t))

                                ≤ α2 .
where the first step follows from Definition F.3, the second step follows from δµ,i (x, s, t) = −α ·
ci (x, s, t)·µi (x, s, t), the third step follows from norm of xi (see Definition F.3), the forth step follows
                             −1/2
from γi (x, s, t) = ∥Hx,i µi (x, s, t)∥2 (see Eq. (18)), the fifth step follows from ci (x, s, t)2 =
               sinh2 ( wλ γi (x,s,t))
γi2 (x,s,t)
              P          i
                        −1
                           cosh2 ( wλ γj (x,s,t))
                                                  (see Eq. (22)), the sixth step follows from canceling the term
                j∈[n] wj         j

γi2 (x, s, t), and the last step follows from cosh2 (x) ≥ sinh2 (x) for all x.

The following lemma bounds the norm of δx and δs .
Lemma F.11. For each i ∈ [n], we define αi := ∥δx,i ∥xi . Then, we have
                                           X                  9
                              ∥δx ∥w,x = (     wi αi2 )1/2 ≤ α.                                            (32)
                                                              8
                                                              i∈[n]

In particular, we have αi ≤ 98 α. Similarly, for δs , we have
                                                                                           17
                                                  sX
                                 ∥δs ∥∗w,x =                      wi−1 (∥δs,i ∥x∗ i )2 ≤      α · t.       (33)
                                                                                            8
                                                          i∈[n]


Proof. For δx , we have
                                                  1/2       −1/2                      −1/2
                            ∥δx ∥w,x ≤ ∥tHw,x Bw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ ∥2 + ϵα
                                                1/2                         −1/2
                                         ≤ ∥t         (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ ∥2 + ϵα
                                                1/2       −1/2
                                         ≤ ∥t         Bw,x,t δµ ∥2 + ϵα
                                                 −1/2
                                         ≤ ∥Hw,x δµ ∥2 + ϵα
                                         ≤ α + ϵα
                                           9
                                         ≤ α.
                                           8
First step follows from Assumption F.8. Second step is because tHw,x ⪯ Bw,x,t . Third step is
because Pw,x,t is a projection matrix. Fourth step is because tHw,x ⪯ Bw,x,t . Fifth step is by
Lemma F.10. Sixth step is because ϵ ≤ 81 .
For δs , we have
                                                      2              −1/2                    −1/2
                   ∥δs ∥∗w,x ≤ ∥tδµ ∥∗w,x + ∥t Hw,x Bw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ ∥∗w,x + ϵαt
                         ≤ αt + αt + ϵαt
                            17
                         ≤     α · t.
                             8
First step is by triangle inequality and the assumption that
                                                  2                −1/2                     −1/2
                                δs ≈ tδµ − t Hw,x Bw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ .

Second step is by same analysis as the analysis for δx . Third step is by t ≤ 33            1
                                                                              32 t and ϵ ≤ 32 .

The following lemma shows that µnew is close to µ + δµ under an approximate step.
Lemma F.12 (Variation of (Ye, 2020, Lemma A.9)). For each i ∈ [n], we define
                                                            βi := ∥ϵµ,i ∥∗xi


                                                                     54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For each i ∈ [n], let
                                 µi (xnew , snew , t) = µi (x, s, t) + δµ,i + ϵµ,i .
Then, we have
                                              Xn
                                             (   wi−1 βi2 )1/2 ≤ 15ϵα.
                                                i=1


Proof. The proof is similar as (Ye, 2020, Lemma A.9), except for changing the definitions of ϵ1 and
ϵ2 :
                         1/2                1/2    −1/2                   −1/2
              ϵ1 := Hw,x δx − t · Hw,x Bw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ ,
                        −1      −1/2            −1/2                −1/2                −1/2
              ϵ2 := t         Hw,x δs − Hw,x (δµ − tHw,x Bw,x,t (I − Pw,x,t )Bw,x,t δµ ).

One key step in the proof of Ye (2020) is the following property:
                                           −1                          1/2
                                δµ,i = t        · δs,i + Hw,x δx,i − Hw,x (ϵ1 + ϵ2 ).
Under our new definition of ϵ1 and ϵ2 , the above property still holds. Remaining parts of the proof
are similar and we omit the details here.

The following lemma shows that error µ(x, s, t) on the robust central path is close to error µ(x, s, t)
on the ideal central path. Furthermore, norms of errors γi (x, s, t) and γi (x, s, t) are also close to
each other.
Lemma F.13 ((Ye, 2020, Lemma A.10)). Assume that γi (x, s, t) ≤ wi for all i. For all i ∈ [n], we
have
                               ∥µi (x, s, t) − µi (x, s, t)∥∗xi ≤ 3ϵwi .
Furthermore, we have that
                                 |γi (x, s, t) − γi (x, s, t)| ≤ 5ϵwi .

Proof. Same as proof of (Ye, 2020, Lemma A.10).

The following lemma bounds the change of γ under one robust IPM step.
Lemma F.14 ((Ye, 2020, Lemma A.12)). Assume Φ(x, s, t) ≤ cosh(λ). For all i ∈ [n], we define
                 ϵr,i := γi (xnew , snew ) − γi (x, s, t) + α · ci (x, s, t) · γi (x, s, t).
Then, we have
                    Xn
                  (     wi−1 ϵ2r,i )1/2 ≤ 90 · ϵ · λα + 4 · max(wi−1 γi (x, s, t)) · α.
                                                                  i∈[n]
                        i=1


Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of (Ye, 2020, Lemma A.12). By replacing corresponding
references in Ye (2020) by our versions (Lemma F.11, F.12, F.13) we get proof of this lemma.

Finally, the following theorem bounds the movement of potential function Φ under one robust IPM
step.
Theorem F.15 (Variation of (Ye, 2020, Theorem A.15)). Assume Φ(x, s, t) ≤ cosh(λ/64). Then for
any 0 ≤ h ≤ 64√P α w ν , we have
                     i∈[n] i i

                                              αλ
                                                                          sX
              Φ(xnew , snew , tnew ) ≤ (1 − qP         ) · Φ(x, s, t) + αλ       wi−1 .
                                              i∈[n] wi                     i∈[n]

In particular, for any cosh(λ/128) ≤ Φ(x, s, t) ≤ cosh(λ/64), we have that
                                Φ(xnew , snew , tnew ) ≤ Φ(x, s, t).

Proof. Similar to the proof of (Ye, 2020, Theorem A.15), but replacing lemmas with the correspond-
ing QP versions.


                                                           55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.4    I NITIAL P OINT R EDUCTION

In this section, we propose an initial point reduction scheme for quadratic programming. Our scheme
is closer to Lee et al. (2019) rather than Ye (2020); Lee & Vempala (2021). The reason is that Lee
& Vempala (2021)’s initial point reduction requires an efficient algorithm for finding the optimal
solution to an unconstrained program, which may be difficult in quadratic programming.
Lemma F.16 ((Nesterov, 1998, Theorem 4.1.7 and Lemma 4.2.4)). Let ϕ be a ν-self-concordant
barrier. Then for any x, y ∈ dom(ϕ), we have
                                      ⟨∇ϕ(x), y − x⟩ ≤ ν,
                                                               ∥y − x∥2x
                            ⟨∇ϕ(y) − ∇ϕ(x), y − x⟩ ≥                      .
                                                             1 + ∥y − x∥x
Let x∗ = arg minx ϕ(x). For any x ∈ Rn such that ∥x − x∗ ∥x∗ ≤ 1, we have that x ∈ dom(ϕ).
Lemma F.17 (QP version
                   P of (Lee et al., 2019, Lemma     D.2)). Work under the setting of Theorem F.1.
                                                   1
Let x(0) = arg minx i∈[n] wi ϕi (xi ). Let ρ = LR(R+1) . For any 0 < ϵ ≤ 21 , the modified program

                                                 1 ⊤         ⊤
                                     min           x Qx + c x
                              Ax=b,x∈K×R≥0       2
with

                  ϵρQ 0                                (0)                           ϵρc
              Q=          ,          A = [A | b − Ax         ],        b = b,    c=
                   0  0                                                               1
satisfies the following:

                 x(0)             m         ϵρ(c + Qx(0) )
        • x=           , y = 0 ∈ R and s =                  are feasible primal dual vectors with
                   1                              1
                           ∗
                                             Pn
           ∥s + ∇ϕw (x)∥x ≤ ϵ where ϕw (x) = i=1 wi ϕi (xi ) − log(xn+1 ).

       • For any x ∈ K × R≥0 satisfying Ax = b and

                         1 ⊤                                          1 ⊤
                           x Qx + c⊤ x ≤     min                                ⊤
                                                                        x Qx + c x + ϵ2 ,      (34)
                         2               Ax=b,x∈K×R≥0                 2
         the vector x1:n ( x1:n is the first n coordinates of x ) is an approximate solution to the
         original convex program in the following sense:

                      1 ⊤                                    1 ⊤
                        x1:n Qx1:n + c⊤ x1:n ≤ min             x Qx + c⊤ x + ϵρ−1 ,
                      2                          Ax=b,x∈K 2

                               ∥Ax1:n − b∥1 ≤ 3ϵ · (R∥A∥1 + ∥b∥1 ),
                                          x1:n ∈ K.

Proof. First bullet point: Direct computation shows that (x, y, s) is feasible.
Let us compute ∥s + ∇ϕw (x)∥∗x . We have
                         ∥s + ∇ϕw (x)∥x∗ = ∥ϵρ(c + Qx(0) )∥∇2 ϕw (x(0) )−1

Lemma F.16 says that for all x ∈ Rn with ∥x − x(0) ∥w,x(0) ≤ 1, we have x ∈ K, because
x(0) = arg minx ϕw (x). Therefore for any v such that v ⊤ ∇2 ϕw (x(0) )v ≤ 1, we have x(0) ± v ∈ K
and hence ∥x(0) ± v∥2 ≤ R. This implies ∥v∥2 ≤ R for any v ⊤ ∇2 ϕw (x(0) )v ≤ 1. Hence
(∇2 ϕw (x(0) ))−1 ⪯ R2 · I. So we have
                         ∥s + ∇ϕw (x)∥x∗ = ∥ϵρ(c + Qx(0) )∥∇2 ϕw (x(0) )−1
                                          ≤ ϵρR∥c + Qx(0) ∥2
                                          ≤ ϵρR(∥c∥2 + ∥Q∥2→2 ∥x(0) ∥2 )


                                                 56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          ≤ ϵρR(L + LR)
                                          ≤ ϵ.

Second bullet point: We define

                                             1 ⊤
                            OPT :=     min    x Qx + c⊤ x ,                                    (35)
                                   Ax=b,x∈K 2

                                                  1 ⊤
                            OPT :=     min          x Qx + c⊤ x .                              (36)
                                   Ax=b,x∈K×R≥0   2

                                                        x
For any feasible x in the original problem (35), x =       is feasible in the modified problem (36).
                                                        0
Therefore we have
                                         1
                             OPT ≤ ϵρ( x⊤ Qx + c⊤ x) = ϵρ · OPT .
                                         2

                                                 x
Given a feasible x satisfying (34), we write x = 1:n for some τ ≥ 0. Then we have
                                                   τ
                     1
                  ϵρ( x⊤   Qx1:n + c⊤ x1:n ) + τ ≤ OPT + ϵ2 ≤ ϵρ · OPT +ϵ2 .
                     2 1:n
Therefore
                              1 ⊤
                               x Qx1:n + c⊤ x1:n ≤ OPT +ϵρ−1 .
                              2 1:n
We have
                               1
                       τ ≤ −ϵρ( x⊤   Qx1:n + c⊤ x1:n ) + ϵρ · OPT +ϵ2 ≤ 3ϵ
                               2 1:n
          1 ⊤       ⊤
because   2 x Qx + c x     ≤ LR(R + 1) for all x ∈ K.
Note that x satisfies Ax1:n + (b − Ax(0) )τ = b. So

                                 ∥Ax1:n − b∥1 ≤ ∥b − Ax(0) ∥1 · τ.
This finishes the proof.

The following lemma is a generalization of (Lee et al., 2019, Lemma D.3) to quadratic program, and
with weight vector w.
Lemma F.18 (QP version of (Lee et al., 2019, Lemma D.3)). Work under the setting of Theorem F.1.
Suppose we have sti + wi ∇ϕi (xi ) = µi for all i ∈ [n], −Qx + A⊤ y + s = c and Ax = b. If
∥µi ∥∗xi ≤ wi for all i ∈ [n], then we have
                        1 ⊤               1
                          x Qx + c⊤ x ≤ x∗⊤ Qx∗ + c⊤ x∗ + 4tκ
                        2                 2
where x∗ = arg minAx=b,x∈K 21 x⊤ Qx + c⊤ x .



Proof. Let xα = (1−α)x+αx∗ for some α to be chosen. By Lemma F.16, we have ⟨∇ϕw (xα ), x∗ −
xα ⟩ ≤ κ. (Note that ϕw is a κ-self-concordant barrier for K.) Therefore we have
      κα
         ≥ ⟨∇ϕw (xα ), xα − x⟩
     1−α
                                                    s
            = ⟨∇ϕw (xα ) − ∇ϕw (x), xα − x⟩ + ⟨µ − , xα − x⟩
                                                    t
              X       ∥xα,i − xi ∥2xi                 1
            ≥    wi                    + ⟨µ, xα − x⟩ − ⟨c − A⊤ y + Qx, xα − x⟩
                    1 + ∥xα,i − xi ∥xi                t
               i∈[n]


                                                57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 X              α2 ∥x∗i − xi ∥2xi     X                         α
             ≥           wi             ∗         − α   ∥µi ∥∗xi ∥x∗i − xi ∥xi − ⟨c + Qx, x∗ − x⟩.
                              1 + α∥xi − xi ∥xi                                 t
                 i∈[n]                                 i∈[n]
                                        ∗
First step is because ⟨∇ϕw (xα ), x − xα ⟩ ≤ ν. Second step is because µ = st + ∇ϕw (x). Third step
is by Lemma F.16 and c = −Qx + A⊤ y + s. Fourth step is by Cauchy-Schwarz and Axα = Ax.
So we get
 1 ⊤
   (x Qx + c⊤ x)
 t
 1                     κ    X                          X      α∥x∗i − xi ∥2xi
≤ (x⊤ Qx∗ + c⊤ x∗ ) +     +   ∥µi ∥∗xi ∥x∗i − xi ∥xi −   wi
 t                    1−α                                   1 + α∥x∗i − xi ∥xi
                                            i∈[n]                         i∈[n]

 1 1       1                     κ    X                    X      α∥x∗i − xi ∥2xi
≤ ( x⊤ Qx + x∗⊤ Qx∗ + c⊤ x∗ ) +     +   wi ∥x∗i − xi ∥xi −   wi
 t 2       2                    1−α                             1 + α∥x∗i − xi ∥xi
                                                          i∈[n]                     i∈[n]

 1 1       1                     κ                         X            ∥x∗i − xi ∥xi
= ( x⊤ Qx + x∗⊤ Qx∗ + c⊤ x∗ ) +     +                             wi
 t 2       2                    1−α                                  1 + α∥x∗i − xi ∥xi
                                                          i∈[n]
 1 1       1                     κ    X wi
≤ ( x⊤ Qx + x∗⊤ Qx∗ + c⊤ x∗ ) +     +
 t 2       2                    1−α     α
                                                          i∈[n]
 1 1       1                       κ
≤ ( x⊤ Qx + x∗⊤ Qx∗ + c⊤ x∗ ) +          .
 t 2       2                    α(1 − α)
First step is by rearranging terms in the previous inequality. Second step is by AM-GM inequality
and ∥µi ∥∗xi ≤ wi . Third
                       P step is by P
                                    merging the last two terms. Fourth step is by bounding the last
term. Fifth step is by i∈[n] wi ≤ i∈[n] wi νi = κ.
Finally,
                          1 ⊤                1                       κt
                            x Qx + c⊤ x ≤ x∗⊤ Qx∗ + c⊤ x∗ +
                          2                  2                    α(1 − α)
                                             1 ∗⊤ ∗       ⊤ ∗
                                          ≤ x Qx + c x + 4κt.
                                             2
First step is by rearranging terms in the previous inequality. Second step is by taking α = 12 . This
finishes the proof.

F.5   P ROOF OF T HEOREM F.1

In this section we combine everything and prove Theorem F.1.

Proof of Theorem F.1. Lemma F.17 shows that the initial x and s satisfies
                                                    ∥µ∥∗w,x ≤ ϵ.
This implies wi−1 ∥µi ∥∗xi ≤ ϵ because wi ≥ 1.
Because ϵ ≤ λ1 , we have
                                     X
                   Φ(x, s, t) =             cosh(λwi−1 ∥µi ∥∗xi ) ≤ n cosh(1) ≤ cosh(λ/64)
                                    i∈[n]

for the initial x and s, by the choice of λ.
Using Theorem F.15, we see that
                                              Φ(x, s, t) ≤ cosh(λ/64)
during the entire algorithm.
So at the end of the algorithm, we have wi−1 ∥µi ∥∗xi ≤ 64
                                                        1
                                                           for all i ∈ [n]. In particular, ∥µi ∥∗xi ≤ wi
for all i ∈ [n].


                                                         58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore, applying Lemma F.18 we get
                          1 ⊤                  1
                            x Qx + c⊤ x ≤ x∗⊤ Qx∗ + c⊤ x∗ + 4tκ
                          2                    2
                                               1
                                            ≤ x∗⊤ Qx∗ + c⊤ x∗ + ϵ2
                                               2
where we used the stop condition for t at the end.
So Lemma F.17 shows how to get an approximate solution for the original quadratic program with
error ϵLR(R + 1).
The number of iterations is because we decrease t by a factor of 1 − h every iteration, and the choice
h = 64α√κ .

G     G AUSSIAN K ERNEL SVM: A LMOST-L INEAR T IME A LGORITHM AND
      H ARDNESS
In this section, we provide both algorithm and hardness for Gaussian kernel SVM problem. For the
algorithm, we utilize a result due to Aggarwal & Alman (2022) in conjunction with our low-rank
QP solver to obtain an O(n1+o(1) log(1/ϵ)) time algorithm. For the hardness, we build upon the
framework outlined in Backurs et al. (2017) and improve their results in terms of dependence on
dimension d.
We start by proving a simple lemma that shows that if K = U V ⊤ for low-rank U, V , then the
quadratic objective K ◦ (yy ⊤ ) also admits such a factorization via a simple scaling.
Lemma G.1. Let U, V ∈ Rn×k and y ∈ Rn . Then, there exists a pair of matrices U        e , Ve ∈ Rn×k
such that
                                      e Ve ⊤ = (U V ⊤ ) ◦ (yy ⊤ )
                                      U
moreover, U
          e , Ve can be computed in time O(nk).

Proof. The proof relies on the following identity for Hadamard product: for any matrix A and
conforming vectors x, y (all real), one has
                                       A ◦ (yx⊤ ) = Dy ADx
where Dy , Dx ∈ Rn×n are diagonal matrices that put y, x on their diagonals. Thus, we can simply
compute U
        e , Ve as follows:
                                         U
                                         e = Dy U,
                                             Ve = Dy V,
consequently,
                                     e Ve ⊤ = Dy U V ⊤ Dy
                                     U
                                            = (yy ⊤ ) ◦ (U V ⊤ )
                                         = (U V ⊤ ) ◦ (yy ⊤ ),
as desired. Moreover, the diagonal scaling of U, V can be indeed performed in O(nk) time, as
advertised.

Throughout this section, we will let B denote the squared radius of the dataset.

G.1   A LMOST-L INEAR T IME A LGORITHM FOR G AUSSIAN K ERNEL SVM

We state a result due to Aggarwal & Alman (2022), in which they present an optimal-degree polyno-
mial approximation to the function e−x and consequentially, this produces an efficient approximate
scheme to the Batch Gaussian Kernel Density Estimation problem.
We start by introducing a notion that captures the minimum degree polynomial that well-approximates
e−x :


                                                 59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition G.2. Let f : [0, B] → R, we let qB;ϵ (f ) ∈ N denote the minimum degree of a non-
constant polynomial p(x) such that
                                        sup |p(x) − f (x)| ≤ ϵ
                                      x∈[0,B]


Utilizing the Chebyshev polynomial machinery together with the orthgonal polynomial families, Ag-
garwal & Alman (2022) provides the following characterization on qB;ϵ (f ):
Theorem G.3 (Theorem 1.2 of Aggarwal & Alman (2022)). Let B ≥ 1 and ϵ ∈ (0, 1). Then
                                        p                    log(1/ϵ)
                    qB;ϵ (e−x ) = Θ(max{ B log(1/ϵ),                        })
                                                       log(B −1 log(1/ϵ))
Theorem G.4 (Corollary 1.7 of Aggarwal & Alman (2022)). Let x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd be a dataset with
squared radius B and ϵ ∈ (0, 1). Let q = qB;ϵ (e−x ). Let K ∈ Rn×n be the Gaussian kernel matrix
formed by x1 , . . . , xn . Finally, let k = 2d+2q

                                               2q    . Then, there exists a deterministic algorithm that
computes a pair of matrices U, V ∈ Rn×k such that for any vector v ∈ Rn ,
                                     ∥Kv − U V ⊤ v∥∞ ≤ ϵ∥v∥1 .
Moreover, matrices U, V can be computed in time O(nkd).

Even though ℓ∞ error in terms of ℓ1 norm of vector v seems quite weak, it can be conveniently
translated into more standard guarantees, e.g., spectral norm error. The following lemma provides
a conversion of errors that come in handy later when integrating the kernel approximation to our
low-rank QP solver.
Lemma G.5. Let K ∈ Rn×n be a PSD kernel matrix and ϵ ∈ (0, 1) be a parameter. Let K    e ∈ Rn×n
be an approximation to K with the guarantee that for any v ∈ Rn ,
                                       ∥Kv − Kv∥
                                             e ∞ ≤ ϵ∥v∥1 ,
then
                               |v ⊤ Kv − v ⊤ Kv|
                                             e ≤ ϵ∥v∥21 ≤ ϵn∥v∥22 .

Proof. The proof is a simple application of Hölder’s inequality:
                               |v ⊤ (Kv − Kv)|
                                          e    = |⟨v, Kv − Kv⟩|
                                                           e
                                               ≤ ∥v∥1 ∥Kv − Kv∥
                                                             e ∞
                                                 ≤ ϵ∥v∥21
                                                 ≤ ϵn∥v∥22 ,
where the second step is by Hölder’s inequality, and the last step is by Cauchy-Schwarz. This
completes the proof.

We can now combine the Gaussian kernel low-rank decomposition with our low-rank QP solver
to provide an almost-linear time algorithm for Gaussian kernel SVM. We restate the kernel SVM
formulation here.
Definition G.6 (Restatement of Definition 1.3). Given a data matrix X ∈ Rn×d and labels y ∈ Rn .
Let Q ∈ Rn×n denote a matrix where Qi,j = K(xi , xj ) · yi yj for i, j ∈ [n]. The hard-mragin kernel
SVM problem with bias asks to solve the following program.
                                                     1 ⊤
                                        max 1⊤ n α − α Qα
                                       α∈Rn          2
                                               ⊤
                                         s.t. α y = 0
                                              α ≥ 0.
Theorem G.7. Let Gaussian kernel SVM training problem be defined as above with kernel function
K(xi , xj ) = exp(−∥xi − xj ∥22 ). Suppose the dataset has squared radius B ≥ 1, and let ϵ ∈ (0, 1)
be the precision parameter. Suppose the program satisfies the following:


                                                  60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • There exists a point z ∈ Rn such that there is an Euclidean ball with radius r centered at z
        that is contained in the constraint set.
      • The constraint set is enclosed by an Euclidean ball of radius R, centered at the origin.

                                                                               b ∈ Rn such that
Then, there exists a randomized algorithm that outputs an approximate solution α
b ≥ 0, moreover,
α
                                        1 ⊤
                                   1⊤
                                    nαb− αb Qb α ≥ OPT − ϵ,
                                        2
                                        ∥bα⊤ y∥1 ≤ 3ϵ,
where OPT denote the optimal cost of the objective function. Let q = qB;Θ(ϵ/nR2 ) (e−x ) and
k = 2d+2q

      2q    . Then, the vector α
                               b can be computed in expected time
                                        (ω+1)/2
                                   O(nk
                                   e            log(nR/(ϵr))).

Proof. Throughout the proof, we set ϵ1 = O(ϵ/(nR2 )). We will craft an algorithm that first computes
an approximate Gaussian kernel together with a proper low-rank factorization, then use this proxy
kernel matrix to solve the quadratic program. We will use K to denote the exact Gaussian kernel
matrix, Q to denote the exact quadratic matrix.
Approximate the Gaussian kernel matrix with finer granularity. We start by invoking The-
orem G.4 using data matrix X with accuracy parameter ϵ1 . We let K    e = U V ⊤ to denote this
                                      e = Dy U V ⊤ Dy to denote the approximate quadratic matrix.
approximate kernel matrix, and we let Q
Owing to Lemma G.5, we know that for any vector x ∈ Rn ,

                           |x⊤ (Q − Q)x|
                                    e    = |(Dy x)⊤ (K − K)(D
                                                         e   y x)|

                                              ≤ ϵ1 n∥Dy x∥22
                                              = ϵ1 n∥x∥22 ,
where we use the fact that y ∈ {±1}n . This also implies that

                                          ∥Q − Q∥
                                               e ≤ ϵ1 n                                            (37)
this simple bound will come in handy later.
Solving the approximate program to high precision. Given Q,
                                                         e we solve the following program:
                                                   1 ⊤e
                                       max 1⊤ n α − α Qα
                                       α∈Rn        2
                                              ⊤
                                        s.t. α y = 0
                                             α≥0
by invoking Theorem E.1. To do so, we need a bound on the Lipschitz constant of the program, i.e.,
                     e and ℓ2 norm of 1. The latter is clearly √n, we shall show the first term is at
the spectral norm of Q
most (1 + ϵ1 ) · n.
Note that
                                        ∥Q∥ = ∥Dy KDy ∥
                                            ≤ tr[Dy KDy ]
                                            = tr[K]
                                            ≤ n,
where we use K is PSD. Combining with Eq. (37) and triangle inequality, we have

                                     ∥Q∥
                                      e ≤ ∥Q∥ + ∥Q − Q∥   e
                                         ≤ (1 + ϵ1 ) · n.


                                                   61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


With these Lipschitz constants, we examine the error guarantee provided by Theorem E.1: it produces
         b ∈ Rn such that
a vector α
                       1 ⊤e                    1 ⊤e
                  1⊤
                   nαb− α   α≥
                         b Qb     max (1⊤                      2
                                          n α − α Qα) − O(ϵ1 nR ),
                       2       α⊤ y=0,x≥0      2
                           α⊤ y∥1 ≤ O(ϵ1 nR),
                          ∥b
we mainly focus on the first error bound, as we need to understand the quality of x
                                                                                  b when plug into
the program with Q.
We will follow a chain of triangle inequalities, so we first bound

                                      α ⊤ (Q
                                     |b    e − Q)b       α∥22
                                                 α| ≤ ϵn∥b
                                                        ≤ ϵnR2 .

Next, let
                                                       1 ⊤e
                               α′ := arg     max 1⊤
                                                  n α − α Qα,
                                           α⊤ y=0,α≥0  2
                                                       1 ⊤
                              α∗ := arg max 1⊤    n α − α Qα,
                                        ⊤
                                       α y=0,α≥0       2
then we have the following
                           1 ′⊤ e ′         1 ∗ ⊤e ∗
                     1⊤  ′             ⊤ ∗
                      n α − α Qα ≥ 1n α − (α ) Qα
                           2                2
                                            1
                                    ≥ 1n α − (α∗ )⊤ Qα∗ − O(ϵ1 nR2 )
                                       ⊤ ∗
                                            2
                                    = OPT − O(ϵ1 nR2 ),
where the second step is by applying Lemma G.5 to α∗ . Now we are ready to bound the final error:
                             1 ⊤            1 ⊤e
                        1⊤
                         nαb− α   α ≥ 1⊤
                               b Qb    nαb− α b Qbα − O(ϵ1 nR2 )
                             2              2
                                             1 ′⊤ e ′
                                    ≥ 1⊤  ′
                                       n α − α Qα − O(ϵ1 nR )
                                                                2
                                             2
                                    ≥ OPT − O(ϵ1 nR2 ).
The final error guarantee follows by the choice of ϵ1 , and we indeed design an algorithm that outputs
a vector α
         b with
                                            1 ⊤
                                   1⊤ αb− α   b Qb α ≥ OPT − ϵ,
                                            2
                                            ∥bα⊤ y∥1 ≤ ϵ.

Runtime analysis. It remains to analyze the runtime of our proposed algorithm. We first compute an
approximate kernel K
                   e with parameter ϵ1 , owing to Theorem G.4, we have
                                       p                         log(nR/ϵ)
                  qB;ϵ1 (e−x ) = Θ(max{ B log(nR/ϵ),                             })
                                                             log(B −1 log(nR/ϵ))

then by setting k = 2d+2q

                         2q   , the matrix K
                                           e can be computed in time O(nkd). Given this rank-k
factorization, the program can then be solved with precision ϵ1 in time
                                         (ω+1)/2
                                    O(nk
                                    e            log(nR/(ϵr))),
as desired.
Remark G.8. To understand the value range of k, let us consider the set of parameters:
                       d = O(log n), ϵ = 1/ poly n, R = poly n, B = Θ(1),


                                                 62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


under this setting, O(log(nR/ϵ)) = O(log n) and the degree q is
                                              p
                                       q = Θ( log n)
the rank k is then

                                             2d + 2q
                                       k=
                                               2q
                                                           1
                                                               √
                                                                   log n
                                        ≤ Θ((log n) 2                      )
                                                            √
                                                 Θ(log log n log n)
                                        = Θ(2                                  )
                                        = no(1) ,
consequentially, our algorithm runs in almost-linear time in n:
                                          e 1+o(1) log n).
                                          O(n
It is worth noting to achieve the almost-linear runtime, the data radius B can be further relaxed. In
fact, as long as

                                                    log n
                                        B =o                  ,
                                                  log log n
we can ensure that k = no(1) and subsequently the almost-linear runtime.
The runtime we obtain can be viewed as a consequence of the “phase transition” phenomenon
observed in Aggarwal & Alman (2022), in which they prove that if B = ω(log n), then quadratic
time in n is essentially needed to approximate the Gaussian kernel assuming SETH.

G.2    H ARDNESS OF G AUSSIAN K ERNEL SVM WITH L ARGE R ADIUS

In this section, we show that for d = O(log n), any algorithm that solves the program associated to
hard-margin Gaussian kernel SVM would require Ω(n2−o(1) ) time for B = ω(log n). This justifies
the choice of B in Remark G.8. To prove the hardness result, we need to introduce the approximate
Hamming nearest neighbor problem.
Definition G.9. For δ > 0 and n, d ∈ N, let {a1 , . . . , an }, {b1 , . . . , bn } ⊆ {0, 1}d be two sets
of vectors, and let t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , d} be a threshold. The (1 + δ)-Approximate Hamming Nearest
Neighbor problem asks to distinguish the following two cases:

       • If there exists some ai and bj such that ∥ai − bj ∥1 ≤ t, output “Yes”;
       • If for any i, j ∈ [n], we have ∥ai − bj ∥1 > (1 + δ) · t, output “No”.

Note that the algorithm can output any value if the datasets fall in neither of these two cases. We will
utilize the following hardness result due to Rubinstein.
Theorem G.10 (Rubinstein (2018)). Assuming SETH, for every q > 0, there exists δ > 0 and C > 0
such that (1 + δ)-Approximate Hamming Nearest Neighbor in dimension d = C log n requires time
Ω(n2−q ).

A final ingredient is a rewriting of the dual SVM into its primal form, without resorting to optimize
over an infinite-dimensional hyperplane.
Lemma G.11. Consider the dual hard-margin kernel SVM defined as
                                           1   X
                            maxn 1⊤ α −              αi αj yi yj K(wi , wj ),
                            α∈R            2
                                              i,j∈[n]×[n]
                                   ⊤
                              s.t. α y = 0,
                                   α ≥ 0.
The primal program can be written as
                                   1        X
                            min                       αi αj yi yj K(wi , wj ),
                            α∈Rn 2
                                        i,j∈[n]×[n]


                                                      63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  s.t. yi f (wi ) ≥ 1,
                                       α ≥ 0,

where f : Rd → R is defined as
                                                n
                                                X
                                     f (w) =          αj yj K(wj , w) − b.
                                                j=1

Moreover, the primal and dual program has no duality gap and the optimal solution α to both
programs are the same.

Proof. Recall that the primal hard-margin SVM is the following program:
                                             1
                                       min ∥v∥22 ,
                                        v 2
                                        s.t. yi (v ⊤ ϕ(wi ) − b) ≥ 1,

where b ∈ R is the bias term and ϕ : Rd → RK is the feature mappingPncorresponding to the kernel in
the sense that K(wi , wj ) = ϕ(wi )⊤ ϕ(wj ). The optimal weight v = i=1 αi yi ϕ(wi ) where α ∈ Rn
is the optimal solution to the dual program. Consequently,
                                         n
                                         X
                             ∥v∥22 = (         αi yi ϕ(wi ))2
                                         i=1
                                            X
                                     =                 αi αj yi yj ϕ(wi )⊤ ϕ(wj )
                                         i,j∈[n]×[n]
                                            X
                                     =                 αi αj yi yj K(wi , wj )
                                         i,j∈[n]×[n]

                                     = α⊤ Qα,
where the matrix Q is the usual
                                               Q = (yy ⊤ ) ◦ K,
the constraint can be rewritten as
                                                  Xn
                       yi (v ⊤ ϕ(wi ) − b) = yi ((   αi yi ϕ(wi ))⊤ ϕ(wi ) − b)
                                                          i=1
                                                   Xn
                                             = yi (   αj yj ϕ(wj )⊤ ϕ(wi )) − yi b
                                                      j=1
                                                      Xn
                                             = yi (         αj yj K(wi , wj )) − yi b
                                                      j=1

                                             = yi f (wi ),

where f : Rd → R is defined as
                                                n
                                                X
                                     f (w) =          αj yj K(wj , w) − b.
                                                j=1

Thus, we can alternatively write the primal as
                                                      1
                                            min           α⊤ Qα,
                                            α∈Rn 2
                                               s.t. yi f (wi ) ≥ 1.
For the strong duality and optimal solution, see, e.g., Muller et al. (2001).


                                                          64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We will now prove the almost-quadratic lower bound for Guassian kernel SVM. Our proof strategy is
similar to that of Backurs et al. (2017) with different set of parameters. It is also worth noting that
the Backurs et al. (2017) construction

       • Requires the dimension d = Θ(log3 n);
       • Requires the squared dataset radius B = Θ(log4 n).

We will improve both of these results.
Theorem G.12. Assuming SETH, for every q > 0, there exists a hard-margin Gaussian kernel SVM
without the bias term as defined in Definition 1.3 with d = Θ(log n) and error ϵ = exp(−Θ(log2 n))
for inputs whose squared radius is at most B = Θ(log2 n) requiring time Ω(n2−q ) to solve.
                p
Proof. Let l = 2(c′ δ)−1 log n. We will provide a reduction from (1 + δ)-Approximate Hamming
Nearest Neighbor to Gaussian kernel SVM. Let A := {a1 , . . . , an }, B := {b1 , . . . , bn } ⊆ {0, 1}d be
the datasets, we assign label 1 to all vectors ai and label −1 to all vectors bj , moreover, we scale both
A and B by l, this results in two datasets with points in {0, l}d . The squared radius of this dataset is
then
                 B = max{max ∥lai − laj ∥22 , max ∥lbi − lbj ∥22 , max ∥lai − lbj ∥22 }
                                   i,j                         i,j                         i,j
                            2
                      ≤l d
                      = Θ(δ −1 log2 n).
To simplify the notation, we will implictly assume A and B are scaled by l without explicitly writing
out lai , lbj . Now consider the following three programs:

       • Classifying A:
                                                1            X
                                           min                         αi αj K(ai , aj ),
                                          α∈R≥0 2
                                             n
                                                        i,j∈[n]×[n]
                                                      n
                                                      X
                                               s.t.         αj K(ai , aj ) ≥ 1,             ∀i ∈ [n]                             (38)
                                                      j=1

       • Classifying B:
                                               1         X
                                         min                         βi βj K(bi , bj ),
                                         β∈R≥0 2
                                           n
                                                      i,j∈[n]×[n]
                                                      n
                                                      X
                                           s.t. −           βj K(bi , bj ) ≤ −1,                 ∀i ∈ [n]                        (39)
                                                      j=1

       • Classifying both A and B:
                  1    X                         1                      X                                   X
           minn              αi αj K(ai , aj ) +                                   βi βj K(bi , bj ) −                 αi βj K(ai , bj ),
         α,β∈R≥0 2                               2
                       i,j∈[n]×[n]                                   i,j∈[n]×[n]                         i,j∈[n]×[n]
                      n
                      X                         n
                                                X
               s.t.         αj K(ai , aj ) −           βj K(ai , bj ) ≥ 1,            ∀i ∈ [n],
                      j=1                      j=1
                      Xn                       Xn
                            αj K(bi , aj ) −          βj K(bi , bj ) ≤ −1,                ∀i ∈ [n]                               (40)
                      j=1                      j=1


We will prove that the optimal solution αi∗ ’s and βi∗ ’s are both lower and upper bounded. Use
Val(A), Val(B) and Val(A, B) to denote the value of program (38), (39) and (40) respectively, then
note that
                                                     n2
                                        Val(A) ≤
                                                      2

                                                                65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


by plugging in α = 1 and setting all vectors to be the same. On the other hand,
                                                              n
                                                          1X ∗ 2
                                           Val(A) ≥            (α ) K(ai , ai )
                                                          2 i=1 i
                                                              n
                                                          1X ∗ 2
                                                      =        (α ) .
                                                          2 i=1 i
Combining these two, we can conclude that for any αi∗ , it must be αi∗ ≤ n. For the lower bound,
consider the inequality constraint for the i-th point:
                                            X
                                     αi∗ +      αj∗ K(ai , aj ) ≥ 1,
                                                      j̸=i

to estimate K(ai , aj ), note that ∥ai − aj ∥22 = ∥ai − aj ∥1 ≥ 1 for j ̸= i,9 and
                               K(ai , aj ) = exp(−l2 ∥ai − aj ∥22 )
                                                = exp(−2(c′ δ)−1 log n∥ai − aj ∥1 )
                                                ≤ exp(−2(c′ δ)−1 log n)
                                                ≤ n−10 /100,
combining with αj∗ ≤ n, we have
                                                             X
                                            αi∗ ≥ 1 −               αj∗ K(ai , aj )
                                                             j̸=i

                                                  ≥ 1 − n · n · n−10 /100
                                                  ≥ 1/2.
This lower bound on αi∗ is helpful when we attempt to lower bound Val(A, B) with Val(A)+Val(B).
Following the outline of Backurs et al. (2017), we consider the three dual programs:

          • Dual of classifying A:
                                                      n
                                                      X               1X
                                            max              αi −           αi αj K(ai , aj )                    (41)
                                              n
                                            α∈R≥0
                                                      i=1
                                                                      2 i,j

          • Dual of classifying B:
                                                       n
                                                       X              1X
                                                max          βi −           βi βj K(bi , bj )                    (42)
                                            β∈R≥0 n
                                                       i=1
                                                                      2 i,j

          • Dual of classifying A and B:
                      n            n
                      X            X            1X                        1X                        X
              maxn          αi +         βi −         αi αj K(ai , aj ) −       βi βj K(bi , bj ) +     αi βj K(ai , bj )
            α,β∈R≥0
                      i=1          i=1
                                                2 i,j                     2 i,j                     i,j
                                                                                                                 (43)

as the SVM program exhibits strong duality, we know that the optimal value of the primal equals
to the dual, so we can alternatively bound Val(A, B) using the dual program. Plug in α∗ , β ∗ to
program (43), we have
                  n           n
                  X           X  1X ∗ ∗                     1X ∗ ∗                    X
Val(A, B) ≥           αi∗ +        βi∗ −αi αj K(ai , aj ) −       βi βj K(bi , bj ) +     αi∗ βj∗ K(ai , bj )
                i=1      i=1
                                 2 i,j
                                                            2 i,j                     i,j
                                  X
                                        ∗ ∗
              = Val(A) + Val(B) +      αi βj K(ai , bj ),
                                            i,j

   9
       We without loss of generality that during preprocess, we have remove duplicates in A and B.


                                                               66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to bound the third term, we consider the pair (ai0 , bj0 ) such that ∥ai0 − bj0 ∥1 ≤ t − 1, and note that
                      X
                          αi∗ βj∗ K(ai , bj ) ≥ αi∗0 βj∗0 K(ai0 , bj0 )
                         i,j
                                                        1
                                                   ≥      exp(−2(c′ δ)−1 log n · (t − 1)).
                                                        4
To wrap up, we have
                                                   1
                 Val(A, B) ≥ Val(A) + Val(B) +       exp(−2(c′ δ)−1 log n · (t − 1))
                                                   4
We now prove the “No” case, where for any ai , bj , ∥ai − bj ∥1 ≥ t. We have
                                      K(ai , bj ) = exp(−l2 ∥ai − bj ∥22 )
                                                  ≤ exp(−2(c′ δ)−1 log n · t),
we let m := exp(−2(c′ δ)−1 log n · t), set α′ = α∗ + 10n2 m and β ′ = β ∗ + 10n2 m, we let V to
denote the value when evaluating program (40) with α′ , β ′ . We will essentially show that
                                                    Val(A, B) ≤ V
and
                                        V ≤ Val(A) + Val(B) + 400n6 m
chaining these two gives us a certificate for the “No” case. To prove the first assertion, we show that
α′ , β ′ are feasible solution to program (40) since
                   n
                   X                          n
                                              X
                         αj′ K(ai , aj ) =          (αj∗ K(ai , aj ) + 10n2 mK(ai , aj ))
                   j=1                        j=1
                                                                       X
                                          = αi∗ + 10n2 m +                    (αj∗ + 10n2 m)K(ai , aj )
                                                                       j̸=i
                                                        X
                                          ≥ αi∗ +              αj∗ K(ai , aj ) + 10n2 m
                                                        j̸=i
                                                               n
                                                               X
                                          = 10n2 m +                 αj∗ K(ai , aj )
                                                               j=1
                                                    2
                                          ≥ 10n m + 1
where
Pn we     use αi∗ satisfy the inequality constraint of program (38). We compute an upper bound on
       ′
  j=1 βj K(ai , bj ):
                                            n
                                            X                           n
                                                                        X
                                                  βj′ K(ai , bj ) ≤            2nm
                                            j=1                          j=1

                                                                     = 2n2 m,
where we use the fact that m = exp(−2(c′ δ)−1 log n · t) ≤ n−10 /10 therefore β ∗ + 10n2 m ≤ 2n.
Thus, it must be the case that
                               X                         n
                                                         X
                                     αj′ K(ai , aj ) −          βj′ K(ai , bj ) ≥ 8n2 m + 1
                               j=1                       j=1

                                                                                 ≥ 1,
as desired. The other linear constraint follows by a symmetric argument. This indeed shows that
α′ , β ′ are feasible solutions to program (40) and Val(A, B) ≤ V .
To prove an upper bound on V , we note that
                   1X ′ ′                    1X ′ ′                    X
              V =        αi αj K(ai , aj ) +       βi βj K(bi , bj ) −     α′ βj′ K(ai , bj )
                   2 i,j                     2 i,j                     i,j


                                                                67
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      1X ′ ′                    1X ′ ′
                  ≤         αi αj K(ai , aj ) +      β β K(bi , bj ),
                      2 i,j                     2 i,j i j

we bound the first quantity, as the second follows similarly:
        1X ′ ′                     1X ∗ ∗
               αi αj K(ai , aj ) =      (α α + 10n2 m(αi∗ + αj∗ ) + 100n4 m2 )K(ai , aj )
        2 i,j                      2 i,j i j
                                             X                       X
                                 ≤ Val(A) +      10n3 mK(ai , aj ) +   100n4 m2 K(ai , aj )
                                               i,j                      i,j

                                ≤ Val(A) + 10n5 m + 100n6 m2
                                ≤ Val(A) + 200n6 m,
we can thus conclude
                                  V ≤ Val(A) + Val(B) + 400n6 m.
Chaining these two, we obtain the following threshold for the “No” case:
                             Val(A, B) ≤ Val(A) + Val(B) + 400n6 m.
Finally, we observe that
                                                      1
                400n6 exp(−2(c′ δ)−1 log n · t) ≪       exp(−2(c′ δ)−1 log n · (t − 1)),
                                                      4
we can therefore distinguish these two cases.
Note that when one considers solving the program with additive error, we need to make sure that the
error is smaller than the distinguishing threshold, i.e.,
                                     1
                                 ϵ≤    exp(−2(c′ δ)−1 log n · (t − 1))
                                     4
                                     1
                                   ≤ exp(−2(c′ δ)−1 d log n)
                                     4
                                   = exp(−Θ(log2 n)),
where we use t ≤ d and d = Θ(log n). This concludes the proof.

Remark G.13. Our proof can be interpreted as using a stronger complexity theoretical tool in place
of the one used by Backurs et al. (2017), to obtain a better dependence on dimension d and B. We
also note that the construction due to Backurs et al. (2017) has the relation that B = Θ(d log n), this
is because in order to lower bound Val(A, B), one has to lower bound the optimal values of αi∗ ’s and
βj∗ ’s. To do so, one needs to further scale up ai ’s and bj ’s so that within datasets A and B, the radius
is at least Θ(log n). This is in contrast to the Batch Gaussian KDE studied in Aggarwal & Alman
(2022), where they show the almost-quadratic lower bound can be achieved for both d, B = Θ(log n).

Similar to Backurs et al. (2017), we obtain hardness results for hard-margin kernel SVM with bias,
and soft-margin kernel SVM with bias.
Corollary G.14. Assuming SETH, for every q > 0, there exists a hard-margin Gaussian kernel SVM
with the bias term with d = Θ(log n) and error ϵ = exp(−Θ(log2 n)) for inputs whose squared
radius is at most B = Θ(log6 n) requiring time Ω(n2−q ) to solve.

Proof. The proof is similar to Backurs et al. (2017). Given a hard instance of Theorem G.12, except
we append Θ(log n) entries with magnitude Θ(log2 n) instead of distributing the values across
Θ(log3 n) entries. Rest of the proof follows exactly the same as Backurs et al. (2017).

Corollary G.15. Assuming SETH, for every q > 0, there exists a soft-margin Gaussian kernel SVM
with the bias term with d = Θ(log n) and error ϵ = exp(−Θ(log2 n)) for inputs whose squared
radius is at most B = Θ(log6 n) requiring time Ω(n2−q ) to solve.


                                                     68
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark G.16. Compared to the construction of Backurs et al. (2017) in which they distribute a
total mass of Θ(log3 n) across Θ(log3 n) entries so that they ensure after the reduction, the vectors
take values in {−1, 0, 1}, we instead distribute the mass across Θ(log n) entries so that each entry
has magnitude Θ(log2 n). To make the reduction work, the total mass of Θ(log3 n) is needed, and
for Backurs et al. (2017), it is fine to append an extra Θ(log3 n) entries as their hardness result for
hard-margin SVM without bias does require d = Θ(log3 n). For us, we need to restrict d = Θ(log n)
at the price of each entry has a larger magnitude of Θ(log2 n). This blows up the squared radius from
log2 n to log6 n. We note that the Backurs et al. (2017) construction has squared radius log4 n.


                                                  69
