Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P ROVABLE U NLEARNING IN T OPIC M ODELING AND
D OWNSTREAM TASKS
 Stanley Wei∗, Sadhika Malladi∗, Sanjeev Arora                                 Amartya Sanyal
 Princeton University                                                          University of Copenhagen
 {stanley.wei, smalladi, arora}@princeton.edu                                  amsa@di.ku.dk



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Machine unlearning algorithms are increasingly important as legal concerns arise
             around the provenance of training data, but verifying the success of unlearning is
             often difficult. Provable guarantees for unlearning are often limited to supervised
             learning settings. In this paper, we provide the first theoretical guarantees for un-
             learning in the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm by studying topic models,
             simple bag-of-words language models that can be adapted to solve downstream
             tasks like retrieval and classification. First, we design a provably effective unlearn-
             ing algorithm for topic models that incurs a computational overhead independent
             of the size of the original dataset. Our analysis additionally quantifies the dele-
             tion capacity of the model – i.e., the number of examples that can be unlearned
             without incurring a significant cost in model performance. Finally, we formally
             extend our analyses to account for adaptation to a given downstream task. In par-
             ticular, we design an efficient algorithm to perform unlearning after fine-tuning
             the topic model via a linear head. Notably, we show that it is easier to unlearn
             pre-training data from models that have been fine-tuned to a particular task, and
             one can unlearn this data without modifying the base model.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Modern-day machine learning has shifted from single-stage supervised learning on manually con-
structed datasets to a paradigm in which models are pre-trained and subsequently fine-tuned (Bom-
masani et al., 2022). In this setting, a model initially learns a good representation of the data using
a self-supervised objective on a large unstructured corpus. The resulting pre-trained model is later
adapted to solve specific tasks for which it is difficult or costly to curate a large dataset. This
blueprint has yielded strong performance in text (e.g., Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020), vi-
sion (e.g., Oquab et al., 2024; He et al., 2022), and multimodal (e.g., Radford et al., 2021; Zhai et al.,
2023) settings. It is well-known that the scale of the pre-training data is strongly correlated with the
final performance of the model (Hoffmann et al., 2022), leading to the construction of larger datasets
via broad internet scrapes (Gao et al., 2020; Schuhmann et al., 2022; Soldaini et al., 2024; Penedo
et al., 2023). Such datasets have been found to often inadvertently include private, sensitive, and
unsafe data (Birhane et al., 2021; Longpre et al., 2024; He et al., 2024).
Unsafe data can generally degrade model performance and introduce biases, making the model less
useful for various applications (McKenna et al., 2023; Birhane & Prabhu, 2021; Choenni et al., 2021;
Naous et al., 2024). Using private and sensitive data, even unknowingly, poses legal risks (Bom-
masani et al., 2022; Henderson et al., 2023). In particular, recent works have shown that models can
memorize and thus permit the extraction of training data (Somepalli et al., 2023; Carlini et al., 2021;
2023). Moreover, one may be requested to remove data in accordance with GDPR’s right to be
forgotten (European Parliament & Council of the European Union), or as part of a copyright-related
lawsuit (Tremblay v. OpenAI, Inc.,, 2023; DOE 1 v. GitHub, Inc., N.D. Cal. 2022).
Therefore, there is great empirical interest in developing machine unlearning algorithms that can
surgically remove portions of the training data from an already learned model without harming per-
formance. The gold standard for machine unlearning is for the model to behave as though it had
    ∗
        Equal contribution.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


never been trained on that datapoint (Cao & Yang, 2015). As it is often undesirable to completely
retrain models, especially as they grow larger, many works have proposed computationally cheaper
heuristics for solving this problem (e.g., Jang et al., 2023; Foster et al., 2024; Kurmanji et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2024b; Eldan & Russinovich, 2023; Gandikota et al., 2023). In the absence of theoret-
ical guarantees, it is common to use empirics to measure the success of these algorithms. However,
recent works have shown that such evaluations often overestimate the success of these unlearning
methods (Hayes et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Maini et al., 2024) and thus it has proven difficult
to confidently ascertain whether the proposed methods meet the necessary compliance standards.
In this context, it is highly desirable to design efficient unlearning algorithms with well-motivated
guarantees that are salient to the pre-training and finetuning paradigm (Thudi et al., 2022; Lee et al.,
2024).
While there are some instances of such algorithms for linear models (Guo et al., 2020; Izzo et al.,
2021; Mahadevan & Mathioudakis, 2023), general convex models (Ullah et al., 2021; Sekhari et al.,
2021; Neel et al., 2021), Bayesian models (Nguyen et al., 2020), and GANs (Liu et al., 2024), there
are no works on the paradigm of pre-training and fine-tuning algorithms. One of the most classical
such algorithms is topic modeling (Hofmann et al., 1999; Blei et al., 2003; Blei & Lafferty, 2006;
Li & McCallum, 2006), which can also be thought of as the simplest language model. In this paper,
we present the first provably effective and efficient unlearning algorithms for topic models.
Topic models are generally pre-trained to extract latent structure (i.e., a small set of underlying top-
ics) from a large corpus of documents. This feature extractor is then used for a variety of downstream
applications, including retrieval, classification, and recommendation (Boyd-Graber et al., 2017). De-
spite their simplicity, topic models can be used to effectively solve many real-world natural language
problems — see a survey in Churchill & Singh (2022).

1.1   OVERVIEW OF R ESULTS

We focus on the setting in Arora et al. (2012b), because it admits an efficient learning algorithm with
provable guarantees (Arora et al., 2012a). The corpus is assumed to contain r underlying topics,
where each topic defines a distribution over words. Let D be a distribution over topic distributions.
Then, each document d is generated by sampling a topic distribution Wd ∼ D over topics, and then
sampling words according to Wd .
The dataset of m documents is a matrix M ∈ Rn×m , where M permits a non-negative matrix
factorization M = A∗ X. Here, A∗ ∈ Rn×r is the distribution of words in each of the r unknown
underlying topics, and X ∈ Rr×m is the sampled distribution of topics in each document. In
particular, A⋆ , X have columns on the probability simplex. We seek to learn the embedding function
A∗ and the topic-topic covariance R⋆ = ED [XX ⊤ ].
To derive provable guarantees on the success of unlearning, we adapt the notion of (ϵ, δ)-unlearning
introduced in Sekhari et al. (2021) to the topic modeling setting. The unlearned model is required
to behave indistinguishably from a model that was retrained on the modified dataset. We define a
notion of utility-preserving unlearning that combines this condition with an analysis on the deletion
capacity – i.e., the number of datapoints that can be unlearned without performance degradation
(Definition 4). We now state our main result on utility-preserving unlearning in topic models.
Main Result 1 (Informal version of Theorem 2). Suppose we trained a topic model AS , X S on a
training set S containing m documents. Algorithm 1 can perform utility-preserving unlearning of

                                                       m
                                        mU = Õ        √
                                                    r2 nr
documents from the pre-trained topic model, where Õ(·) hides constants depending on the learning
and unlearning algorithm.
To adapt a topic model to a downstream topic classification task, we learn a head w ∈ Rr on top
of A to minimize a strongly convex loss function (Definition 2). When A and w are both released,
one would necessarily have to first unlearn from A, which makes unlearning just as hard as it was
in pre-training (Theorem 3). This setting is rather unrealistic, because there is no obvious case in
which one would want to use w without A or vice versa. We thus advocate for viewing fine-tuned
model B = Aw as a whole i.e. it is not allowed to access outputs of A solely, and we show that it
is easier to perform utility-preserving unlearning of pre-training data in this case.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Main Result 2 (Informal version of Theorem 4). After adapting the model to a downstream
                                                                                         task
                                                                                    mq
(Definitions 1 and 2), Algorithm 2 can perform utility-preserving unlearning of Ω̃ r√nr doc-
uments, where q ∈ [1/r, 1] is a task-dependent quantity, without modifying the base model A.
Simpler downstream tasks have a larger q, increasing the separation from the pre-training result.

We demonstrate that our unlearning algorithms run substantially faster than retraining the model
(Table 1). Overall, our results imply the following takeaways in the context of topic models —
(1) It is possible to effectively and efficiently unlearn datapoints from a pre-trained model without
retraining it (Algorithm 1 and Theorem 2), (2) One can effectively unlearn more pre-training data
from a model that has been adapted to a downstream task without harming the utility of the base and
fine-tuned models (Theorem 4), and (3) One can unlearn pre-training data from a fine-tuned model
without modifying the base model (Algorithm 2 and Theorem 4).

2     T OPIC M ODELS
As we previously discussed, topic models can be considered as one of the simplest language models
that one can pre-train in a self-supervised fashion and later fine-tune for other language-related
tasks. This pipeline mirrors the modern-day paradigm of pre-training large language models to
build a general understanding of natural language and later fine-tuning them to solve a variety of
tasks ranging from classification to code generation.

2.1   P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION

Topic modeling is a classical, bag-of-words method to discover structure in a corpus of docu-
ments (Hofmann et al., 1999). One assumes that each document contains a convex combination
of topics, each of which can be described in terms of a distribution over the vocabulary. Different
assumptions on the structure of this distribution and the topics have yielded a variety of topic mod-
eling methodologies (Blei & Lafferty, 2006; Li & McCallum, 2006) – perhaps most famous among
these is the latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA, Blei et al. (2003)). Many early works established the
statistical learnability of topic models under such assumptions, but the learning algorithms generally
were not efficient in real-world settings (Arora et al., 2012b; Recht et al., 2012).
Our paper focuses on the setting in Arora et al. (2012b), for which Arora et al. (2012a) provided an
empirically efficient learning algorithm. The dataset consists of a set of m documents d1 , ..., dm ,
where each document contains L words from a vocabulary V with |V| = n.1 The corpus contains r
different underlying topics, each of which defines a distribution over words. Each word in document
d is generated by: (1) sampling a distribution over topics Wd ∼ D, and then (2) sampling L words
independently according to Wd .
We represent the corpus as a matrix M ∈ Rn×m , where M permits a non-negative matrix factoriza-
tion M = A⋆ X. Here, A⋆ ∈ Rn×r is the distribution of words in each of the r topics, X ∈ Rr×m
is the distribution of topics in each document, and hence M is the distribution of words in each
document. While there are several algorithms for learning the feature extractor A⋆ , it is well-known
that it is hard to recover X exactly (Arora et al., 2012b). Instead, it is desirable to learn how the
topics co-occur together, denoted as R⋆ = ED [XX ⊤ ]. This quantity is termed the topic-topic
covariance. Further discussion of this has been included in Appendix A.
The topic modeling setting generally determines D (e.g., in LDA, D is a Dirichlet distribution). In
order to recover A∗ and R∗ efficiently and accurately from an observed corpus M ∼ D, we need
to make the following assumption on the underlying data distribution.
Assumption 1 (p-separability, Arora et al. (2012b)). The topic matrix A⋆ is p-separable for p > 0
if for every topic k ∈ [r], there exists a word i ∈ [n] such that A∗i,k ≥ p and A∗i,k′ = 0 for all
k ′ ̸= k. Such words are called anchor words.

Without this separability assumption, maximum likelihood estimation of a topic model is NP-
hard (Arora et al., 2012b). Assumption 1 requires that A⋆ contains a diagonal matrix, up to row
     1
       Without loss of generality, we assume L = 2. The same asymptotic results hold for constant sized L, and
it is straightforward to modify our analysis to account for this.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


permutations; intuitively, the appearance of an anchor word in a document perfectly indicates the
document has nonzero probability of the corresponding topic. As we will detail in Section 4, this ob-
servation inspires a two-phase learning algorithm, whereby one first approximates the anchor words
for each topic and then leverages them to identify patterns among the topics.

2.2   D OWNSTREAM A DAPTATION

Topic models are frequently trained on a general corpus, and the embeddings can be later used
to classify documents. The classification problem usually involves only a subset of topics. For
example, after training a topic model on a large corpus of news articles with diverse topics (e.g.,
sports, politics, technology, finance, etc.), one relevant downstream task is to classify the subject of
a given news article as sports or politics. We formalize the topic classification task below.
Definition 1 (Topic Classification Task). A topic classification task T = (Tclf , w⋆ ) is defined by a
subset of topics Tclf ⊂ [r] on which the task is defined and a ground-truth labelling vector w⋆ ∈ Rr
with bounded norm. Importantly, w⋆ only has non-zero coordinates in the positions corresponding
to Tclf .
The classification task is defined on the latent features of a given document, so it is necessary to first
identify the salient topics as they occur in the text. Fitting a topic model to the corpus yields such a
feature extractor A that embeds a document into the r-dimensional topic space. In order to adapt a
topic model to a particular classification task, we perform head tuning on the feature extractor A.
Definition 2 (τ -Head Tuning). For a given labelled document classification dataset Dclf = {(di , yi )}
representing a topic classification task T , embed each document di as a vector xi ∈ Rn containing
the word counts in the document. To perform head tuning on a pre-trained topic model A, we learn
wτ ∈ Rr that is a τ -optimal point of
                                               1      X
                               ℓT (w; A) =                   f (x⊤ Aw, y)
                                             |Dclf |
                                                    (x,y)∈Dclf

where ℓT is strongly convex in w. In other words, wτ satisfies ℓT (wτ ; A) − min ℓT (w; A) ≤ τ .
                                                                                     w

One example of f is the logistic loss with ℓ2 regularization. For ease of exposition, we primarily
consider binary classification tasks, but we point out that the definition can extend to multi-class
tasks solved via the one-vs-all scheme (Rifkin & Klautau, 2004).
We note that head tuning, also referred to as linear probing, is a simpler adaptation technique than
fine-tuning A alongside w. Nonetheless, recent works on popular language models have demon-
strated that head tuning can substantially improve the ability of general pre-trained language models
to solve complex classification tasks (Malladi et al., 2023a;b). Head tuning thus serves as a con-
venient yet effective adaptation method that avoids updating the pre-trained model, which is often
desirable. For example, if a single pre-trained model needs to be separately adapted to solve many
different tasks, then it is desirable to minimize the number of parameters that are fine-tuned to min-
imize the memory needed to store all of the adapted models.2

3     U NLEARNING
As mentioned previously, there is increased interest in machine unlearning due to the growing scale
of modern datasets and the difficulty of manually inspecting each datapoint. Theoretically, the gold
standard for unlearning is that the model should behave identically to one that was trained without
the datapoint in its corpus (Cao & Yang, 2015). We first define what it means for two models
θ1 , θ2 ∈ Θ to behave almost identically, where Θ denotes the parameter space of a hypothesis class.
Due to randomness in learning, θ1 and θ2 are random variables.
Definition 3 ((ϵ, δ)-indistinguishable models, Dwork et al. (2014)). Two models denoted by random
variables θ1 , θ2 ∈ Θ are (ϵ, δ)-indistinguishable if for all possible subsets of models T ⊆ Θ,
           Pr (θ1 ∈ T ) ≤ eϵ Pr (θ2 ∈ T ) + δ and Pr (θ2 ∈ T ) ≤ eϵ Pr (θ1 ∈ T ) + δ

   2
     This motivation has driven widespread development and adoption of parameter-efficient fine-tuning meth-
ods for large language models. Liu et al. (2021) contains a survey of such techniques.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We adapt the definitions from Sekhari et al. (2021) to the topic modeling setting. A learning al-
gorithm A takes in a set of m documents, denoted as S, and returns a topic model θ = (A, R).
Analogously, an unlearning algorithm U takes in the learned topic model θ, a set of documents to
unlearn Sf ⊆ S, some statistics on the training set T (S), and outputs a model. The set of datapoints
to unlearn Sf is often referred to as the forget set. With this in mind, we now define a notion of
utility-preserving unlearning, whereby the unlearning algorithm needs to not only effectively simu-
late retraining the model from scratch but also maintain the model’s performance.
Definition 4 (Utility-preserving (ϵ, δ)-Unlearning with Deletion Capacity). Let m ∈ N be a constant
that depends on the topic modeling distribution D satisfying Assumption 1. For any training dataset
   i.i.d.
S ∼ D of size at least m, and ϵ, δ > 0, we say that a pair of learning and unlearning algorithms
                                                                         A,U
(A, U) performs utility-preserving unlearning with deletion capacity Tϵ,δ    (m) if

      1. With probability at least 0.9 over draws from D, for any forget set Sf ⊆ S of size at most
          A,U
         Tϵ,δ (m), model trained on S \ Sf is indistinguishable from that resulting from unlearning
                        ϵ,δ
         with U. Here, ≈ denotes (ϵ, δ)-indistinguishability.
                                                     ϵ,δ
                              U(Sf , A(S), T (S)) ≈ U(∅, A(S \ Sf ), T (S \ Sf ))

      2. Even for an adversarially chosen Sf , the unlearned model does not suffer a large perfor-
         mance degradation. Formally,
                             "                                          #
                          EA,U        max         h(U(Sf , A(S), T (S))) − h⋆ ≤ 0.01
                                        A,U
                                 |Sf |≤Tϵ,δ (m)


where h : Θ → R is the loss of the topic model, and h⋆ = minw∈W h(w) is the irreducible loss.
The above definition can be applied to both the pre-training and the downstream adaptation stages
of training a topic model. Of particular note is that (1) does not guarantee (2), since the former
only concerns indistinguishability between the unlearned and retrained models, while the latter is
a statement about utility preservation. Moreover, unless T (S) contains the entire dataset, we note
that the unlearning algorithm U cannot be as simple as retraining the model. In this paper, we will
design an unlearning algorithm for topic models that satisfies this definition of provable unlearning,
and the number of statistics T (S) will not depend on the initial dataset size m.
To show (ϵ, δ)-indistinguishability, we utilize the Gaussian mechanism, a classic tool from differen-
tial privacy. Given a particular function, the Gaussian mechanism essentially prescribes how much
noise one must add to the output in order for the input to be indistinguishable from a similar one.
The guarantee of the Gaussian mechanism is described in the following lemma.
Lemma 1 (Gaussian Mechanism, Dwork et al. (2014)). Let f be an arbitrary d-dimensional func-
tion, and define its ℓ2 -sensitivity to be ∆2 f := max ∥f (x) − f (y)∥2 . Then, for c2 > 2 log 1.25
                                                                                                  δ ,
                                                   adjacent x,y
the Gaussian mechanism with parameter σ ≥ c∆2 f /ϵ is (ϵ, δ)-differentially private.
In our case, we define adjacent inputs (i.e., training datasets) as the case where y is a superset of x.

4     L EARNING AND U NLEARNING T OPIC M ODELS
In this section, we present the learning and unlearning algorithms and guarantees for topic models.

Notation. We use A⋆ to refer to the ground-truth topic model, AS to refer to a topic model trained
on S, and AF to denote a topic model retrained with the forget set removed S \ Sf . We also use Ā
to denote the unlearned topic model before applying the Gaussian mechanism and Ã to denote the
model after the mechanism is applied. Analogous notations are used for R.

4.1   L EARNING A LGORITHM AND G UARANTEES

Per Arora et al. (2012a), the learning algorithm Abase takes in a corpus of documents S =
{d1 , ..., dm } and consists of the following three phases to learn a topic model θ = (AS , RS ).


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  1. Measure the word co-occurrences. Compute the word co-occurrence matrix Q ∈ Rn×n ,
     where Qij is the number of times word i appears in the same document as word j. We also
     compute Q̄, which normalizes the rows of Q to sum to 1. A detailed discussion of the con-
     struction of Q and its relationship to the factorization M = A⋆ X is included in Appendix A.
  2. Identify the anchor words P . Recall that in order to be able to learn topic models efficiently,
     there must exist a set of anchor words P with |P | = r, and each anchor word must appear
     exclusively in a single topic (Assumption 1). This subroutine uses Q̄ to approximately identify
     the r anchor words P .
  3. Learn the feature extractor AS and the topic-topic covariance RS . The algorithm uses the
     anchor words P and the word co-occurrences Q̄ to learn AS and RS . Each word is expressed
     as a convex combination of anchor words, and thus, topics. With appropriate normalization
     and by cross-referencing information with the co-occurrence matrix, one can recover A⋆ , R⋆
     in the infinite data limit.
We sketch how this algorithm recovers the ground truth A⋆ , R⋆ when one has infinitely many doc-
uments in Appendix A. Arora et al. (2012a) gives the following finite-document guarantee.
Theorem 1 (Learning Guarantee). Running Abase on a dataset S of size m, where m is at least
                             3               3 3               2
                               ar log n         a r log n         r log r
                    max O                 , O               , O
                               L(γp)6 ϵ0        Lϵ30 (γp)4           Lϵ20
recovers AS and RS with entrywise additive error up to ϵ0 from the ground truth A⋆ , R⋆ , respec-
tively. Here, a is the topic imbalance parameter, and γ is the condition number of the ground truth
R⋆ . Formally, we have a = maxi,j∈[r] PrD [z = i]/ PrD [z = j].
Approximating the anchor words. We defer a precise description of the anchor word identification
algorithm to Appendix A and instead focus here on the intuitions driving its design and the guar-
antees we will use throughout the paper. First, we note the relationship between Q̄ and the set of
anchor words. If we had infinitely many documents, then the convex hull of the rows in Q̄ will be a
simplex with vertices corresponding to the anchor words, because each anchor word corresponds to
a topic, and each topic prescribes a distribution over words. However, in the finite document setting,
each row of Q̄ only approximates their expected value, and so one must approximate the vertices of
a convex hull when given access to a perturbation of the points that define it.
We start by requiring that each topic is distinctly different from any mixture on the other topics.
Formally, this requires that the simplex is robust, in that each vertex (i.e., anchor word) is sufficiently
far from any combination of the other topics. Most topic modeling settings define lower bounds on
the robustness of the simplex. By a result in Arora et al. (2012b), the simplex defined by the r
anchor word rows of the population Q̄ is γp-robust. We can now define exactly the sense in which
a Q̄ computed on a finite dataset approximates the population co-occurrence matrix.
Definition 5. Let {ai }ni=1 be a set of points whose convex hull P is a simplex with vertices {vi }ri=1 .
We say a set of r points is ϵ-close the vertex set {vi }ri=1 if each of the r points is ϵ-close in ℓ2
distance to a different vertex in P . Moreover, we say that a simplex P is β-robust if for every vertex
v of P , the ℓ2 distance between v and the convex hull of the rest of the vertices as at least β.
In the context of this definition, P corresponds to the ground truth convex hull, and the finite sample
Q̄ can be seen as a perturbation to it. In particular, Arora et al. (2012a) used this to established a
guarantee on the accuracy of anchor word recovery.
Lemma 2 (Approximation Guarantee on Anchor Words). Suppose each row of Q̄ is at most δ
distance away from the ground truth γp-robust simplex Q̄⋆ in ℓ2 norm. If 20rδ/(γp)2 < γp, then
the set of anchor words found by the algorithm is O(δ/γp)-close to the ground truth anchor words.
We now describe how to use the recovered approximate anchor words to learn the topic model.
Learning the topic model from anchor words. We are given the set of anchor words P , the word
co-occurrence matrix Q ∈ Rn×n , and the normalized co-occurrence matrix Q̄. Our goal is to use
these quantities to learn A ∈ Rn×r and R ∈ Rr×r . We will do so by first expressing each word
i ∈ [n] as a convex combination of the anchor words (and thus, the topics). In particular, for each
word i, we learn the coefficients Ci ∈ ∆r as
                                   Ci = arg min ∥Q̄i − v ⊤ Q̄P ∥2
                                            v∈∆r


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Unlearning algorithm (Ubase )
  Input: Forget set Sf ⊆ S, statistics T (S) which include {CiS }ni=1 , QS , P , normalization con-
  stants pS
  Output: Unlearned model Ã, R̃
  Compute the updated co-occurrence matrix QF by subtracting documents in Sf
  Store the updated normalization constants pF = QF 1
  for i in 1, . . . , n do
     Newton step update on Ci ’s:
                                                  −1
                                    C̄iF ← CiS − HC       S
                                                    S ∇L(Ci , S \ Sf )
                                                        i

                                    C̄iF ← proj∆r (C̄iF )
                                      ⊤ F 2
     where L(v, S \ Sf ) := ∥Q̄F                           2    S
                               i − v Q̄P ∥ and HCiS = ∇ L(Ci , S \ Sf )
  end for
  Ā′ = diag(pF )C̄
  Ā = column normalized Ā′
  R̄ = Ā† QF Ā†⊤ where Ā† is the pseudoinverse of Ā
  Sample νA , νR from normal distribution defined by Gaussian mechanism guarantee
  Ã = Project each column of Ā + νA to ∆n .
  R̃ = Project R̄ + νR onto the set of PSD matrices.
  return The unlearned topic model Ã, R̃


where Q̄P is the P rows of Q̄ corresponding to the anchor words. Arora et al. (2012a) showed the
following approximation guarantee for Ci compared to the ground-truth coefficients.
Lemma 3. When 20rδ/(γp)2 < γp, for every word i, Ci has entrywise error O(δ/(γp)2 ) from Ci⋆ .


We then normalize this Ci by the total number of co-occurrences that word i is involved in. Note that
the Ci can be assembled into a matrix C ∈ Rn×r . We set A to be C after normalizing the columns
sum to 1, since the columns represent the topic-conditioned distribution over the vocabulary. We
                              ⊤
finally compute R = A† QA† , where A† denotes the pseudoinverse of A.

4.2   U NLEARNING A LGORITHM AND G UARANTEES

 Learning Phase                           Retrain Time           Unlearning Update     Unlearning Time
 Co-occurrence matrix computation               O(m)            Updating frequencies           O(mU )
 Identify anchor words                 O(n2 + nr/ϵ20 )      Use learned anchor words             O(1)
 Recover topics from anchors          O(n2 r + nr2 /ϵ20 )      Projected Newton step           O(nr2 )
 Head tuning w (Definition 2)                      ERM                  Newton step             O(r3 )


Table 1: Our unlearning algorithms generally have a runtime shorter than the retraining procedure.
ERM denotes empirical risk minimization, and we note the training time relies on the error tolerance.

We describe our unlearning algorithm Ubase to forget a set Sf from a trained model (Algorithm 1),
which crucially updates Ci with a Newton step. We then compute Ā from the modified Ci and
apply the Gaussian mechanism to ensure indistinguishability. We describe our formal guarantee on
the unlearning algorithm below, sketching out our utility preserving guarantees with respect to A⋆ .
The arguments for R⋆ follow analogously; we defer the discussion to the appendix.
Theorem 2 (Utility-Preserving Unlearning on the Base Model). Let Abase be the learning algo-
rithm described in the prior sections and Ubase be the unlearning algorithm in Algorithm 1. Then,
(Abase , Ubase ) performs utility-preserving unlearning with deletion capacity
                                         Abase ,Ubase             m
                                       Tϵ,δ           (m) ≥ c · 2 √
                                                               r rn


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where m is the number of training documents, r is the number of topics, and c is a constant de-
pendent on ϵ, δ, and D. The loss function h used in the utility-preserving definition is the maximum
entrywise error from the ground truth topic model A⋆ .
                                                                                               3
Proof sketch. The full proof can be found in Appendix B.2. We delete mU ≤ 0.001mϵ       0 (γp)
                                                                                    a2 r 2     points.
This upper bound ensures that the anchor words are likely unchanged per Lemma 2. Recall that
utility-preserving unlearning requires: (1) that the unlearned model is indistinguishable from the
retrained model, and (2) that the unlearned model is not too far from the ground-truth model.
Indistinguishability. The Gaussian mechanism introduced in Lemma 1 allows us to make two models
with a given ℓ2 -sensitivity (ϵ, δ)-indistinguishable from each other. We bound the ℓ2 -sensitivity of
the feature extractor A by noting that Ā is a rescaled version of C̄.
Lemma 4. For ϵ, δ > 0, the following holds for the C̄ and the topic matrix Ā:
                                    armU
             ∥C̄ − C F ∥∞ ≤ c ·                      ∥Ā − AF ∥∞ ≤ (ar) · ∥C̄ − C F ∥∞
                                   mϵ0 γp

                                                                                  √       2
Applying the Gaussian mechanism with noise σ = ∆ϵ 2 log(1.25/δ), where ∆ = c nr · (ar)      mU
                                                   p
                                                                                        mϵ0 γp
and followed by projecting the columns of Ā + νA back to ∆n yields the desired result.
Utility Preservation. We first apply Lemma 2 to show that, with high probability, the anchor words
do not change when unlearning mU documents. Then, we use Lemma 8 to bound the distance
between the unlearned C̄i and the ground truth Ci⋆ . Accounting for the noise added via the Gaussian
mechanism completes the proof.
Lemma 5. For ϵ, δ > 0, denote the unlearned model after the Gaussian mechanism described above
as Ã. Then, Ã satisfies:
                                                                      p               !
               h
                          ⋆
                             i       (ar)2 mU     √      p              log(1/δ)
             E ∥Ã − A ∥∞ ≤ c ·                ·     nr · log(nr) ·               +1
                                      mϵ0 γp                               ϵ


Eachnof  the two  terms ino the above equation  yield a  constraint on mU . In particular, mU ≤
            m
                 , O rm2 , so setting mU ≤ Õ r2 √  m

min Õ r2 √   nr                                     nr
                                                          completes the proof.


5     U NLEARNING WITH RESPECT TO A D OWNSTREAM TASK
We are interested in unlearning a set of pre-training documents Sf ⊆ S. A topic classification task
is usually defined on a subset of the topics in the dataset — for example, if the pre-training corpus
contained diverse news articles, one plausible downstream task is to classify the content of a given
document as containing politics or sports. Definition 1 formalizes this: a topic classification task
T = (Tclf , w∗ ) is defined on a subset of the topics Tclf and a r-length ground-truth labelling vector
w∗ ∈ Whead , where w∗ only has non-zero values in positions corresponding to Tclf . We describe two
possible settings under which we can show utility-preserving unlearning. For the sake of exposition,
we will assume for now τ = 0 in downstream head tuning; the extension to inexact head tuning
(τ > 0), which is a more realistic regime, will be deferred to the appendix.

5.1   NAIVE S ETTING

In the first setting, the learning algorithm Ahead, naive returns the pre-trained feature extractor A and
the head w separately. So, we must ensure that the forget set Sf ⊆ S cannot be recovered from either
A or w. As such, we must necessarily perform unlearning on A as described in Algorithm 1, which
means that unlearning the fine-tuned model is exactly as difficult as unlearning the base model.
Theorem 3 (Unlearning when releasing A and w). For a downstream task T with loss func-
tion ℓT , consider the unlearning algorithm Uhead, naive that first runs Algorithm 1 to compute
Ã = Ubase (Sf , Abase (S), T (S)), where (Abase , Ubase ) performs utility-preserving unlearning (Theo-
rem 2). Then, it fits a head w = arg minw∈Whead ℓT (w; Ã) and returns Ã and w. We assert that
(Ahead, naive , Uhead, naive ) performs utility-preserving unlearning (Definition 4).


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Unlearning algorithm for task T (Uhead )
  Input: Document deletion requests Sf ⊆ S, statistics T (S) which include AS , {CiS }ni=1 , QS , P ,
  diag(pS ), wS = arg minw∈Whead ℓT (w; AS )
  Ā, R̄ = Run Algorithm 1 (Ubase ) up to the Gaussian mechanism
                 −1
  w̄ = wS − Hw               S                       2      S
                  S ∇w ℓT (w ; Ā) where Hw S = ∇w ℓT (w ; Ā)
             S †
  return (A ) Āw̄ + ξ, in accordance with the Gaussian mechanism


Given the guarantee on Ã from Theorem 2, we show that this result extends to w by the well-
known fact: for ϵ, δ > 0, post-processing indistinguishable quantities (Definition 3) preserves
(ϵ, δ)-indistinguishability (Dwork et al., 2014). The full proof of utility preservation can be found
in Appendix C, which essentially boils down to a Lipschitz condition. However, there are some
downsides to this algorithm. First, it requires retraining the head w for each unlearning request, but
we want to perform unlearning without access to Dclf . Second, repeatedly noising the base model
via the Gaussian mechanism will erode its utility. We address these issues in the realistic setting.

5.2   R EALISTIC S ETTING

There is little reason to release A and w separately after fine-tuning the model, because it is unclear
why one would want to use A without w or vice versa. One can obtain A directly after pre-training
instead of relying on a fine-tuned model, and there is little use for w alone, because it is highly
sensitive to the specific topics extracted by A and their ordering. As such, we argue for releasing
the fine-tuned model as a single matrix3 B = Aw, where B ∈ Rn×1 .
Theorem 4 (Utility-Preserving Unlearning on the Downstream Task). Suppose that the downstream
task T only depends on a subset of topics Tclf ⊆ [r]; that is, w⋆ = arg minv∈Wbase ℓT (v; A⋆ ) has
non-zero entries only in the index set Tclf . Denote q := mink∈Tclf PrD [z = k], and let Ahead be
the head tuning algorithm (Definition 2) and Uhead be Algorithm 2. Then, (Ahead , Uhead ) performs
utility-preserving unlearning with deletion capacity
                                      Ahead ,Uhead            mq
                                     Tϵ,δ          (m) ≥ c′ · √
                                                             r nr
where c′ is a constant dependent on ϵ, δ, D, and T .

The full proof is in Appendix C, including the worst case of Tclf = [r]. When the task relies heavily
on every single topic (i.e., q = 1/ar), the above guarantee is equivalent to the one in the pre-training
phase. However, in most realistic settings, the downstream task will only depend on a subset of
the latent topics in the corpus. In this case, q > 1/ar, and we can unlearn more points without
degrading the utility of the model. Intuitively this makes sense too; the more reliance T has on a
rare topic, the less adversarial deletion it can tolerate.

                                                                                3
Proof sketch. We again assume that we are deleting mU ≤ 0.001mϵ            0 (γp)
                                                                       a2 r 2     points. For any mod-
ification made to A, there is an equivalent modification that can be made to w instead such that
B = Aw is preserved, so we do not need to update A. We look for v ∈ Whead such that
AS v = AF wF , where wF is the head learned on AF . It can be shown that ĀS has a unique
                                                              †
pseudoinverse since it is full rank; naturally, we set v = AS AF wF , thereby ensuring privacy even
if one recovers a part of A from B = Aw. We furthermore define v̄ that is fit to the unlearned
                                                    †
model before the Gaussian mechanism, v̄ = AS Āw̄. We now need to show v and v̄ satisfy both
the indistinguishability and utility preservation conditions in Definition 4.
Indistinguishability. Let w̄⋆ = arg minv∈Whead ℓT (v; Ā) denote the result of head tuning Ā, and let
w̄ be the result of taking a Newton step on w (see Algorithm 2). Then by triangle inequality,

       ∥Āw̄ − AF wF ∥2 ≤ ∥Āw̄ − Āw̄⋆ ∥2 + ∥Āw̄⋆ − AF w̄⋆ ∥2 + ∥AF w̄⋆ − AF wF ∥2
  3
    One can generalize this to the case where the downstream task is a C-way classification, in which case
B ∈ Rn×C .


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Informally, the first term is controlled by the error in the Newton step approximation, and the third
term is bounded by the error to the retrained wF . The remaining term can be rewritten as ∥(Ā −
AF )(w̄⋆ − w⋆ ) + (Ā − AF )w⋆ ∥, where the first term can be bounded using the same technique
use to prove Lemmas 4 and 5. The second term can be bounded by noting that w⋆ is sparse, which
yields the below lemma that plays a crucial role in establishing the improved deletion capacity.
Lemma 6 (Modification of Lemma 4 for downstream task). For ϵ, δ > 0,
                                           1                      1 armU
                         ∥Ā − AF ∥∞ ≤ · ∥C̄ − C F ∥∞ = c · ·
                                           q                       q mϵ0 γp

As in the pre-training case, we can now set the noise scale in the Gaussian mechanism and complete
the proof. In the worst case, when the downstream task depends on every topic, then q = 1/ar, and
we recover Lemma 4; however, this is unlikely to happen in practice.
Utility Preservation. We compare the value of v after the Gaussian mechanism ṽ = v̄ + νv̄ to what
it would be for the ground-truth model v ⋆ = (AS )† A⋆ w⋆ . We again rely the sparsity of w⋆ and
bound E[∥v̄ − v ⋆ ∥∞ ] in Lemma 31.

6   R ELATED W ORKS
Provable unlearning. One ideally wants the unlearned model to behave identically to one that
was retrained from scratch with the forget set removed from the training data (Cao & Yang, 2015;
Bourtoule et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2021). This is difficult to achieve in many settings, so there are
several notions of approximate unlearning (Ginart et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2020; Neel et al., 2021)
reminiscent of differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2014). Most relevant to our work is the notion
of (ϵ, δ)-unlearning introduced in Sekhari et al. (2021), which we adapt to construct Definition 4.
Our work focuses on deriving unlearning guarantees in the pre-training and fine-tuning pipeline.
Golatkar et al. (2020) is closest to our work. They show considerably weaker guarantees on un-
learning information with respect to probes fit to the weights. In contrast, our work is focused on
realistic topic classification tasks and demonstrates strong guarantees (Definition 4). Recent works
have extended notions of certified unlearning to nonconvex settings. Zhang et al. (2024a); Mu &
Klabjan (2024); Chien et al. (2024) provide unlearning algorithms without deletion capacity guar-
antees. Qiao et al. (2024) also proposes an unlearning method for non-convex settings but analyzes
its deletion capacity in a convex setting. Our work extends beyond the convex setting to provide
provable unlearning methods and corresponding deletion capacity analysis for non-convex models.

Theoretical analysis of pre-training and fine-tuning. Our downstream task definition (Sec-
tion 2.2) is inspired by works on transfer learning in language models (Saunshi et al., 2021; Wei
et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023; Kumar et al., 2022), contrastive learning (Lee et al., 2021; HaoChen &
Ma, 2023), and meta-learning (Chua et al., 2021; Collins et al., 2022; Yüksel et al., 2024).

7   C ONCLUSION
This work uses topic models to develop the first provable guarantees on unlearning in the modern-
day pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm. We propose two unlearning algorithms that can effec-
tively and efficiently unlearn from both the pre-trained model (Algorithm 1 and Theorem 2) and
the fine-tuned model (Algorithm 2 and Theorem 4). Notably, we find that it is easier, in terms of
the deletion capacity (Definition 4), to unlearn pre-training data from the fine-tuned model, and we
can do so without modifying the pre-trained base model. Our findings suggest that task-specific un-
learning is easier than full model unlearning, providing a promising path forward to design efficient
algorithms for large-scale models.
The most notable limitation of our work is that our usage of topic models, which permit a tractable
analysis but cannot capture interesting features of modern-day language models (e.g., their autore-
gressive nature). Moreover, with the growing popularity of foundation models, there is scholarly
discussion around meaningful definitions of unlearning and how they can be measured (Thudi et al.,
2022; Lee et al., 2024). Our work focuses on traditional notions of unlearning centered on differen-
tial privacy (see Definition 4), but we hope to extend these definitions to capture additional features
of generative models that are salient to their real-world uses.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, Yoni Halpern, David Mimno, Ankur Moitra, David Sontag, Yichen Wu,
  and Michael Zhu. A practical algorithm for topic modeling with provable guarantees, 2012a.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1212.4777.
Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, and Ankur Moitra. Learning topic models - going beyond svd, 2012b.
Abeba Birhane and Vinay Uday Prabhu. Large image datasets: A pyrrhic win for computer vision?
  In 2021 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 1536–1546.
  IEEE, 2021.
Abeba Birhane, Vinay Uday Prabhu, and Emmanuel Kahembwe. Multimodal datasets: misogyny,
  pornography, and malignant stereotypes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01963, 2021.
David M. Blei and John D. Lafferty. Dynamic topic models. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’06, pp. 113–120, New York, NY, USA, 2006. Asso-
  ciation for Computing Machinery. ISBN 1595933832. doi: 10.1145/1143844.1143859. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/1143844.1143859.
David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine
  Learning research, 3(Jan):993–1022, 2003.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von
  Arx, Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolf-
  sson, Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri Chatterji, Annie Chen, Kathleen
  Creel, Jared Quincy Davis, Dora Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Dur-
  mus, Stefano Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor
  Gale, Lauren Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori
  Hashimoto, Peter Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang,
  Thomas Icard, Saahil Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keel-
  ing, Fereshte Khani, Omar Khattab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Ku-
  ditipudi, Ananya Kumar, Faisal Ladhak, Mina Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent,
  Xiang Lisa Li, Xuechen Li, Tengyu Ma, Ali Malik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir Mirchandani,
  Eric Mitchell, Zanele Munyikwa, Suraj Nair, Avanika Narayan, Deepak Narayanan, Ben New-
  man, Allen Nie, Juan Carlos Niebles, Hamed Nilforoshan, Julian Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel
  Orr, Isabel Papadimitriou, Joon Sung Park, Chris Piech, Eva Portelance, Christopher Potts, Aditi
  Raghunathan, Rob Reich, Hongyu Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf Roohani, Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan,
  Christopher Ré, Dorsa Sadigh, Shiori Sagawa, Keshav Santhanam, Andy Shih, Krishnan Srini-
  vasan, Alex Tamkin, Rohan Taori, Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr, Rose E. Wang, William
  Wang, Bohan Wu, Jiajun Wu, Yuhuai Wu, Sang Michael Xie, Michihiro Yasunaga, Jiaxuan You,
  Matei Zaharia, Michael Zhang, Tianyi Zhang, Xikun Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Lucia Zheng, Kait-
  lyn Zhou, and Percy Liang. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07258.
Lucas Bourtoule, Varun Chandrasekaran, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Hengrui Jia, Adelin
  Travers, Baiwu Zhang, David Lie, and Nicolas Papernot. Machine unlearning. In 2021 IEEE
  Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 141–159. IEEE, 2021.
Jordan Boyd-Graber, Yuening Hu, David Mimno, et al. Applications of topic models. Foundations
  and Trends® in Information Retrieval, 11(2-3):143–296, 2017.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yinzhi Cao and Junfeng Yang. Towards making systems forget with machine unlearning. In 2015
  IEEE symposium on security and privacy, pp. 463–480. IEEE, 2015.

Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine
  Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data
  from large language models. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pp.
  2633–2650, 2021.

Nicolas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramer, Borja
  Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models. In 32nd
  USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23), pp. 5253–5270, 2023.

Eli Chien, Haoyu Wang, Ziang Chen, and Pan Li. Langevin unlearning: A new perspective of noisy
  gradient descent for machine unlearning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.
  10371.

Rochelle Choenni, Ekaterina Shutova, and Robert van Rooij. Stepmothers are mean and aca-
  demics are pretentious: What do pretrained language models learn about you? In Marie-
  Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the
  2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1477–1491, Online
  and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.111. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  emnlp-main.111.

Kurtland Chua, Qi Lei, and Jason D Lee. How fine-tuning allows for effective meta-learning. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8871–8884, 2021.

Rob Churchill and Lisa Singh. The evolution of topic modeling. ACM Comput. Surv., 2022.

Liam Collins, Aryan Mokhtari, Sewoong Oh, and Sanjay Shakkottai. Maml and anil provably learn
  representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4238–4310. PMLR, 2022.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
  and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  N19-1423.

Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations
  and Trends® in Theoretical Computer Science, 9(3–4):211–407, 2014.

Ronen Eldan and Mark Russinovich. Who’s harry potter? approximate unlearning in llms, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02238.

DOE 1 v. GitHub, Inc. 4:22-cv-06823, N.D. Cal. 2022.

Tremblay v. OpenAI, Inc.,. 23-cv-03416-AMO, (N.D. Cal.), 2023.

European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the Euro-
  pean Parliament and of the Council. URL https://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/
  679/oj.

Jack Foster, Stefan Schoepf, and Alexandra Brintrup. Fast machine unlearning without retraining
  through selective synaptic dampening. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
  ligence, volume 38, pp. 12043–12051, 2024.

Rohit Gandikota, Joanna Materzynska, Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, and David Bau. Erasing concepts
  from diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 2426–2436, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason
  Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy. The pile:
  An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language modeling, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2101.00027.

Antonio Ginart, Melody Guan, Gregory Valiant, and James Y Zou. Making ai forget you: Data dele-
  tion in machine learning. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2019/file/cb79f8fa58b91d3af6c9c991f63962d3-Paper.pdf.

Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Eternal sunshine of the spotless net:
  Selective forgetting in deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9304–9312, 2020.

Chuan Guo, Tom Goldstein, Awni Hannun, and Laurens Van Der Maaten. Certified data removal
  from machine learning models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3832–
  3842. PMLR, 2020.

Varun Gupta, Christopher Jung, Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi, and Chris Waites.
  Adaptive machine unlearning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:16319–
  16330, 2021.

Jeff Z. HaoChen and Tengyu Ma. A theoretical study of inductive biases in contrastive learning.
   In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
   //openreview.net/forum?id=AuEgNlEAmed.

Jamie Hayes, Ilia Shumailov, Eleni Triantafillou, Amr Khalifa, and Nicolas Papernot. Inex-
  act unlearning needs more careful evaluations to avoid a false sense of privacy, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.01218.

Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.

Luxi He, Yangsibo Huang, Weijia Shi, Tinghao Xie, Haotian Liu, Yue Wang, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Chiyuan Zhang, Danqi Chen, and Peter Henderson. Fantastic copyrighted beasts and how (not)
  to generate them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14526, 2024.

Peter Henderson, Xuechen Li, Dan Jurafsky, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Mark A Lemley, and Percy
  Liang. Foundation models and fair use. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(400):1–79,
  2023.

Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.

Thomas Hofmann et al. Probabilistic latent semantic analysis. In UAI, volume 99, pp. 289–296,
  1999.

Zachary Izzo, Mary Anne Smart, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and James Zou. Approximate data deletion
  from machine learning models, 2021.

Joel Jang, Dongkeun Yoon, Sohee Yang, Sungmin Cha, Moontae Lee, Lajanugen Logeswaran, and
  Minjoon Seo. Knowledge unlearning for mitigating privacy risks in language models, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=zAxuIJLb38.

Ananya Kumar, Aditi Raghunathan, Robbie Matthew Jones, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Fine-
  tuning can distort pretrained features and underperform out-of-distribution. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=UYneFzXSJWh.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Meghdad Kurmanji, Peter Triantafillou, Jamie Hayes, and Eleni Triantafillou. Towards unbounded
 machine unlearning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=OveBaTtUAT.
Jason D Lee, Qi Lei, Nikunj Saunshi, and Jiacheng Zhuo. Predicting what you already know helps:
  Provable self-supervised learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:309–
  323, 2021.
Katherine Lee, A. Cooper, Christopher Choquette-Choo, Ken Liu, Matthew Jagielski, Niloofar
  Mireshghallah, Lama Ahmed, James Grimmelmann, David Bau, Christopher De Sa, Fernando
  Delgado, Vitaly Shmatikov, Katja Filippova, Seth Neel, Miranda Bogen, Amy Cyphert, Mark
  Lemley, and Nicolas Papernot. Extended abstract: Machine unlearning doesn’t do what you
  think, 04 2024.
Wei Li and Andrew McCallum. Pachinko allocation: Dag-structured mixture models of topic corre-
 lations. In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning, pp. 577–584,
 2006.
Jiaqi Liu, Jian Lou, Zhan Qin, and Kui Ren. Certified minimax unlearning with generalization rates
   and deletion capacity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-
  train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language pro-
  cessing, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.13586.
Shayne Longpre, Robert Mahari, Anthony Chen, Naana Obeng-Marnu, Damien Sileo, William
  Brannon, Niklas Muennighoff, Nathan Khazam, Jad Kabbara, Kartik Perisetla, et al. A large-
  scale audit of dataset licensing and attribution in ai. Nature Machine Intelligence, 6(8):975–987,
  2024.
Ananth Mahadevan and Michael Mathioudakis. Cost-effective retraining of machine learning mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04216, 2023.
Pratyush Maini, Zhili Feng, Avi Schwarzschild, Zachary C. Lipton, and J. Zico Kolter. Tofu: A task
  of fictitious unlearning for llms, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.06121.
Sadhika Malladi, Tianyu Gao, Eshaan Nichani, Alex Damian, Jason D. Lee, Danqi Chen, and San-
  jeev Arora. Fine-tuning language models with just forward passes. In Thirty-seventh Confer-
  ence on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023a. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=Vota6rFhBQ.
Sadhika Malladi, Alexander Wettig, Dingli Yu, Danqi Chen, and Sanjeev Arora. A kernel-based
  view of language model fine-tuning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  23610–23641. PMLR, 2023b.
Nick McKenna, Tianyi Li, Liang Cheng, Mohammad Javad Hosseini, Mark Johnson, and Mark
  Steedman. Sources of hallucination by large language models on inference tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.14552, 2023.
Siqiao Mu and Diego Klabjan. Rewind-to-delete: Certified machine unlearning for nonconvex func-
  tions, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.09778.
Tarek Naous, Michael Ryan, Alan Ritter, and Wei Xu. Having beer after prayer? measuring
  cultural bias in large language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 16366–16393, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.862. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.862.
Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, and Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi. Descent-to-delete: Gradient-based methods
  for machine unlearning. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 931–962. PMLR, 2021.
Quoc Phong Nguyen, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Patrick Jaillet. Variational bayesian unlearning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:16025–16036, 2020.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy V. Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khali-
 dov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel HAZIZA, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mido Assran,
 Nicolas Ballas, Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra,
 Michael Rabbat, Vasu Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Herve Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick
 Labatut, Armand Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. DINOv2: Learning robust visual features with-
 out supervision. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=a68SUt6zFt.

Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Alessandro Cappelli,
  Hamza Alobeidli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The refinedweb
  dataset for falcon llm: outperforming curated corpora with web data, and web data only. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.01116, 2023.

Xinbao Qiao, Meng Zhang, Ming Tang, and Ermin Wei. Efficient and generalizable certified un-
  learning: A hessian-free recollection approach, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2404.01712.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Ben Recht, Christopher Re, Joel Tropp, and Victor Bittorf. Factoring nonnegative matrices with
  linear programs. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.

Ryan Rifkin and Aldebaro Klautau. In defense of one-vs-all classification. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 5:101–141, 2004.

Nikunj Saunshi, Sadhika Malladi, and Sanjeev Arora. A mathematical exploration of why language
  models help solve downstream tasks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=vVjIW3sEc1s.

Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:25278–25294, 2022.

Ayush Sekhari, Jayadev Acharya, Gautam Kamath, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Remember what
  you want to forget: Algorithms for machine unlearning, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2103.03279.

Weijia Shi, Jaechan Lee, Yangsibo Huang, Sadhika Malladi, Jieyu Zhao, Ari Holtzman, Daogao
 Liu, Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A. Smith, and Chiyuan Zhang. Muse: Machine unlearning six-way
 evaluation for language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.06460.

Luca Soldaini, Rodney Kinney, Akshita Bhagia, Dustin Schwenk, David Atkinson, Russell Authur,
  Ben Bogin, Khyathi Chandu, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar, Valentin Hofmann, Ananya Jha,
  Sachin Kumar, Li Lucy, Xinxi Lyu, Nathan Lambert, Ian Magnusson, Jacob Morrison, Niklas
  Muennighoff, Aakanksha Naik, Crystal Nam, Matthew Peters, Abhilasha Ravichander, Kyle
  Richardson, Zejiang Shen, Emma Strubell, Nishant Subramani, Oyvind Tafjord, Evan Walsh,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah Smith, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Iz Beltagy, Dirk Groeneveld, Jesse Dodge,
  and Kyle Lo. Dolma: an open corpus of three trillion tokens for language model pretraining re-
  search. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 15725–15788, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.840. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  acl-long.840.

Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Diffusion
  art or digital forgery? investigating data replication in diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6048–6058, 2023.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Anvith Thudi, Hengrui Jia, Ilia Shumailov, and Nicolas Papernot. On the necessity of auditable
  algorithmic definitions for machine unlearning. In 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
  Security 22), pp. 4007–4022, Boston, MA, August 2022. USENIX Association. ISBN 978-1-
  939133-31-1. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity22/
  presentation/thudi.
Enayat Ullah, Tung Mai, Anup Rao, Ryan A Rossi, and Raman Arora. Machine unlearning via
  algorithmic stability. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4126–4142. PMLR, 2021.
Colin Wei, Sang Michael Xie, and Tengyu Ma. Why do pretrained language models help in down-
  stream tasks? an analysis of head and prompt tuning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:16158–16170, 2021.
Chenwei Wu, Holden Lee, and Rong Ge. Connecting pre-trained language model and downstream
  task via properties of representation. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=YLOJ4aKAka.
Oğuz Kaan Yüksel, Etienne Boursier, and Nicolas Flammarion. First-order ANIL provably learns
  representations despite overparametrisation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=if2vRbS8Ew.
Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid loss for language
  image pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 11975–11986, 2023.
Binchi Zhang, Yushun Dong, Tianhao Wang, and Jundong Li. Towards certified unlearning for deep
  neural networks, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00920.
Ruiqi Zhang, Licong Lin, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. Negative preference optimization: From catas-
  trophic collapse to effective unlearning. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024b. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=MXLBXjQkmb.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P RECISE D ESCRIPTION OF ABASE
A.1     C OMPLETE D ESCRIPTION

Algorithm 3 High level learning algorithm (A)
  Input: document corpus S = {di }m   i=1 , anchor word tolerance ϵ0
  Output: matrices A,R
  Q = word co-occurrences
  Q̄ = row-normalized Q
  P = RecoverAnchors({Q̄1 , . . . , Q̄n })
  A, R = RecoverTopics(Q, S)
  return A, R


Algorithm 4 RecoverAnchors, same as Arora et al. (2012a)
  Input: Row-normalized co-ocurrence matrix Q̄ and ϵ0 tolerance parameter
  Output: r points of this perturbed simplex close to the vertices of the actual simplex
  Project the rows to a randomly chosen 4 log n/ϵ20 dimensional subspace
  S ← {Q̄i } where Q̄i is the furthest point from the origin
  for i in 1, . . . , r − 1 do
    Let Q̄j be the row of Q with largest distance to span(S)
    S ← S ∪ {Q̄j }
  end forS = {Q̄s1 , . . . , Q̄sr }
  for i in 1, . . . , r do
    Let Q̄j be the point that has largest distance to span(S \ {Q̄si })
    Remove Q̄si from S and insert Q̄j into S
  end for
  return S


Algorithm 5 Recover Topics, from Arora et al. (2012a)
  Input: Co-ocurrence matrix Q, anchor words P = {s1 , . . . , sk }, tolerance parameter ϵ0
  Output: Matrices A, R
  Q̄ = row normalized Q
  Store the normalization constants p = Q1
  for i in 1, . . . , n do
     Solve Ci = arg min ∥Q̄i − v ⊤ Q̄P ∥2
                   v∈∆r
      up to ϵ0 accuracy
    end for
    A′ = diag(p)C
    A = column-sum-one normalized A′
    R = A† QA†⊤ where A† is the pseudoinverse of A
    return A, R


More formally, the co-occurrence matrix is constructed as follows. For each document, let Hd ∈ Rn
be the frequency vector of each word in the document; the sum of its entries should be L. Then, for
a document d, consider the matrix
                                       Gd := H̃d H̃d⊤ − Ĥd
where
                                                      Hd
                                        H̃d := p
                                                 L(L − 1)
                                               diag(Hd )
                                        Ĥd :=
                                               L(L − 1)


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In particular, the denominator term L(L − 1) is precisely the number of co-occurences in each
document, by simple combinatorics, and it can be seen that the sum of the entries of Gd is always
1. Our co-ocurrence matrix Q is defined to be
                                                  m
                                              1 X
                                        Q :=        Gd
                                              m i=1
so that Q also has entries that sum to 1. By linearity of expectation, we have
                                E[Q] = E[Gd ] = A⋆ E[Xd Xd⊤ ]A⋆⊤
which implies that as the number of documents increases, Q concentrates around AE[XX ⊤ ]A⊤ =
E[M M ⊤ ]. Therefore, we should expect A† QA†⊤ to concentrate around E[XX ⊤ ] = R⋆ .

A.2   S KETCH : P OPULATION A NALYSIS

To understand this algorithm, consider the setting where we have infinitely many documents. Specif-
ically, consider two words w1 , w2 in a document and their respective topics z1 , z2 . Then, this
population co-occurrence matrix Q will have elements Qi,j = Pr[w1 = i, w2 = j], and the row-
normalized co-occurrence matrix Q̄ will have entries Q̄i,j = Pr[w2 = j|w1 = i]. Moreover, we
have that Ai,k = Pr[w1 = i|z1 = k] = Pr[w2 = i|z2 = k].
Consider the set of anchor words P = {s1 , . . . , sr } ⊆ [n], where sk is the anchor word for topic k.
Then, observe that for an anchor word row sk of Q̄, it holds that
                                      X
    Q̄sk ,j = Pr[w2 = j|w1 = sk ] =      Pr[z1 = k ′ |w1 = sk ] Pr[w2 = j|w1 = sk , z1 = k ′ ]
                                         k′
                                     = Pr[w2 = j|w1 = sk , z1 = k]
                                     = Pr[w2 = j|z1 = k]
where the second line follows from only Pr[z1 = k|w1 = sk ] = 1 in the summation, and the last
line follows from w2 , w1 are conditionally independent given z1 . Furthermore, for non-anchor word
rows i of Q̄, it holds that
                                   X
                           Q̄i,j =   Pr[z1 = k|w1 = i] Pr[w2 = j|z1 = k]
                                  k
where again we use that w2 , w1 are conditionally independent z1 . For a word i, let Ci ∈ Rr be
the vector such that Ci,k := Pr[z1 = k|w1 = i]. Then, it holds that Q̄i = c⊤  i Q̄S , where Q̄S is
the submatrix of Q̄ constrained to the anchor word rows. In other words, for every word i, Q̄i is a
convex combination of rows of Q̄S .
In the algorithm, one can see that A′i,k = Ci,k pi . Normalizing this along each column, we obtain
                   Ci,k pi             Pr[z1 = k|w1 = i] Pr[w1 = i]
       Ai,k = P                     =P                   ′           ′
                                                                        = Pr[w1 = i|z1 = k]
                   i ′ C i ′ ,k pi′
                                      i′ Pr[z1 = k|w1 = i ] Pr[w1 = i ]

Hence, in the infinite document limit, this algorithm recovers the ground truth A⋆ , R⋆ .

B     F ROM PROPERTIES OF THE LEARNING ALGORITHM TO THE PROOF OF
      T HEOREM 2
We first give the formal statement of Theorem 2.
Theorem 5 (Formal statement of Theorem 2). Let Abase be the learning algorithm described in the
prior sections and Ubase be the unlearning algorithm in Algorithm 1. Then, (Abase , Ubase ) performs
utility-preserving unlearning with deletion capacity
                                                    (                        )
                         Abase ,Ubase                     mϵ          0.001m
                       Tϵ,δ           (m) ≥ c · min                 ,
                                                                         r2
                                                        p
                                                      r2 rn log 1/δ
where m is the number of training documents, r is the number of topics, and c is a constant depen-
dent on D. The loss function h used in the utility-preserving definition is the maximum entrywise
error from the ground truth topic model A⋆ .


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1   P RELIMINARIES

When the norm is not specified, we assume that it is the Euclidean norm ∥ · ∥2 . We now start off
with a technical assumption on the precision of the learning algorithm.
                            √
Assumption 2. ϵ0 ≤ O(1/ nr).
Assumption 3. Every word appears with probability ϵ0 /4ar without loss of generality; see discus-
sion in Arora et al. (2012b). Essentially, less probable words can be combined in a sense to form a
single category of ”rare” words.
We recall the definitions from Arora et al. (2012a).
Definition 6 (β-robust simplex). A simplex P is β-robust if for every vertex v of P , the ℓ2 distance
between v and the convex hull of the rest of the vertices as at least β.
Definition 7. Let {ai }ni=1 be a set of points whose convex hull is a simplex with vertices {vi }ri=1 .
We say a set of r points is ϵ-close the vertex set {vi }ri=1 if each of the r points is ϵ-close in ℓ2
distance to a different vertex in this vertex set.
The following result will be used throughout our proof.
Proposition 1 (Arora et al. (2012b)). Q̄⋆P in population is γp-robust.
We now list the high probability events we condition on throughout our proof. These follow from
previous results in Arora et al. (2012a); they concern the properties of the output of the learning
algorithm.
Proposition 2. With high probability, in our regime of m, the following hold:
       • The correct anchor words are selected.
       • Each word appears at least O mϵ

                                       4ar times.
                                          0


                                                                        √
       • The error in the empirical matrix Q̂ is entrywise at most Õ(1/ m) from the population
         Q⋆ .
We also utilize the following two key lemmas from Arora et al. (2012a) that we touched upon in the
main paper.
Lemma 7 (Approximation Guarantee on Anchor Words). Suppose each row of Q̄ is at most δ
distance away from the ground truth γp-robust simplex Q̄⋆ in ℓ2 norm. If 20rδ/(γp)2 < γp, then
the set of anchor words found by the algorithm is O(δ/γp)-close to the ground truth anchor words.
Lemma 8. When 20rδ/(γp)2 < γp, it holds for every word i that Ci has entrywise error
O(δ/(γp)2 ) from Ci⋆ .

B.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

The following are lemmas bounding the relation between Q̄Si , Q̄F     ⋆
                                                                i , Q̄i .
                                                                                   q
                                                                                       4ar
Lemma 9. After training, the error of each row of Q̄S is at most δ2 := O               mϵ0       . That is,
∥Q̄Si − Q̄⋆i ∥ ≤ δ2 for all words i.
Importantly, note that
                                            20rδ2 /(γp)2 < γp
This implies that the anchor words of Q̄Si are O(δ2 /(γp)) close to the anchor words of Q̄⋆i .

Consequently, it holds that
                                       ∥C S − C ⋆ ∥∞ ≤ O(δ2 /(γp)2 )

Proof. The first part follows directly from the fact that if the number of documents m = Ω̃(1/ϵ2Q ),
then ∥Q̄Si − Q̄⋆i ∥ ≤ δ2 for each row i. To show that
                                            20rδ2 /(γp)2 < γp


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we note that by the sample complexity guarantee,
                                                   ar3

                                       mϵ0 ≥ Õ
                                                  (γp)6
which implies that
                                                    (γp)3

                                            δ2 ≤ Õ
                                                      r
as desired.
                                                       3
Lemma 10. When we delete mU ≤ 0.001mϵ  0 (γp)
                                   a2 r 2     , it holds that
                                                        mU       4armU
                                ∥Q̄F     S
                                   i − Q̄i ∥ ≤                 =
                                                      mϵ0 /4ar    mϵ0
In particular, this is smaller than
                              0.001mϵ0 (γp)3      1       0.004(γp)3
                                    2  2
                                             ·          =
                                   a r         mϵ0 /4ar       ar

Proof. For a word i, consider the change in Q̄i after deletion requests. Let F be the initial sum of
the the ith row of Q. Each coordinate j ∈ [n] will change as follows:
                                        fj − t j   fj   mU fj − F tj
                                δj =             −    =
                                        F − mU     F    F (F − mU )
where fj is the initial number of coocurrences of words i, j and tj is the number of documents
removed that have this cooccurrence. Moreover, F is the number of initial occurrences of word i, and
T is the numberP of deletions of the word i. From the previous lemma, it holds that F ≥ mϵ0 /4ar,
                  n
and that mU ≥ j=1 tj Hence, it follows that the squared Euclidean norm of the change is:
          n                        n                                                     2
                                                             2F 2 m2U

         X                1       X                                              mU
             δj2 = 2                 (m  f
                                        U j  − F tj )2
                                                       ≤                ≤  2
         j=1
                   F (F − T )2 j=1                       F 2 (F − mU )2       F − mU
                                                       3
Hence, for the regime where mU ≤ 0.001mϵ  0 (γp)
                                      a2 r 2     , we have
                                             √         mU     mU   4armU
                           ∥Q̄Si − Q̄F
                                     i ∥≤        2          ≲    ≲
                                                     F − mU   F     mϵ0
Of particular notice is that when mU is taken as large as possible, this is at most
                               0.001mϵ0 (γp)3 /a2 r2
                                                     = 0.004(γp)3 /ar
                                    mϵ0 /4ar



We now combine the above two with triangle inequality.
Lemma 11. Hence, it holds that
                                                                   r
                                  4armU        4armU                     4ar
                   ∥Q̄F     ⋆
                      i − Q̄i ∥ ≤       + δ2 =       +O                            =: δ2′
                                   mϵ0          mϵ0                      mϵ0
Importantly, note that
                                           20rδ2′ /(γp)2 < γp
                                                 ′
This implies that the anchor words of Q̄F                                                ⋆
                                        i are O(δ2 /(γp)) close to the anchor words of Q̄i .

Consequently, it holds that
                                      ∥C F − C ⋆ ∥∞ ≤ O(δ2′ /(γp)2 )


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. The first part follows from triangle inequality, and the second part follows from lemma B.1
from Arora et al. (2012a).

We now bound what happens to ∥C F − C S ∥∞ . First, we have that the perturbed simplex Q̄SP is
γp/2-robust.
Lemma 12. The perturbed simplex Q̄SP is γp/2-robust.
                                                                     √
Proof. This is because of Lemma A.1 in Arora et al. (2012a). Since 10 rδ2 < γp, the result of that
lemma applies.

Hence, we will apply Lemma B.1 from Arora et al. (2012a) on C S to say something about ∥C F −
C S ∥∞ .
                                                             3
Lemma 13. Recall that when we delete mU ≤ 0.001mϵ  0 (γp)
                                               a2 r 2     , it holds that
                                                   mU       4armU
                                ∥Q̄F     S
                                   i − Q̄i ∥ ≤            =
                                                 mϵ0 /4ar    mϵ0
Importantly, note that

                                     4armU
                                 20r         /(γp/2)2 < γp/2
                                      mϵ0
                                                 4armU /mϵ0
This implies that the anchor words of Q̄F i are     γp/2    close to the anchor words of Q̄Si . By
lemma B.1 from Arora et al. (2012a), it holds that

                                                    4armU
                            ∥C F − C S ∥∞ ≤ O              /(γp/2)2
                                                     mϵ0
Observe that this is smaller than O((γp)/ar).

We now deal with the Hessian step that we had took to prevent retraining the Ci ’s. In particular, we
will denote C̄ to be our estimated new C.
First, a lemma to say that our Hessian step is full rank and has a lower bound on its minimum
singular value.
                                                  3
Lemma 14. When we delete mU ≤ 0.001mϵ  0 (γp)
                                   a2 r 2     samples, it holds that the minimum eigenvalue of
  F F
Q̄P Q̄P is at least γp/2.

Proof. Follows from Lemma A.3 in Arora et al. (2012a).
                                                  3
Lemma 15. When we delete mU ≤ 0.001mϵ  0 (γp)
                                   a2 r 2      samples, it holds for all i,

                            F      F         4        4armU
                          ∥Ci − C̄i ∥ ≤          δ2 +
                                            γp          mϵ0

Proof. For the case of d(·, ·) being the squared loss, we will denote the following:
                                         ⊤     F⊤ 2     F F ⊤ −1 F F ⊤
                Ci,uncon := arg min ∥Q̄F
                                       P C − Q̄i ∥ = (Q̄P Q̄P ) Q̄P Q̄i
                                 C
                C̄iF := proj∆r (Ci,uncon )
                                  F⊤         ⊤ 2
                CiF := arg min ∥Q̄P  C − Q̄F
                                           i ∥
                         C∈∆r

In particular, the Newton step plus projection outputs Ci,proj . First, observe that by one of the
anchor word lemmas,
            ⊤     F⊤       F⊤             F⊤       F⊤ F     F⊤                           4armU
   min ∥Q̄F
          P C − Q̄i ∥ = ∥Q̄P Ci,uncon − Q̄i ∥ ≤ ∥Q̄P Ci − Q̄i ∥ ≤ δ2 +
     C                                                                                    mϵ0


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The last inequality follows from the fact that Q̄F                             S         S
                                                 P is a perturbed version of Q̄P , and Q̄P is a perturbed
version of Q̄⋆P . Hence, we will bound
             ∥C̄iF − CiF ∥ = ∥proj∆r (Ci,uncon ) − proj∆r (CiF )∥
                            ≤ ∥Ci,uncon − CiF ∥
                               1         ⊤
                            ≤      ∥Q̄F               F
                                      P (Ci,uncon − Ci )∥
                              σmin
                               1          ⊤       ⊤ F       F⊤             F⊤
                                    ∥Q̄F    − Q̄F

                            ≤           i       P Ci ∥ + ∥Q̄P Ci,uncon − Q̄i ∥
                              σmin

                               2           4armU
                            ≤        δ2 +
                              σmin          mϵ0
                                                    ⊤
where σmin is the smallest singular value of Q̄F  i , which is guaranteed to be full rank per the
previous lemma. Due to a result in Arora et al. (2012a), this σmin ≥ (γp)/2. This gives us that the
whole quantity is at most

                                       4           4armU
                                            δ2 +
                                      γp             mϵ0


Corollary 1. We have that

                                    F     F  4       4armU
                               ∥C − C̄ ∥∞ ≤     δ2 +
                                            γp        mϵ0
since the ℓ∞ norm is upper bounded by the ℓ2 norm.
Lemma 16. The following are true.

    • ∥C F − C̄ F ∥∞ ≤ γp4
                             δ2 + 4arm
                                   mϵ0
                                       U



                                                            4
       • ∥C̄ F − C ⋆ ∥∞ ≤ ∥C̄ F − C F ∥∞ + ∥C F − C ⋆ ∥∞ ≤ γp   δ2 + 4arm
                                                                      mϵ0
                                                                          U
                                                                              + O(δ2′ /(γp)2 )

From this, we can bound the errors on the topic matrix.
Lemma 17. The following are true.

       • ∥AF − Ā∥∞ ≤ O(ar∥C F − C̄ F ∥∞ )
       • ∥Ā − A⋆ ∥∞ ≤ O(ar∥C̄ F − C ⋆ ∥∞ )
       • ∥AS − AF ∥∞ ≤ O(ar∥C F − C S ∥∞ )

Proof. Note that entries Ai,k are
                                                 Ci,k Pr[w = i]
                                        Ai,k =
                                                   Pr[z = k]
Therefore, the perturbation in A will be the perturbation in C multiplied by ar, since the denomi-
nator is lower bounded by 1/ar due to the topic imbalance constant.

Now, we give a new lemma.
Proposition 3. When mU ≥ Ω( mϵ
                             p 0
                               4ar ), we have that
                                        r
                             4armU         4ar     4armU      armU
                  δ2′ = δ2 +         =          +        ≤O
                              mϵ0         mϵ0       mϵ0        mϵ0

                                                                                 3
                                                           ≤ mU ≤ 0.001mϵ  0 (γp)
                                                 p mϵ0
Now, we analyze what happens given that Ω          4ar                 a2 r 2     .


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 18. For ϵ, δ > 0, the deletion capacity satisfies

                                    A,U                 m
                                   Tϵ,δ (m) ≥ Ω̃ 2 √
                                                     r nr

Proof. Recall that
                                                                                 (ar)2 mU

                     ∥Ā − A⋆ ∥∞ ≤ O(arδ2′ (1/γp + 1/(γp)2 )) ≤ O
                                                                                  mϵ0 γp

Moreover, we also have that
                               ∥Ā − AF ∥∞ ≤ O(ar∥C F − C̄ F ∥∞ )
                                                4arδ2′

                                           ≤O
                                                  γp
                                                (ar)2 mU

                                           ≤O
                                                 mϵ0 γp
                                      √          2

Note that A has ℓ2 sensitivity O          nr (ar)  mU
                                              mϵ0 γp    . We now apply the Gaussian mechanism to the
matrix A entrywise with noise
                                          √          2

                                     O        nr (ar)  mU
                                                  mϵ0 γp    p
                               σ=                               2 log(1.25/δ)
                                                ϵ

From this, we obtain that
       h              i
                ⋆
     E ∥Ã − A ∥∞ ≤ E max |νi,k | + E ∥Ā − A⋆ ∥∞

                               i,k
                                                                      p              !
                               √        (ar)2 mU p                                          (ar)2 mU

                                                                          log(1/δ)
                         ≤O        nr ·         · log(nr) ·                              +O
                                         mϵ0 γp                              ϵ               mϵ0 γp

Finally, this says that when

                                                      m
                                            mU ≤ Ω̃ 2 √
                                                    r nr
we have that the utility is preserved up to constant amount, say 0.01.

This proves Theorem 2. It is straightforward to continue the perturbation analysis for the topic-topic
covariance matrix R⋆ and prove similar deletion capacity rates.

C    D OWNSTREAM TASK PROOFS
Recall the algorithm for learning the downstream task head.

Algorithm 6 Learning algorithm for task T (Ahead )
  Input: document corpus S = {di }m i=1 , anchor word tolerance ϵ0
  A, R = Abase (S)
  return arg minw∈Whead ℓT (w; A)


Assumption 4. For any A, ℓT is λ-strongly convex with respect to w.

Since our topic matrix A, can only take on a bounded support (i.e. the set of matrices where each
row is on the probability simplex), it is natural to say that the set of values w⋆ (A) takes on over all
topic matrices A is bounded in a certain sense. As such, we also assume the following:


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Assumption 5. For any base model A, the vector v such that v = arg minw ℓT (w; A) satisfies
∥v∥2 ≤ B.
Assumption 6. For any A, ℓT is L-Lipschitz with respect to w and the ℓ2 norm, and is L2 -Hessian
Lipschitz with respect to w and the ℓ2 norm. In other words,
                             ∥ℓT (A, w1 ) − ℓT (A, w2 )∥2 ≤ L∥w1 − w2 ∥2
                      ∥∇w ℓT (A, w1 ) − ∇2w ℓT (A, w2 )∥2 ≤ L2 ∥w1 − w2 ∥2
                        2


Assumption 7. For any w, ∇w ℓT is L∞ -Lipschitz with respect to A and the ℓ∞ norm; that is,
                        ∥∇w ℓT (A, w) − ∇w ℓT (Ã, w)∥2 ≤ L∞ ∥A − Ã∥∞


We give a helper lemma that (ϵ, δ)-indistinguishability is immune to post processing.
Lemma 19 (Post-processing immunity). Consider two random variables θ1 , θ2 ∈ Θ that are (ϵ, δ)-
indistinguishable. Then, for any arbitrary mapping f : Θ → Θ′ , it holds that f (θ1 ), f (θ2 ) ∈ Θ′ are
(ϵ, δ)-indistinguishable.

Proof. Consider an arbitrary set T ′ ⊆ Θ′ ; let T = {r ∈ Θ : f (r) ∈ T ′ }. Then, it holds that
                              Pr[f (θ1 ) ∈ T ′ ] = Pr[θ1 ∈ T ]
                                                 ≤ eϵ Pr[θ2 ∈ T ] + δ
                                               = eϵ Pr[f (θ2 ) ∈ T ′ ] + δ
as desired.

We now give a certifiable unlearning guarantee for the most naive retraining algorithm for the down-
stream task, which we mentioned in the main text as Theorem 3.
Theorem 6 (Unlearning when releasing A and w). For a downstream task T with loss func-
tion ℓT , consider the unlearning algorithm Uhead, naive that first runs Algorithm 1 to compute
Ã = Ubase (Sf , Abase (S), T (S)), where (Abase , Ubase ) perform utility-preserving unlearning (The-
orem 2). Then, it fits a head w = arg minw∈Whead ℓT (w; Ã) and returns Ã and w. We assert that
(Ahead, naive , Uhead, naive ) performs utility-preserving unlearning (Definition 4).

Proof. Intuitively, this is a result of post processing. More precisely, consider the (ϵ, δ)-
indistinguishable base models Ã := Ubase (Sf , Abase (S), T (S)) and Ã′ := Ubase (∅, Abase (S \
Sf ), T (S \ Sf )). Then, since the head fitting is a deterministic post-processing of the original
model, this proves the (ϵ, δ)-indistinguishability between the two.
To prove the utility preservation, observe that in this setting
                                       E[∥Ã − A⋆ ∥∞ ] ≤ 0.01


We thus obtain by Lemma 20
                      E[∥w⋆ (Ã) − w⋆ (A⋆ )∥∞ ] ≤ E[∥w⋆ (Ã) − w⋆ (A⋆ )∥2 ]
                                                   L∞
                                                 ≤    E[∥Ã − A⋆ ∥∞ ]
                                                    λ
which is at most 0.01, up to constant rescaling.

The above result is nice, and it follows from the fact that the training algorithm of the downstream
task head is just a post-processing. However, a downside is that it still requires retraining of the
downstream task head. We can show something stronger: even without provable unlearning of the
base model (A and R), we can achieve provable unlearning of the downstream task head weights
when the downstream task loss is convex in the trainable weights w.
We will now consider an arbitrary task T . We first give the following notation.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 8. For a base model A, let w⋆ (A) := arg minw ℓT (w; A).
First, we give the following helper lemma that will be useful later on.
Lemma 20. Consider two base models A1 and A2 . Then, it holds that
                                                       L∞
                           ∥w⋆ (A1 ) − w⋆ (A2 )∥2 ≤        ∥A1 − A2 ∥∞
                                                        λ

Proof. Observe that
           λ∥w⋆ (A1 ) − w⋆ (A2 )∥2 ≤ ∥∇w ℓT (w⋆ (A1 ); A2 ) − ∇w ℓT (w⋆ (A2 ); A2 )∥2
                                      = ∥∇w ℓT (w⋆ (A1 ); A2 ) − ∇w ℓT (w⋆ (A1 ); A1 )∥2
                                      ≤ L∞ ∥A1 − A2 ∥∞
where the first line follows from strong convexity, the second line from the gradients being zero,
and the third line from the definition of L∞ Lipschitz constant. Dividing both sides by λ gives the
desired result.

We now define the following notations for clarity.
      • wS := w⋆ (AS )
      • wF := w⋆ (AF )
      • w̄⋆ := w⋆ (Ā)
                    −1
      • w̄ := wS − Hw           S
                      S ∇w ℓT (w ; Ā), which is the Newton step we take from w
                                                                                S
                                                                                  to approxi-
                ⋆
        mate w̄
First, we give a bound on the approximation error of the Newton step.
Lemma 21. It holds that
                                              L2 L2∞
                                ∥w̄ − w̄⋆ ∥ ≤         ∥AS − Ā∥2∞
                                               2λ3

Proof. We aim to bound the distance of the Newton step from w̄⋆ :
                                             −1
                        w̄ − w̄⋆ = wS − Hw                   S       ⋆

                                               S ∇w ℓT (Ā, w ) − w̄


where HwS = ∇2w ℓT (Ā, wS ). Then, it holds that
                       −1
                w S − Hw               S
                         S ∇w ℓT (Ā, w ) − w̄
                                               ⋆

                               −1
                 = wS − w̄⋆ − Hw               S                   ⋆

                                 S ∇w ℓT (Ā, w ) − ∇w ℓT (Ā, w̄ )
                                          Z 1
                    −1         S    ⋆                              S    ⋆
                 = HwS HwS (w − w̄ ) −         Hw̄⋆ +t(wS −w̄⋆ ) (w − w̄ )dt
                                                 0
                          Z 1
                    −1
                                HwS − Hw̄⋆ +t(wS −w̄⋆ ) dt · (wS − w̄⋆ )

                 = Hw S
                           0
The norm of this quantity is therefore bounded by
                             −1       L2
                         ∥Hw   S ∥2 ·     ∥wS − w̄⋆ ∥ · ∥wS − w̄⋆ ∥
                                       2
                             L2
                          ≤      ∥wS − w̄⋆ ∥22
                              2λ
                                                                         2
                             L2 1
                          ≤           ∥∇ℓT (Ā, wS ) − ∇ℓT (AS , wS )∥2
                              2λ λ
                                                      2
                             L2 L∞              S
                          ≤              ∥Ā − A ∥∞
                              2λ λ
Hence, we have that
                                                 L2 L2∞
                                 ∥w̄ − w̄⋆ ∥2 ≤          ∥AS − Ā∥2∞
                                                  2λ3



                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1   I NSTANTIATING FOR TCLF = [r]

We first instantiate Theorem 4 for the case where Tclf = [r], or equivalently when q = 1/ar.
Lemma 22. Recall our retrained model for the downstream task is AF wF . Then, it holds that
                                                                            !
                                       √ (ar)2 mU 2           √ (ar)2 mU

                         F F
             ∥Āw̄ − A w ∥2 ≤ O          r               + B nr
                                              mϵ0 γp               mϵ0 γp

Proof. We rewrite as follows.
           Āw̄ − AF wF = Āw̄ − Āw̄⋆ + Āw̄⋆ − AF w̄⋆ + AF w̄⋆ − AF wF


Now, we proceed to bound the ℓ2 norm of each of these individual terms separately. For the first
term, we have that
                            ∥Āw̄ − Āw̄⋆ ∥2 = ∥Ā(w̄ − w̄⋆ )∥2
                                             ≤ ∥w̄ − w̄⋆ ∥1
                                               √
                                             ≤ r∥w̄ − w̄⋆ ∥2
                                               √ L2 L2∞
                                             ≤ r          ∥AS − Ā∥2∞
                                                    2λ3
                                               √ L2 L2∞ (ar)2 mU 2

                                             ≤ r
                                                    2λ3      mϵ0 γp
where second line follows from Ā having column sum 1, and the fourth line follows from Lemma 20
For the third term, we have a similar analysis.
                           ∥AF w̄⋆ − AF wF ∥2 = ∥AF (w̄⋆ − wF )∥2
                                                  ≤ ∥w̄⋆ − wF ∥1
                                                    √
                                                  ≤ r∥w̄⋆ − wF ∥2
                                                    √ L∞
                                                  ≤ r      ∥Ā − AF ∥∞
                                                        λ
                                                    √ L∞ (ar)2 mU

                                                  ≤ r
                                                        λ     mϵ0 γp

Finally, for the second term, we have that
                          ∥Āw̄⋆ − AF w̄⋆ ∥2 ≤ ∥Ā − AF ∥2 ∥w̄⋆ ∥2
                                                            √
                                             ≤ ∥Ā − AF ∥∞ nr∥w̄⋆ ∥2
                                                   (ar)2 mU √

                                             ≤O               nrB
                                                    mϵ0 γp
By triangle inequality, we obtain the desired result.

First, we note show the following property of the learned topic model AS .
                                                                        S
Lemma 23. The minimum singular value of the ground truth√ topic matrix A is at least Θ(p), since
the perturbations in entries of A⋆ are at most ϵ0 ≤ O(1/ nr). Hence, the singular values cannot
change by more than a constant factor relative to p.

Proof. We know that A⋆ is a p-separable topic model, and hence has smallest singular value at
least p. For the given sample complexity of learning, AS will have smallest singular value at least
Θ(p).

The above result says that AS has a unique pseudoinverse, and has largest singular value at most
O(1/p).


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Recall that our goal for the downstream task is to approximate the v such that
                                                 AS v = AF w F
in order to say we have approximated the unlearned fine-tuned model. Therefore, it suffices to obtain
indistinguishability of our unlearning algorithm output w̃ with (AS )† AF wF . Our following claim
is that we can use (AS )† Āw̄ as the approximation for this.
Proposition 4. It holds that

                                               1
        ∥(AS )† Āw̄ − (AS )† AF wF ∥2 ≤ O       ∥Āw̄ − AF wF ∥2
                                               p
                                                    "              2                      #!
                                               1 √ (ar)2 mU               √ (ar)2 mU
                                         ≤O       ·   r               + B nr
                                               p           mϵ0 γp               mϵ0 γp

Let v̄ := (AS )† Āw̄ and v = (AS )† AF wF . We claim the following.
Lemma 24. The unlearning algorithm Uhead that outputs
                                                  ṽ := v̄ + νv
where νv is the noise defined by the Gaussian mechanism using the above sensitivity satisfies prov-
able (ϵ, δ) unlearning. In particular, we use
                              √ (ar)2 mU  2        √ (ar)2 mU

                          1
                     O p·        r mϵ0 γp      + B nr mϵ0 γp       p
                 σ=                                                   2 log(1.25/δ)
                                             ϵ
where the numerator of the fraction is from the previous proposition.

Proof. This follows from Gaussian mechanism.

We now proceed to bound the deletion capacity. In this case, the utility is defined by the closeness
of ṽ to (AS )† A⋆ w⋆ in ℓ∞ norm, similar the way we defined this for the base model unlearning
algorithm Ubase earlier.
First, the following lemma to bound AF wF − A⋆ w⋆ .
Lemma 25. We have that
                                                    √ (ar)2 mU

                          ∥AF wF − A⋆ w⋆ ∥2 ≤ O B nr
                                                       mϵ0 γp

Proof. We decompose as follows.
                      AF wF − A⋆ w⋆ = (AF wF − AF w⋆ ) + (AF w⋆ − A⋆ w⋆ )
The first term is bounded by
                                √                           √        √ (ar)2 mU

        F   F         F   ⋆              F        ⋆               F   ⋆
     ∥A w − A w ∥2 ≤                r∥w − w ∥2 ≤ O( r∥A − A ∥∞ ) ≤ O  r
                                                                        mϵ0 γp

The second term is bounded by
                                                (ar)2 mU √

                                F    ⋆       ⋆    ⋆
                              ∥A w − A w ∥2 ≤ O            nrB
                                                 mϵ0 γp
by considering the spectral norm ∥AF − A⋆ ∥2 . This gives the desired result.

As a result, the following holds.
Proposition 5. It holds that
                                      1 √ (ar)2 mU    √ (ar)2 mU

                S †   F   F      S †     ⋆   ⋆
         ∥(A ) A w − (A ) A w ∥2 ≤ O     r         + B nr
                                      p    mϵ0 γp         mϵ0 γp

                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This is once again from the bounded operator norm property of (AS )† .
Finally, we can apply triangle inequality to get the following.
Lemma 26. It holds that
                                                   "              2               #!
             S †           S † ⋆ ⋆            1 √ (ar)2 mU             √ (ar)2 mU
         ∥(A ) Āw̄ − (A ) A w ∥2 ≤              ·    r             + B nr
                                              p           mϵ0 γp           mϵ0 γp

Then, we can get the following bound on deletion capacity.
Lemma 27. For ϵ, δ > 0, the deletion capacity satisfies

                                 Ahead ,Uhead              m
                                Tϵ,δ          (m) ≥ Ω̃ 2 √
                                                        r nr

Proof. The calculation is as follows.
E ∥ṽ − (AS )† A⋆ w⋆ ∥∞ ≤ E[∥νv ∥∞ ] + E ∥(AS )† Āw̄ − (AS )† A⋆ w⋆ ∥∞

                                     "           2                    #! p                  !
                                 1 √ (ar)2 mU          √ (ar)2 mU          log r log 1/δ
                           ≤       ·   r           + B nr                                +1
                                 p       mϵ0 γp              mϵ0 γp             ϵ
For this to be a small constant, we require
                               (ar)2 mU

                                                    1      1
                                        ≤ Õ min        , √
                                mϵ0 γp             r1/4     nr
Therefore, we should have

                                                  m
                                        mU ≤ Ω̃ 2 √
                                                r nr



C.2   P ROOF FOR GENERAL q

The following is the formal statement of Theorem 4.
Theorem 7 (Formal version of Theorem 4). Suppose that the downstream task T only depends on
a subset of topics Tclf ⊆ [r]; that is, w⋆ = arg minv∈Wbase ℓT (v; A⋆ ) has non-zero entries only in
the index set Tclf . Denote q := mink∈Tclf PrD [z = k], and let Ahead be the head tuning algorithm
(Definition 2) and Uhead be Algorithm 2. Then, (Ahead , Uhead ) performs utility-preserving unlearning
with deletion capacity
                                                    (                          )
                         Ahead ,Uhead        ′           mqϵ          0.001m
                        Tϵ,δ          (m) ≥ c · min                 ,
                                                                         r2
                                                       p
                                                      r nr log 1/δ
where c′ is a constant dependent on D, and T .
Lemma 28. Recall our retrained model for the downstream task is AF wF . Then, it holds that
                                                                                         2     !
                          √ (ar)2 mU             √ (1/q)armU                 (ar)2 mU √

           F F
∥Āw̄ − A w ∥2 ≤ O          r               + O B nr                +O                      nr
                                mϵ0 γp                  mϵ0 γp                 mϵ0 γp

Proof. Consider this decomposition again.
           Āw̄ − AF wF = Āw̄ − Āw̄⋆ + Āw̄⋆ − AF w̄⋆ + AF w̄⋆ − AF wF


The first term is the same as old analysis; the second term is from considering q; the third is the
same as the old analysis. In particular, when q = 1/ar, we recover the old bound. We have that the
first term is
                                               √ L2 L2∞ (ar)2 mU 2

                                          ⋆
                            ∥Āw̄ − Āw̄ ∥ ≤ r
                                                   2λ3      mϵ0 γp


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The third term is
                                                     √ L∞       (ar)2 mU

                            ∥AF w̄⋆ − AF wF ∥ ≤       r
                                                        λ        mϵ0 γp
The second term is
           ∥Āw̄⋆ − AF w̄⋆ ∥ ≤ ∥(Ā − AF )w̄⋆ ∥ + ∥(Ā − AF )(w⋆ − w̄⋆ )∥
                                                                         2    !
                                    √ (1/q)armU                (ar)2 mU √

                             ≤ O B nr                  +O                  nr
                                           mϵ0 γp               mϵ0 γp

This gives the desired result using triangle inequality.

Continuing, we have the following.
Proposition 6. It holds that
           ∥(AS )† Āw̄ − (AS )† AF wF ∥2

                  1           F F
            ≤O      ∥Āw̄ − A w ∥2
                  p
                       "                                           2    #!
                  1 √ (ar)2 mU            √ (1/q)armU     (ar)2 mU √

            ≤O       ·   r             + B nr         +              nr
                  p          mϵ0 γp           mϵ0 γp       mϵ0 γp

This gives us the following.
Lemma 29. The unlearning algorithm Uhead that outputs
                                             ṽ := v̄ + νv
where νv is the noise defined by the Gaussian mechanism using the above sensitivity satisfies prov-
able (ϵ, δ) unlearning. In particular, we use
                    √ (ar)2 mU          √                              2 √

                                                             (ar)2 mU
           O p1 ·     r mϵ0 γp + B nr (1/q)arm  mϵ0 γp
                                                       U
                                                         +    mϵ0 γp      nr p
     σ=                                                                       2 log(1.25/δ)
                                             ϵ
where the numerator of the fraction is from the previous proposition.

Proof. This follows from Gaussian mechanism.

We now proceed to bound the deletion capacity. In this case, the utility is defined by the closeness
of ṽ to (AS )† A⋆ w⋆ in ℓ∞ norm, similar the way we defined this for the base model unlearning
algorithm Ubase earlier.
First, the following lemma to bound AF wF − A⋆ w⋆ .
Lemma 30. We have that
                                                                                  2      !
                                √         2         √                       2       √

                                      (ar)  mU          (1/q)arm U     (ar)   mU
    ∥AF wF − A⋆ w⋆ ∥2 ≤ O         r              + B nr            +                  nr
                                       mϵ0 γp             mϵ0 γp        mϵ0 γp

Proof. We decompose as follows.
                    AF wF − A⋆ w⋆ = (AF wF − AF w⋆ ) + (AF w⋆ − A⋆ w⋆ )
The first term is bounded by
                            √                √                     √ (ar)2 mU

       F F         F ⋆          F     ⋆           F      ⋆
  ∥A w − A w ∥2 ≤ r∥w − w ∥2 ≤ O( r∥A − A ∥∞ ) ≤ O                   r
                                                                        mϵ0 γp
The second term is bounded by
                                                                                  2
                                         √ (1/q)armU                  (ar)2 mU        √

                    ∥AF w⋆ − A⋆ w⋆ ∥2 ≤ B nr         +                                    nr
                                             mϵ0 γp                    mϵ0 γp
Triangle inequality gives us the desired result.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As a result, the following holds.
Proposition 7. It holds that
                                "                                        2    #!
                            1 √ (ar)2 mU        √ (1/q)armU     (ar)2 mU √

      S †   F   F     S †     ⋆   ⋆
∥(A ) A w − (A ) A w ∥2 ≤ O   ·   r          + B nr         +              nr
                            p       mϵ0 γp          mϵ0 γp       mϵ0 γp

This is once again from the bounded operator norm property.
Finally, we can apply triangle inequality to get the following.
Lemma 31. It holds that
                                 "                                        2    #!
                             1 √ (ar)2 mU        √ (1/q)armU     (ar)2 mU √

      S †           S †   ⋆   ⋆
∥(A ) Āw̄ − (A ) A w ∥2 ≤ O   ·   r          + B nr         +              nr
                             p       mϵ0 γp          mϵ0 γp       mϵ0 γp

Then, we can get the following bound on deletion capacity.
Lemma 32. For ϵ, δ > 0, the deletion capacity satisfies

                                Ahead ,Uhead             m
                              Tϵ,δ           (m) ≥ Ω̃ 2 √
                                                        r nr

Proof. The calculation is as follows.
E ∥ṽ − (AS )† A⋆ w⋆ ∥∞ ≤ E[∥νv ∥∞ ] + E ∥(AS )† Āw̄ − (AS )† A⋆ w⋆ ∥∞

                                     "                                               2    #!
                                 1 √ (ar)2 mU            √ (1/q)armU        (ar)2 mU √

                           ≤       ·     r            + B nr           +               nr
                                 p           mϵ0 γp          mϵ0 γp          mϵ0 γp
                               p                   !
                                  log r log 1/δ
                           ·                    +1
                                       ϵ

For this to be a small constant, we require
                           (ar)2 mU

                                                  1      1      arq
                                      ≤ Õ min       ,        , √
                            mϵ0 γp               r1/2 (nr)1/4     nr
When n is at least r3 , the last of these terms will be the smallest. Therefore, we have that
                                                      mq
                                           mU ≤ Ω̃ 1.5 0.5
                                                      r n



C.3    D OWNSTREAM TASKS WITH INEXACT MINIMIZERS

We will consider τ -optimal minimizers for the downstream task.
Definition 9. For a base model A, let wτ (A) ∈ {w : ℓT (w; A) − ℓT (w⋆ (A); A) ≤ τ }.

We will have the following technical assumption on τ to eliminate trivial cases.
Assumption 8. We assume that τ = O(1/r).

We have the following intermediate result.
Lemma 33. For a base model A, it holds that
                                                             p
                                      ∥wτ (A) − w⋆ (A)∥2 ≤       2τ /λ

Proof. This follows from a standard strong convexity argument.

This gives an updated version of Lemma 20, using triangle inequality.


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 34. Consider two base models A1 and A2 . Then, it holds that
                           p                                   p      L∞
 ∥wτ (A1 ) − wτ (A2 )∥2 ≤ 2 2τ /λ + ∥w⋆ (A1 ) − w⋆ (A2 )∥ ≤ 2 2τ /λ +    ∥A1 − A2 ∥∞
                                                                       λ
We now define the following notations for clarity.

       • wτS := wτ (AS )
       • wτF := wτ (AF )
       • w̄⋆ := w⋆ (Ā)
                       −1
       • w̄τ := wτS − Hw           S                                               S
                         S ∇w ℓT (wτ ; Ā), which is the Newton step we take from wτ to approxi-
                        τ
                 ⋆
         mate w̄

Now, consider our Newton step from wτ (AS ) to approximate wτ (AF ). To do so, consider
                                                 −1
                                   w̄τ := wτS − Hw           S
                                                   S ∇w ℓT (wτ ; Ā)
                                                       τ

Then, the following holds, using a similar argument as a previous section.
                                          L2
                           ∥w̄τ − w̄⋆ ∥2 ≤   ∥wS − w̄⋆ ∥22
                                          2λ τ
                                          L2
                                              ∥wτS − wS ∥22 + ∥wS − w̄⋆ ∥22

                                        ≤
                                           λ
                                                                       2 !
                                          L2 2τ       L∞          S
                                        ≤         +        ∥Ā − A ∥∞
                                           λ   λ       λ
where the second term of the last line follows from a line in the previous proof of the Newton step.
We now bound ∥Āw̄τ − AF wτF ∥2 . We rewrite this as follows.
          Āw̄τ − AF w̄τF = (Āw̄τ − Āw̄⋆ ) + (Āw̄⋆ − AF wF ) + (AF wF − AF wτF )
The second term we bounded as part of a previous proof. The first term we bound using the above,
and the third part we bound using the inexact minimizer lemma. By a step in a previous proof, we
can say that the first term
                                         √
                      ∥Āw̄τ − Āw̄⋆ ∥2 ≤ r∥w̄τ − w̄⋆ ∥2
                                                                         2 !
                                         √ 2L2 τ      L2 L2∞ (ar)2 mU

                                        ≤ r        +
                                               λ2       2λ3     mϵ0 γp
The second term, to reiterate, satisfies
                                                 (ar)2 mU √

                                   ⋆       F   F
                              ∥Āw̄ − A w ∥2 ≤ O            nrB
                                                  mϵ0 γp
The third term satisfies
                                                   √                     p
                       ∥AF wF − AF wτF ∥2 ≤            r∥wF − wτF ∥2 ≤       2rτ /λ

Therefore, the entire term is bounded by the sum of the above three terms via triangle inequality. In
particular, this is
                                                                             !
                         √ (ar)2 mU 2          √ (ar)2 mU √             √

                     O     r               + B nr             + rτ + rτ
                                mϵ0 γp                mϵ0 γp

Recall that our goal for the downstream task is to approximate the v such that
                                               AS v = AF wτF
or in other words, v = (AS )† AF wτF . Our claim is that we can use (AS )† Āw̄τ as an approximation
for this. The following statement formalizes this, utilizing the fact about the maximum singular value
of AS being at most Θ(1/p).


                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 8. It holds that
                                               "           2                         #!
    S †               S †   F                1 √ (ar)2 mU       √ (ar)2 mU √     √
∥(A ) Āw̄τ − (A ) A            wτF ∥2 ≤ O       r           + B nr        + rτ + rτ
                                             p     mϵ0 γp           mϵ0 γp

Now, let v̄ := (AS )† Āw̄τ , and let v := (AS )† AF wτF . We claim the following.
Lemma 35. The unlearning algorithm Uhead that outputs
                                               ṽ := v̄ + νv
where νv is the noise defined by the Gaussian mechanism using the above sensitivity satisfies prov-
able (ϵ, δ) unlearning. In particular, we use
                     √                     √ (ar)2 mU √         √
                                     2
                               2
               O p1 r (ar)       mU
                            mϵ0 γp     + B    nr mϵ0 γp + rτ +    rτ    p
          σ=                                                              2 log(1.25/δ)
                                             ϵ
where the numerator of the fraction is from the previous proposition.

Proof. This follows from Gaussian mechanism.

We now proceed to bound the deletion capacity. In this case, the utility is defined by the closeness
of ṽ to (AS )† A⋆ w⋆ in ℓ∞ norm, similar the way we defined this for the base model unlearning
algorithm Ubase earlier.
First, the following lemma to bound AF wτF − A⋆ w⋆ .
Lemma 36. We have that
                                                √ (ar)2 mU √

                        ∥AF wτF − A⋆ w⋆ ∥2 ≤ O B nr        + rτ
                                                    mϵ0 γp

Proof. We decompose as follows.
       AF wτF − A⋆ w⋆ = (AF wτF − AF wF ) + (AF wF − AF w⋆ ) + (AF w⋆ − A⋆ w⋆ )
The second term is bounded by
                                  √                    √                     √ (ar)2 mU

     ∥AF wF − AF w⋆ ∥2 ≤              r∥wF − w⋆ ∥2 ≤ O( r∥AF − A⋆ ∥∞ ) ≤ O    r
                                                                                mϵ0 γp

The third term is bounded by
                                                             (ar)2 mU √

                                ∥AF w⋆ − A⋆ w⋆ ∥2 ≤ O                   nrB
                                                              mϵ0 γp
by considering the spectral norm ∥AF − A⋆ ∥2 .
                                                                      p
Finally, the first term is bounded, from an above argument, by         2rτ /λ. This gives the desired
result.

As a result, the following holds.
Proposition 9. It holds that
                                                 1 √ (ar)2 mU    √ (ar)2 mU √

          S †
     ∥(A ) A    F
                    wτF − (AS )† A⋆ w⋆ ∥2 ≤ O       r         + B nr        + rτ
                                                 p    mϵ0 γp         mϵ0 γp

This is once again from the bounded operator norm property of (AS )† .
Finally, we can apply triangle inequality to get the following.


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 37. It holds that
                                            "           2                         #!
    S †             S †   ⋆   ⋆         1 √ (ar)2 mU         √ (ar)2 mU √     √
∥(A ) Āw¯τ − (A ) A w ∥2 ≤               ·   r           + B nr        + rτ + rτ
                                        p       mϵ0 γp           mϵ0 γp

Then, we can get the following bound on deletion capacity.
Lemma 38. For ϵ, δ > 0, the deletion capacity satisfies

                                Ahead ,Uhead             m
                              Tϵ,δ           (m) ≥ Ω̃ 2 √
                                                        r nr

Proof. The calculation is as follows.
E ∥ṽ − (AS )† A⋆ w⋆ ∥∞ ≤ E[∥νv ∥∞ ] + E ∥(AS )† Āw¯τ − (AS )† A⋆ w⋆ ∥∞

                                     "           2                              #! p                 !
                                 1 √ (ar)2 mU          √ (ar)2 mU √         √       log r log 1/δ
                           ≤       ·   r           + B nr             + rτ + rτ                   +1
                                 p       mϵ0 γp             mϵ0 γp                       ϵ

For this to be a small constant, we require
                                  (ar)2 mU

                                                       1     1
                                           ≤ Õ min        ,√
                                   mϵ0 γp             r1/4    nr
since we already have τ = O(1/r) by assumption. Therefore, we should have

                                                 m
                                     mU ≤ Ω̃ 2 √
                                               r nr



Finally, for general q, the same idea used in this section for inexact minimizers can be combined
with the previous section.


                                                 33
