Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING FOR C ONTROL OF N ON -
M ARKOVIAN C ELLULAR P OPULATION DYNAMICS
 Josiah C. Kratz∗
 Computational Biology Department
 Carnegie Mellon University
 Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
 jkratz@andrew.cmu.edu

 Jacob Adamczyk∗
 Department of Physics
 University of Massachusetts Boston
 IAIFI
 Boston, MA 02125
 jacob.adamczyk001@umb.edu



                                                  A BSTRACT

             Many organisms and cell types, from bacteria to cancer cells, exhibit a remark-
             able ability to adapt to fluctuating environments. Additionally, cells can leverage
             a memory of past environments to better survive previously-encountered stres-
             sors. From a control perspective, this adaptability poses significant challenges in
             driving cell populations toward extinction, and thus poses an open question with
             great clinical significance. In this work, we focus on drug dosing in cell popula-
             tions exhibiting phenotypic plasticity. For specific dynamical models switching
             between resistant and susceptible states, exact solutions are known. However,
             when the underlying system parameters are unknown, and for complex memory-
             based systems, obtaining the optimal solution is currently intractable. To address
             this challenge, we apply reinforcement learning (RL) to identify informed dosing
             strategies to control cell populations evolving under novel non-Markovian dynam-
             ics. We find that model-free deep RL is able to recover exact solutions and control
             cell populations even in the presence of long-range temporal dynamics. To fur-
             ther test our approach in more realistic settings, we demonstrate robust RL-based
             control strategies in environments with measurement noise and dynamic memory
             strength.


1       I NTRODUCTION
In order to survive, organisms must adapt to unpredictable environmental stressors occurring over di-
verse timescales. As a result, biological systems display remarkable adaptive capabilities, making it
exceptionally challenging to control them through environmental modulation, marking an open and
significant question in the physics of living systems. Two examples of adaptive systems with great
clinical importance are cancer cell resistance to chemotherapy (Vasan et al., 2019), and bacterial
resistance to antibiotics (Blair et al., 2015). In both settings, the control problem of drug application
is complicated by unknown model parameters and non-Markovian dynamics. Notably, the constant
application of a drug does not typically result in population extinction, as drug application also
drives a certain fraction of the population to alter their phenotypic state to become drug-resistant.
This new resistant state can then persist even after drug removal and across cell lineages, thus en-
coding a memory of the stressful environment which allows populations to more quickly adapt if
the drug is reapplied Harmange et al. (2023); Mathis & Ackermann (2017); Banerjee et al. (2021).
As a result, it is unclear how to devise a control strategy that can effectively mitigate long-term
population growth in these scenarios. We address this open problem in the present work.
    ∗
        Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by coin flip at Primanti Bros.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Previous literature (Padmanabhan et al., 2017; Engelhardt, 2020; Gallagher et al., 2024; Fischer
& Bluethgen, 2024) has studied temporal drug dosing protocols to slow or prevent adaptation in
various cancer or bacterial models using various methods. However, these models fail to account
for the variety of adaptive timescales present in real biological systems. The presence of such
memory effects greatly complicates the control problem, making the study of more realistic models
imperative. Thus, to study the control of such memory-based adaptive systems, in this work we
introduce a novel population model exhibiting phenotypic plasticity with non-Markovian dynamics.
Prior work has shown that learning-based methods are able to form the basis of patient-specific
treatment protocols (Miotto et al., 2016; Ahn et al., 2021). We show that insights from control theory
can be coupled with deep reinforcement learning to discover treatment protocols which successfully
prevent proliferation. We highlight our main contributions below:

M AIN C ONTRIBUTIONS
      1. We develop a novel memory-based model for phenotypic switching relevant for bacterial
         and cancerous population dynamics.
      2. We pose the problem of optimal drug dosing in this model and provide insights on the
         solution from control theory.
      3. We find a robust optimal policy with deep RL that is independent of memory strength,
         requiring only clinically-accessible observations.

In the following sections, we first introduce the new population model, derive bang-bang optimal
control, and experimentally show that bang-bang control is required to find a high-performing policy.
Because of the non-Markovian dynamics, we introduce a short history to the agent’s state which we
implement via framestacking. Using ideas from optimal control theory and deep reinforcement
learning, we thus simplify the original control problem in a well-principled manner. We then apply
standard and more advanced RL techniques to solve different versions of the posed problem.

2     P ROPOSED M ODEL AND A PPROACH
In this section, we develop our novel non-Markovian model for cellular dynamics. These dynamics
are based on a simple but general switching model (Figure 1) with switching rates that are dependent
on drug concentration. We then introduce a physically motivated non-linear memory kernel, before
discussing general approaches to the optimal control problem.

2.1   N ON -M ARKOVIAN P HENOTYPIC S WITCHING M ODEL

To model the treatment response of an adap-
tive cell population, we use a general pheno-
                                                                           𝛼(𝑢)
typic switching model which captures the time
evolution of a susceptible subpopulation, with
size S(t), and a resistant subpopulation, with                       𝑆(𝑡)          𝑅(𝑡)   𝜅" (𝑢)
size R(t). (The notation for susceptible and                𝜅! (𝑢)
resistant states should not be confused with
state and reward in RL, for which we use low-                              𝛿(𝑢)
ercase letters.) Phenotypic switching models
have been successful in describing a wide va- Figure 1: Depiction of the deterministic pheno-
riety of biological scenarios, including devel- typic switching model. The susceptible subpop-
opment of persister cells and resistant cells in ulation S transitions to the resistant state R at a
bacteria, and development of drug resistance concentration-dependent rate, δ. Similarly, the re-
in cancer cells (Balaban et al., 2004; Fischer sistant state switches back to a susceptible state
& Bluethgen, 2024; Witzany et al., 2023; Ku- at a rate α. The subpopulations each have a
mar et al., 2019; Kratz & Banerjee, 2024). In concentration-dependent growth or death rate, κ.
our model, susceptible cells with a net growth
rate κS (u) (κS (u) < 0 corresponds to net cell
death) switch to a resistant state at a rate α(u), where u is the drug concentration. Similarly, when
the drug is removed, resistant cells with a net growth rate κR (u) switch back to the susceptible state
at a concentration-dependent rate δ(u) (Fig. 1). All growth and switching rates are a function of


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


drug concentration normalized by the maximum allowable dose, thus u ∈ [0, 1]. The time evolution
of the size of each subpopulation, x(t) = [S(t), R(t)]T , is then given by the dynamical system:
                                 ẋ(t) = f(x(t), u(t)) = A(u(t))x(t) ,                               (1)
where the state-transition matrix is given by:

                                       κS (u) − α(u)     δ(u)
                           A(u) =                                    .                               (2)
                                            α(u)     κR (u) − δ(u)
To relate the net growth rate to drug concentration for each subpopulation, we assume that both rates
take the general form:
         κS (u) = κmax
                   S   − (κmax
                           S   − κmin
                                  S )g(u) ,            κR (u) = κmin   max
                                                                 R + (κR   − κmin
                                                                              R )h(u) ,

where g(u), h(u) ∈ [0, 1] is a monotonic dose-response function which relates drug dose to net
growth rate, κmax
                S    > 0 denotes the maximum growth rate of the susceptible subpopulation in the
absence of drug application, and where κmin   S    < 0 is the maximum death rate of the susceptible
subpopulation caused by application of the maximum drug dose (u = 1). Importantly, κmax          R    >0
denotes the maximum growth rate of the resistant subpopulation, which occurs in the presence of
the maximum drug dose, and κmin    R     < 0 corresponds to the maximum death rate of the resistant
subpopulation, which occurs when the drug is removed. This parametrization corresponds to “drug
addiction” behavior in the resistant subpopulation, a robust phenomenon which has been observed
not only in cell culture (Suda et al., 2012; Sun et al., 2014; Moriceau et al., 2015), but in animal mod-
els (Das Thakur et al., 2013) and in vivo (Seifert et al., 2016; Dooley et al., 2016). Similarly, δ(u)
decreases with u while α(u) increases with u, as drug application drives the population to become
more resistant, while reduction in drug concentration causes the system to recover susceptibility.
These switching rates can then be defined as:
                          α(u) = αmax j(u) and δ(u) = δmax (1 − k(u)) ,
where j(u), k(u) ∈ [0, 1] and where αmax , δmax > 0 denote the phenotypic switching rates of cells
switching from the susceptible state to the resistant state, and vice versa.
Recently, cell populations of many types, including human cancer cell lines, yeast, and bacteria, have
been shown to maintain a memory of past environments which facilitates adaptation to previously-
seen stressors over many timescales (Shaffer et al., 2020; Harmange et al., 2023; Larkin et al., 2024;
Wolf et al., 2008; Mathis & Ackermann, 2017). To better capture this memory dependence on treat-
ment response, we introduce a memory kernel into the previously-described dynamics (equation 1),
making them non-local in time. Specifically, we choose a fractional differential equation (FDE)
formulation as a phenomenological way to introduce multiple timescales of adaptation, one which
has been used successfully to model memory effects in other biological (Lundstrom et al., 2008),
ecological (Khalighi et al., 2022), and physical contexts (Bonfanti et al., 2020). With this addition
the dynamics now become:
                                              Z t
                                                  (t − τ )µ−2
                      ẋ(t) = F(x(t), u(t)) =                 f(x(τ ), u(τ ))dτ ,                  (3)
                                               0 |Γ(µ − 1)|

where Γ(·) denotes the Gamma function, f(·) is given by equation 1, and here we introduce the
parameter µ ∈ (0, 1] which controls memory strength. A value of µ = 1 corresponds to the memo-
ryless case (first order derivative), whereas smaller values of µ correspond to an increased influence
of past states on the current dynamics (lower order fractional derivative).
We seek to obtain a temporal drug concentration protocol u(t) which minimizes the growth of a
population and thus choose the final cost as C := log N (T )/N (0) over the time interval T , where
N (t) = S(t) + R(t) represents the total population.
Thus, we aim to solve the following control problem:
       min C(x(0), x(T ; u(·))) subject to ẋ(t) = F(x(t), u(t)), x(0) = x0 , u(t) ∈ [0, 1] ,        (4)
         u

where x(T ; u(·)) denotes the state of x at terminal time T subject to control u from 0 ≤ t ≤ T .
Interestingly, in our minimal model (equation 3), as long as κS (u), κR (u), α(u), and δ(u) are
monotonic functions, we can show that the optimal control solution follows “bang-bang” control,
regardless of the precise model parameters and memory strength.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.2   D ERIVATION OF BANG - BANG CONTROL

Using equation 1 and the fact that N (t) = S(t) + R(t), the model dynamics can be rewritten as a
single fractional differential equation in terms of the fraction of resistant cells, ϕ := R/N , namely:
   D0µ ϕ(t) = f (ϕ, u) = (κS (u) − κR (u))ϕ2 + (κR (u) − κS (u) − δ(u) − α(u))ϕ + α(u) ,           (5)
where D0µ denotes the Caputo fractional derivative of order µ starting at t = 0 (Garrappa, 2018), and
here we drop the explicit time dependence for notational clarity. This can equivalently be written as
the continuous delay differential equation (we use this form in equation 3):
                                     Z t
                                         (t − τ )µ−2
                             ϕ̇(t) =                 f (ϕ(τ ), u(τ ))dτ .                         (6)
                                      0 |Γ(µ − 1)|

Given these definitions, the Hamiltonian associated with this control problem is then
                             H(ϕ(t), u(t), λ(t)) = λ(t)f (ϕ(t), u(t)) ,                            (7)
where the trajectory of the Lagrange multiplier λ(t) is the solution to the costate equation (Go-
moyunov, 2023):
                                                     Z T
                       ∂ϕ C(x(0), x(T ; u(·)))    1       ∂ϕ λ(τ )f (ϕ(τ ), u(τ ))
             λ(t) = −                          +                                   dτ .        (8)
                          Γ(µ)(T − t)1−µ         Γ(µ) t         (τ − t)1−µ
Applying Pontryagin’s minimum principle, we obtain the following inequality
                         H(ϕ∗ (t), u∗ (t), λ∗ (t)) ≤ H(ϕ∗ (t), u(t), λ∗ (t)) ,                     (9)
which along with equation 5 and equation 7 can be used to obtain the optimal control policy:
u∗ = arg min λ∗ [∆S (ϕ∗ − ϕ∗2 )g(u) + ∆R (ϕ∗ − ϕ∗2 )h(u) + δmax ϕ∗ k(u) + αmax (1 − ϕ∗ )j(u)] ,
           u

where the following shorthand notation is introduced: ∆S = κmax
                                                            S   − κmin
                                                                   S   and ∆R = κmax
                                                                                 R   − κmin
                                                                                        R .

Critically, the fact that κmax  max                     min
                           S , κR , αmax , δmax > 0, κS , κR
                                                             min
                                                                   < 0, and g, h, j, k, ϕ ∈ [0, 1]
ensures that the bracketed sum which multiplies λ∗ is positive for u > 0. As a result, as long as
g(u), h(u), j(u), and k(u) are monotonically increasing functions of u, then the resulting optimal
control is said to be “bang-bang”, where u∗ (t) only takes on its extreme values. Furthermore, the
switching times between the maximum and minimum values of u are determined by λ∗ (t), yielding
the optimal control solution:
                                   u∗ (t) = 0 if λ∗ (t) > 0,
                                   u∗ (t) = 1 if λ∗ (t)) < 0, and
                                   u∗ (t) ∈ [0, 1] otherwise.

In principle, the optimal control trajectory can be obtained through numerical integration of the
model dynamics (equation 5) along with the corresponding costate equation (equation 8). In the con-
text of bang-bang control of non-Markovian systems however, using this approach can be difficult,
as it requires careful choice of integration technique and update rule. Thus, we turn to reinforcement
learning.
As shown above, the optimal control solution to Problem 4 follows bang-bang control, regardless
of model parameters. This allows the continuous model of equation 1 to be simplified to a discrete
model with binary controls without altering the optimal solution. This yields:

                                          Tx(t) for u = 1 (Treatment Phase)
               ẋ(t) = f(x(t), u(t)) =                                          ,             (10)
                                          Px(t) for u = 0 (Pause Phase)
where now there are two state-transition matrices, given by:
                       min                                  max
                      κS − αmax         0                    κS          δmax
               T=                             ,      P=                               .           (11)
                           αmax        κmin
                                        R                     0       κmin
                                                                       R − δmax

We use this formulation of the environment when training the reinforcement learning agent.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.3   C ONTROL S TRATEGIES

Despite this simplification in action space (from continuous to binary controls), the optimal control
problem remains difficult, as the number of times and duration of drug application must be opti-
mized. Constant application of the drug at the maximum dose (u = 1) results in cell adaptation
and proliferation (Fig. 3): a highly suboptimal solution to Problem 4 and a catastrophic result in the
clinical context.
Recently,(Fischer & Bluethgen, 2024) has shown that in the memoryless case (µ = 1), the opti-
mal solution for this type of model requires an initial drug application phase, followed by pulsing
between treatment and pause phases at a regular interval dependent on the model parameters. How-
ever, as seen in Fig. 3, we find that the addition of memory (µ < 1) renders the control strategy
of the memoryless case ineffective, as cells which have previously encountered treatment switch to
the resistant state faster upon subsequent applications. Furthermore, in the clinical or experimen-
tal setting, obtaining the values which parameterize equation 3 is usually not feasible, and one can
only rely on direct and more macroscopic measurements from the cell populations. Thus, obtaining
the appropriate switching frequencies through direct computation via optimal control (OC) theory
becomes impossible. One may propose to learn these values directly before feeding them into an
OC solution, but this may result in a brittle pipeline, especially as the model discussed may not
fully describe the underlying biological dynamics. As a result, we seek to learn the optimal policy
end-to-end, directly through experience using deep reinforcement learning (Sec. 3).

2.4   O BTAINING THE OPTIMAL SOLUTION IN THE MEMORYLESS CASE

As mentioned above, previous work (Fischer & Bluethgen, 2024) showed that the optimal pulsing
protocol for the memoryless case requires an initial drug application phase until the resistant fraction
reaches some upper threshold ϕh , followed by a pause phase (“drug holiday”) in which the resistant
fraction naturally relaxes back to some lower bound ϕl . This is followed by similarly repeated
cycles of treatment and pause phases where the switching time occurs when the resistant fraction
reaches ϕh and ϕl , respectively. To obtain the optimal values of ϕh and ϕl for our specific model
parameterization, we swept over values of ϕh and ϕl between 0.1 and 0.9, with increments of 0.011,
selecting the values which yielded the highest net death rate: ϕl = 0.494 and ϕh = 0.505.
To compare as baselines against our learned policy in non-Markovian environments, we repeated
the same procedure for different values of µ. The optimal switching fractions are given in Table 1.


3     R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

                                           Reinforcement learning (RL) allows an agent to learn
          µ       ϕl      ϕh               an optimal control strategy (policy) directly from the
         1.0    0.494    0.505             experience it collects. This data may be from sim-
         0.9    0.483    0.494             ulation (Akkaya et al., 2019), or from real-world
         0.8    0.466    0.477             data (Haarnoja et al., 2024), or even from fully offline
         0.7    0.448    0.459             datasets (Levine et al., 2020). In RL, the interactive agent
         0.6    0.428    0.439             receives observations from the environment. As a result
                                           of this input, the agent outputs a control or action (de-
Table 1: Optimal switching fraction        noted u throughout), yielding a transition to a new state
values for the baseline policy for each    and a scalar reward (negative cost). The goal of the agent,
memory strength µ.                         analogous to OC, is to act in a way that maximizes the
                                           expected long-term accumulated rewards. In our problem
                                           formulation, this will correspond to the use of drug to min-
imize the total population count.
We consider the online RL setting in simulation, where a drug protocol is learned through experience
(Fig. 2, left) by continually improving a policy as it is learned. Despite the non-Markovian dynamics
and even without access to the underlying environment-specific model parameters, we show that
RL is capable of providing high-performing policies. To formulate the RL problem, we define
the relevant characteristics as follows (in the following, let ∆ denote the simulation time between
actions):


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Left: The learned policy shows a resemblance to the optimal memoryless strategy, with
an initial constant application phase followed by a pulsatile phase. However, in the case of memory-
based dynamics, the frequency of pulsing must be increased over time as discussed in Sec. 4. Since
the policy is eventually limited by the simulation time, the pulsing frequency becomes bottlenecked
by our choice of time discretization ∆ after ≈ 20 hours. Despite this, the policy is still able to
perform well with rapid pulsing. Right: Effect of learned policy on resistant fraction. for different
memory strengths. The RL agent finds (for distinct µ values) appropriate lower and upper bounds
for the fraction of resistant cells. Maintaining the subpopulation in this range ensures the population
can be controlled.


State: The state (st ) of the agent’s environment is a list of the last K = 5 estimates of
the instantaneous growth rate and one-hot encoded actions, st = [ct−K,..t , ut−K,..t ] where
ct = ∆−1 log Nt /Nt−∆ is a pointwise version of the cost defined above. Thus, a history of past
observations is encoded in the state vector, a crucial design choice if the agent is to learn control
without a recurrent hidden state. Action: As motivated in Section 2.1, we choose a binary action
space u ∈ {0, 1} representing whether the drug is applied or not, as we have proven that this is suf-
ficient to recover optimal control. Reward: As we seek to solve Problem 4, the reward is simply the
negative growth rate, rt = −ct . Notice that with this choice of reward function, the sum of rewards
across a trajectory simplifies as R0:T = ∆−1 log N0 /NT , ensuring the agent’s objective is aligned
with a reduction in total cell population. Dynamics: The dynamics of the total cell population Nt
are governed by the dynamical system described in Section 2.1, initialized to be fully susceptible
(x0 = [1000, 0]). After an action is executed, the simulation (a numerical solution 1 of equation 3)
is computed with the action (dose) fixed for ∆ = 0.01 hours to compute the next state (st+∆ ).
To encourage the agent to reduce the cell population while decreasing computational runtime and
allowing for exploration, we terminate the episode if the number of cells ever exceeds 150% of its
initial amount.
The goal in RL is to learn the policy π ∗ which maximizes the expected cumulative discounted sum
of rewards across a trajectory:
                                                     "∞                 #
                                                       X
                             ∗                              t
                           π (u|s) = arg max Eτ ∼p,π       γ r(st , ut ) .                   (12)
                                             π
                                                             t=0

To solve this optimization problem, we consider discrete-action value-based methods. Within this
framework, the optimal action-value function Q∗ (s, u) is learned based on off-policy data observed
during exploration. The value function satisfies the Bellman optimality equation (written to match
the control notation introduced above):
                         Q∗ (st , ut ; θ) = r(st , ut ) + γ max
                                                             ′
                                                                Q∗ (st+∆ , u′ ; θ) .                    (13)
                                                            u

 Within this class of methods, DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) learns Q∗ by exploring with an annealed
greedy exploration strategy. After an action is taken, the experience tuple (s, u, r, s′ ) is stored in an
experience replay buffer for later use. In deep RL, the action-value function is parameterized with a
neural network (denoted by the trainable parameters θ), and trained via mini-batch gradient descent,
   1
     The numerical solution of fractional differential equations requires some care; cf. (Garrappa, 2018) for
details.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Performance comparison of constant drug application, solution for the memoryless case,
resistant fraction-based pulsing technique, and policy learned by RL. For the fraction-based policy,
an optimal lower and upper bound for resistant fractions are found through sweeping (Appendix 2.4).
The RL policy is capable of controlling the cell population better than any other scheme.


denoted B, uniformly at random from the buffer. The temporal-difference loss function is defined as
the Bellman residual – the squared difference between left and right hand sides of equation 13:
                         X                                                          2
               Lθ =               Q∗ (st , ut ; θ) − r + γ max
                                                            ′
                                                               Q ∗
                                                                   (st+∆ , u′
                                                                              ; θ̄)   .         (14)
                                                            u
                      {s,u,r,s′ }∈B

As common in value-based algorithms, we use an additional target network to reduce the effect of
bootstrapping during training. The target network (denoted with parameters θ̄) has its parameters
frozen during training, and updated periodically directly by copying the online network parameters
θ → θ̄. We additionally use the double DQN approach to mitigate the over-estimation bias in
standard DQN (Van Hasselt et al., 2016). Further details on reinforcement learning can be found
e.g. in (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Hessel et al., 2018). We tune over several hyperparameters (whose
values we list in the Appendix) to optimize performance. Our implementation of double DQN
(Van Hasselt et al., 2016) (and later FQF) are based on open-source code from Stable-Baselines3
(Raffin et al., 2021). Each agent is trained for 3 × 105 environment steps. All code to reproduce our
experimental results can be found at https://github.com/JacobHA/RL4Dosing.

4   C ASE S TUDY OF F IXED M EMORY E NVIRONMENTS
We first test DQN in the memoryless case (µ = 1), for which an optimal controller is known (Fischer
& Bluethgen, 2024). In this case, the optimal policy can be derived based only on two consecutive
resistant fractions. However, recall that the RL agent is only given access to the instantaneous
growth rates, not the resistant fractions. Nevertheless, the RL agent is surprisingly able to reliably
recover the optimal policy with only two successive frames and without any access to underlying
model parameters. The control strategy found by the agent involves first applying the drug and then
pulsing regularly, in agreement with the OC solution, as seen in Fig. 3 (rightmost plot). Indeed,
Fig. 2 (right panel) shows that the agent discovers an internal representation based on growth rates
that is compatible with fraction-based switching.
With confirmation that RL can find the optimal dosing strategy in the memoryless case, we turn to
the more difficult memory-based dynamics (µ < 1). We do not have a solution to Problem 4 in
this regime, so we compare against two baselines: The memoryless protocol described above and
a modified version in which switching times occur when the resistant fraction reaches a threshold
value. We note that these baselines can have arbitrarily small switching times, which is practically
infeasible. Remarkably, we find that using a small but bounded ∆, our learned policy outperforms
both of these baselines (Fig. 3). In addition, our experiments show that decreasing ∆ (increasing
measurement frequency) beyond a certain threshold does not considerably increase performance
(Fig. 6).
Interestingly, the learned policy reveals that the agent initially maintains constant drug applica-
tion before transitioning to a memory-dependent pulsing protocol. The agent increases the fre-
quency of pulsing throughout the trajectory until saturation at the maximum rate (∆−1 ) (Fig. 2).
For cases with memory, this increase in dosing frequency can be understood as the result of


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


faster cellular adaptation back to the resistant state after multiple drug encounters. Thus, to
maintain a susceptible population, the policy’s pulse frequency must continuously be increased
to compensate for the memory-based adaptability. We also find that the agent maintains a lower
average resistant fraction at higher memory strengths (Fig. 2, right). This qualitative trend is
in agreement with the optimal switching fractions found by optimal control shown in Table 1.
To independently show the benefit of using
discrete actions, the original problem can in-
stead be approached with continuous action al-
gorithms, such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)
or SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018). As shown in
Fig. 4, these algorithms considerably underper-
form relative to DQN.
Qualitatively, we find that these continuous
action algorithms successfully find the con-
stant application period at the beginning of the
episode. As the episode continues, though, both
PPO and SAC attempt a short-lived bang-bang
protocol before defaulting to the average action
for the remainder of the episode. These results
were obtained from an equal-compute hyper- Figure 4: PPO and SAC fail to find a bang-bang
parameter sweep in a fixed µ = 0.9 environ- control policy and have a lower performance than
ment. We conjecture that continuous action al- DQN; highlighting the need for discrete action al-
gorithms struggle because of the saturating gra- gorithms, as informed by optimal control.
dient effect at the limits of action space, which
correspond to bang-bang control. Additionally,
continuous action algorithms that give bonuses for policy entropy (e.g. SAC) make the task of
learning these deterministic policies even more difficult.


5   M ODEL SUCCESSFULLY GENERALIZES TO MEMORY AND OBSERVATION
    NOISE PERTURBATIONS

In the previous sections, we construct RL agents that are each trained on specific dynamics deter-
mined by a fixed µ value. However, this can be problematic in practice, as the memory strength µ is
difficult to measure (it would require fitting equation 5 to entire episodes of data), which could corre-
spond to adverse costs in the clinical setting. Furthermore, adaptive cell populations such as cancer
can dynamically change their memory capacity over time (Ringrose & Paro, 2004; Acar et al., 2005).
Thus, a useful policy should be able to interact immediately without requiring additional samples,
and with no access to the value of µ. The unknown value of µ thus represents “side information”
that is not given to the agent but provides a context for the agent to understand the current envi-
ronment. This places the new problem setting in the framework of contextual MDPs (Hallak et al.,
2015; Sodhani et al., 2022). To approach this problem while maintaining clinical applicability, we
train a general agent over a range of memory strengths. This approach of “domain randomization”
(DR) has been applied with great success in other RL problems (Tobin et al., 2017; Akkaya et al.,
2019).
To tackle this more challenging environment, we use FQF (Yang et al., 2019), a recent algorithm for
distributional RL, where the distribution (rather than only the mean) of future returns is learned. FQF
and its variants have shown success in discrete control environments. In particular, we use a noisy
variant that combines the approach of NoisyNets (Fortunato et al., 2018) for improved exploration.
Further, we find it useful to supplement the RL state with the one-hot encoded actions used in the
last K steps. This allows the agent to observe the response of the environment to the presence of
drug: At lower µ, application of drug has a drastically different effect than at higher µ values at
similar growth rates. With these changes, we sweep over hyperparameters (cf. Appendix) to find a
model capable of reducing cell populations given any memory strength.
Although the µ-specific models outperform the generalist agent in their own finetuned environments,
the generalist agent can achieve good performance across a range of memory strengths (Fig. 5). It is
worth noting that this model now enables use in settings where memory strength is entirely unknown


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Left: Policy is robust to observation noise, as tested in a memoryless environment. To
represent potential measurement errors in the clinical setting, noise is drawn from a normal distri-
bution with standard deviation σ and added to each state before given to the agent. Despite large
amounts of observation noise, the agent was able to drive population reduction and maintain a sim-
ilar resistant fraction. Each trace represents the mean over 10 trajectories, with the standard error
represented by the shaded region. Right: Learned policy is general and robust to changes in memory
strength. Every 20 decision steps the memory strength is reset to a new value, drawn from a uniform
distribution over the interval [0.6, 1]. Agent is able to quickly adapt to mitigate population growth
in the new environment.


and possibly dynamical or noisy in nature. Experimentally, we find this agent is very robust to
perturbations of various types: namely large changes in µ and large amounts of observation noise.
In both cases, the learned policy employed by the agent is able to successfully adapt and continue to
minimize population growth (Fig. 5).


6   R ELATED W ORK

The use of reinforcement learning in control of biological systems, especially in dosage control, has
been investigated by others. We will briefly highlight the most relevant prior work in this section.
(Padmanabhan et al., 2017) studies a deterministic memory-less model of cancer dynamics with
additional “immune” and “normal” cell types included. The number of tumor cells is used as a
discrete RL state, and hence a tabular method is used. In (Engelhardt, 2020), a coupled SDE governs
dynamics of d-many phenotypic subpopulations and the RL state is composed of measurements of
individual phenotype populations. Although the specific dynamical model varies, prior work often
requires unrealistic inputs to define the RL observation. An important contribution of the current
work is in advancing the model class itself while maintaining clinical relevance by using easily
measured quantities and providing a policy that generalizes across memory strengths.


7   F UTURE W ORK

We utilize frame-stacking (Mnih et al., 2015) to encapsulate the history of the agent’s trajectory, but
in future work we will test the use of recurrent policies to capture more nuanced long-term effects
which may further improve performance. We also plan to extend our deterministic framework to the
stochastic setting, as population heterogeneity is known to further complicate the control process.
This work demonstrates the benefits of combining OC and RL to simplify the control problem, show-
ing how their frameworks can be effectively integrated. This connection can be further developed by
using the memoryless OC solution to enhance RL training through reward shaping (Ng et al., 1999;
Wiewiora, 2003; Adamczyk et al., 2023) or pre-training (Uchendu et al., 2023) techniques.
In this work we present a strong proof of concept for RL-guided drug dosing, which we hope will
motivate further experimental work on adaptive therapies. Since preparing drug doses of arbitrary
concentration can be challenging, the derived bang-bang control simplifies the practical implemen-
tation of our policies. While our results show that the optimality of such policies is robust against


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


memory strength, switching rates, and dose-response curves, their optimality in the clinical setting
may be influenced by additional factors such as patient well-being, interactions with the host sys-
tem, and penalties for drug exposure. Addressing these constraints highlights the need to bridge the
“sim-to-real” gap through both novel computational approaches and evaluations on real-world data.
Inspired by its success in robotics applications (Akkaya et al., 2019), domain randomization may
prove useful in addressing such computational challenges. By training agents in a diverse set of
simulated environments with randomized parameters (e.g., switching rates, dose-response effects,
noise levels), policies can become more robust for real-world application. With such general agents
successfully trained, an offline RL problem (Levine et al., 2020) with warmstarting (Uchendu et al.,
2023; Agarwal et al., 2022) could be formulated once real-world data is available. We hope that this
approach can provide a path toward generalization, thus enabling more reliable application of RL
policies in diverse real-world contexts.


8   D ISCUSSION

In this work, we study the control of a highly non-Markovian model of adaptive cellular growth dy-
namics using deep reinforcement learning. Although we focus here on a specific parameterization
most relevant to cancer, we expect this methodology to be applied successfully to other scenarios,
including resistance development in bacteria. We find that deep RL is capable of recovering the
known optimal policy for the memoryless case and can successfully find a policy for memory-based
systems which prevents proliferation, all without access to the underlying model parameters. Fur-
thermore, we obtain a policy that is robust to measurement noise and memory strength perturbations.
Exact methods from optimal control require direct access to the population’s resistant fraction and
underlying model parameters to determine switching rates. In practice, experimentally measuring
the growth rate of a pathogenic population is simpler than determining its corresponding resistant
fraction. Surprisingly, we find that model-free reinforcement learning can provide successful poli-
cies directly from the growth rate itself, making it a promising method for use in clinical settings.


9   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

JA acknowledges funding support the NSF through Award No. PHY-2425180; the use of the su-
percomputing facilities managed by the Research Computing Department at UMass Boston; and
fruitful discussions with Rahul V. Kulkarni and Stas Tiomkin. JCK acknowledges support from
the Computational Biology Department at CMU, and from Shiladitya Banerjee in the Department
of Physics at CMU. This work is supported by the National Science Foundation under Cooperative
Agreement PHY-2019786 (The NSF AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interac-
tions, http://iaifi.org/). This project developed out of the hackathon at the 2024 Summer
School hosted by the Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions (IAIFI).


R EFERENCES
Murat Acar, Attila Becskei, and Alexander van Oudenaarden. Enhancement of cellular memory by
 reducing stochastic transitions. Nature, 435(7039):228–232, 2005.

Jacob Adamczyk, Argenis Arriojas, Stas Tiomkin, and Rahul V Kulkarni. Utilizing prior solutions
  for reward shaping and composition in entropy-regularized reinforcement learning. In Proceed-
  ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 6658–6665, 2023.

Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Reincarnating reinforcement learning: Reusing prior computation to accelerate progress. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 35:28955–28971, 2022.

Sang Hee Ahn, EunSook Kim, Chankyu Kim, Wonjoong Cheon, Myeongsoo Kim, Se Byeong Lee,
  Young Kyung Lim, Haksoo Kim, Dongho Shin, Dae Yong Kim, et al. Deep learning method for
  prediction of patient-specific dose distribution in breast cancer. Radiation Oncology, 16:1–13,
  2021.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron,
   Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, et al. Solving rubik’s cube with a
   robot hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113, 2019.
Nathalie Q. Balaban, Jack Merrin, Remy Chait, Lukasz Kowalik, and Stanislas Leibler. Bacterial
  persistence as a phenotypic switch. Science, 305(5690):1622–1625, 9 2004. ISSN 00368075.
Shiladitya Banerjee, Klevin Lo, Nikola Ojkic, Roisin Stephens, Norbert F. Scherer, and Aaron R.
  Dinner. Mechanical feedback promotes bacterial adaptation to antibiotics. Nature Physics, 17(3):
  403–409, 1 2021. ISSN 1745-2481.
Jessica M.A. Blair, Mark A. Webber, Alison J. Baylay, David O. Ogbolu, and Laura J.V. Piddock.
  Molecular mechanisms of antibiotic resistance. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 13(1):42–51, 2015.
  ISSN 17401534.
Alessandra Bonfanti, Jonathan Louis Kaplan, Guillaume Charras, and Alexandre Kabla. Fractional
  viscoelastic models for power-law materials. Soft Matter, 16(26):6002–6020, 2020.
Meghna Das Thakur, Fernando Salangsang, Allison S. Landman, William R. Sellers, Nancy K.
 Pryer, Mitchell P. Levesque, Reinhard Dummer, Martin McMahon, and Darrin D. Stuart. Mod-
 elling vemurafenib resistance in melanoma reveals a strategy to forestall drug resistance. Nature,
 494(7436):251–255, 1 2013. ISSN 1476-4687.
Andrew J Dooley, Avinash Gupta, and Mark R Middleton. Ongoing Response in BRAF V600E-
  Mutant Melanoma After Cessation of Intermittent Vemurafenib Therapy: A Case Report. Tar-
  geted Oncology, 11:557–563, 2016.
Dalit Engelhardt. Dynamic control of stochastic evolution: a deep reinforcement learning approach
  to adaptively targeting emergent drug resistance. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21
  (203):1–30, 2020.
Matthias M Fischer and Nils Bluethgen. On minimising tumoural growth under treatment resistance.
 Journal of Theoretical Biology, 579:111716, 2024.
Meire Fortunato, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Bilal Piot, Jacob Menick, Matteo Hessel, Ian Os-
 band, Alex Graves, Volodymyr Mnih, Remi Munos, Demis Hassabis, Olivier Pietquin, Charles
 Blundell, and Shane Legg. Noisy networks for exploration. In International Conference on
 Learning Representations, 2018.
Kit Gallagher, Maximilian A.R. Strobl, Derek S. Park, Fabian C. Spoendlin, Robert A. Gatenby,
  Philip K. Maini, and Alexander R.A. Anderson. Mathematical Model-Driven Deep Learning
  Enables Personalized Adaptive Therapy. Cancer Research, 84(11):1929–1941, 2024. ISSN
  15387445.
Roberto Garrappa. Numerical solution of fractional differential equations: A survey and a software
  tutorial. Mathematics, 6(2):16, 2018.
M. I. Gomoyunov. On the Relationship Between the Pontryagin Maximum Principle and the Hamil-
 ton–Jacobi–Bellman Equation in Optimal Control Problems for Fractional-Order Systems. Dif-
 ferential Equations, 59(11):1520–1526, 2023. ISSN 16083083.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and appli-
  cations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Ben Moran, Guy Lever, Sandy H Huang, Dhruva Tirumala, Jan Humplik, Markus
  Wulfmeier, Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Noah Y Siegel, Roland Hafner, et al. Learning agile soccer
  skills for a bipedal robot with deep reinforcement learning. Science Robotics, 9(89):eadi8022,
  2024.
Assaf Hallak, Dotan Di Castro, and Shie Mannor. Contextual markov decision processes. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1502.02259, 2015.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Guillaume Harmange, Raúl A Reyes Hueros, Dylan L Schaff, Benjamin Emert, Michael Saint-
  Antoine, Laura C Kim, Zijian Niu, Shivani Nellore, Mitchell E Fane, Gretchen M Alicea,
  Ashani T Weeraratna, M Celeste Simon, Abhyudai Singh, and Sydney M Shaffer. Disrupting
  cellular memory to overcome drug resistance. Nature Communications, 14, 2023.
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan
 Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in
 deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
 volume 32, 2018.
Moein Khalighi, Guilhem Sommeria-Klein, Didier Gonze, Karoline Faust, and Leo Lahti. Quan-
 tifying the impact of ecological memory on the dynamics of interacting communities. PLoS
 Computational Biology, 18(6):1–21, 2022. ISSN 15537358.
Josiah C Kratz and Shiladitya Banerjee. Gene Expression Tradeoffs Determine Bacterial Survival
  and Adaptation to Antibiotic Stress. PRX Life, 2:1–15, 2024.
Niraj Kumar, Gwendolyn M Cramer, Seyed Alireza Zamani Dahaj, Bala Sundaram, Jonathan P
  Celli, and Rahul V Kulkarni. Stochastic modeling of phenotypic switching and chemoresistance
  in cancer cell populations. Scientific reports, 9(1):10845, 2019.
Ajay Larkin, Colin Kunze, Melissa Seman, Alexander Levashkevich, Justin Curran, Dionysus
  Morris-Evans, Sophia Lemieux, Ahmad S Khalil, and Kaushik Ragunathan. Mapping the dynam-
  ics of epigenetic adaptation in s. pombe during heterochromatin misregulation. Developmental
  cell, 59(16):2222–2238, 2024.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tuto-
  rial, review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.
Brian N. Lundstrom, Matthew H. Higgs, William J. Spain, and Adrienne L. Fairhall. Fractional
  differentiation by neocortical pyramidal neurons. Nature Neuroscience, 11(11):1335–1342, 2008.
  ISSN 15461726.
Roland Mathis and Martin Ackermann. Asymmetric cellular memory in bacteria exposed to antibi-
  otics. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 17(1):1–14, 2017. ISSN 14712148.
Riccardo Miotto, Li Li, Brian A Kidd, and Joel T Dudley. Deep patient: an unsupervised represen-
  tation to predict the future of patients from the electronic health records. Scientific reports, 6(1):
  1–10, 2016.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Gatien Moriceau, Willy Hugo, Aayoung Hong, Hubing Shi, Xiangju Kong, Clarissa C. Yu,
  Richard C. Koya, Ahmed A. Samatar, Negar Khanlou, Jonathan Braun, Kathleen Ruchalski,
  Heike Seifert, James Larkin, Kimberly B. Dahlman, Douglas B. Johnson, Alain Algazi, Jeffrey A.
  Sosman, Antoni Ribas, and Roger S. Lo. Tunable-Combinatorial Mechanisms of Acquired Re-
  sistance Limit the Efficacy of BRAF/MEK Cotargeting but Result in Melanoma Drug Addiction.
  Cancer Cell, 27(2):240–256, 2 2015. ISSN 1535-6108.
Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations:
  Theory and application to reward shaping. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 99, pp. 278–287, 1999.
Regina Padmanabhan, Nader Meskin, and Wassim M Haddad. Reinforcement learning-based con-
  trol of drug dosing for cancer chemotherapy treatment. Mathematical biosciences, 293:11–20,
  2017.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dor-
  mann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021.

                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Leonie Ringrose and Renato Paro. Epigenetic regulation of cellular memory by the polycomb and
  trithorax group proteins. Annual Review of Genetics, 38:412–443, 2004.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Heike Seifert, Rosalie Fisher, Juan Martin-Liberal, Kim Edmonds, Peta Hughes, Komel Khabra,
  Martin Gore, and James Larkin. Prognostic markers and tumour growth kinetics in melanoma
  patients progressing on vemurafenib. Melanoma Research, 26(2):138 – 144, 2016.
Sydney M. Shaffer, Benjamin L. Emert, Raúl A. Reyes Hueros, Christopher Cote, Guillaume
  Harmange, Dylan L. Schaff, Ann E. Sizemore, Rohit Gupte, Eduardo Torre, Abhyudai Singh,
  Danielle S. Bassett, and Arjun Raj. Memory Sequencing Reveals Heritable Single-Cell Gene
  Expression Programs Associated with Distinct Cellular Behaviors. Cell, 182(4):947–959, 2020.
  ISSN 10974172.
Shagun Sodhani, Franziska Meier, Joelle Pineau, and Amy Zhang. Block contextual mdps for
  continual learning. In Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference, pp. 608–623. PMLR,
  2022.
Kenichi Suda, Kenji Tomizawa, Hirotaka Osada, Yoshihiko Maehara, Yasushi Yatabe, Yoshitaka
  Sekido, and Tetsuya Mitsudomi. Conversion from the “oncogene addiction” to “drug addiction”
  by intensive inhibition of the egfr and met in lung cancer with activating egfr mutation. Lung
  Cancer, 76(3):292–299, 2012. ISSN 0169-5002.
Chong Sun, Liqin Wang, Sidong Huang, Guus J.J.E. Heynen, Anirudh Prahallad, Caroline Robert,
  John Haanen, Christian Blank, Jelle Wesseling, Stefan M. Willems, Davide Zecchin, Sebastijan
  Hobor, Prashanth K. Bajpe, Cor Lieftink, Christina Mateus, Stephan Vagner, Wipawadee Gr-
  ernrum, Ingrid Hofland, Andreas Schlicker, Lodewyk F.A. Wessels, Roderick L. Beijersbergen,
  Alberto Bardelli, Federica Di Nicolantonio, Alexander M.M. Eggermont, and Rene Bernards.
  Reversible and adaptive resistance to BRAF(V600E) inhibition in melanoma. Nature, 508(7494):
  118–122, 3 2014. ISSN 1476-4687.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Do-
  main randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In
  2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS), pp. 23–30.
  IEEE, 2017.
Ikechukwu Uchendu, Ted Xiao, Yao Lu, Banghua Zhu, Mengyuan Yan, Joséphine Simon, Matthew
  Bennice, Chuyuan Fu, Cong Ma, Jiantao Jiao, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Jump-start re-
  inforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 34556–34583. PMLR, 23–29 Jul
  2023.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 30, 2016.
Neil Vasan, José Baselga, and David M. Hyman. A view on drug resistance in cancer. Nature, 575
  (7782):299–309, 2019. ISSN 14764687.
Eric Wiewiora. Potential-based shaping and Q-value initialization are equivalent. Journal of Artifi-
  cial Intelligence Research, 19:205–208, 2003.
Christopher Witzany, Jens Rolff, Roland Regoes, and Claudia Igler. The pharmacokinetic-
  pharmacodynamic modeling framework as a tool to predict drug resistance evolution. Micro-
  biology, pp. 1–37, 2023.
Denise M. Wolf, Lisa Fontaine-Bodin, Ilka Bischofs, Gavin Price, Jay Keasling, and Adam P. Arkin.
  Memory in microbes: Quantifying history-dependent behavior in a bacterium. PLoS ONE, 3(2),
  2008. ISSN 19326203.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Derek Yang, Li Zhao, Zichuan Lin, Tao Qin, Jiang Bian, and Tie-Yan Liu. Fully parameterized quan-
  tile function for distributional reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32, 2019.


A     R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING D ETAILS
We adapted DQN from Stable-Baselines3 (Raffin et al., 2021) with a Double DQN action selection
rule (Van Hasselt et al., 2016). We train the RL agent for 3×105 total environment steps. We limited
the episodes to be of length 104 steps (corresponding to 100 hours in simulation). An MLP of fixed
size (2 hidden layers with 64 dimensions each and ReLU activation) was used to parameterize the
Q-function.
Regarding the environment and training, we list several key implementation choices: At the begin-
ning of an episode, the state is zero-padded to always be of length K = 5. We experimented with
adding a penalty for allowing the number of cells to increase beyond the initial amount upon termi-
nation, but found this was not necessary for successful training. Borrowing terminology from the
literature on Atari environments (Mnih et al., 2015), we stack K frames (previous cost values) to
form the RL agent’s state vector. Although initially we let K be a µ-dependent hyperparameter, we
found a constant choice of K = 5 to work well across the values of µ studied.
We find exponentially decaying the exploration parameter ε to work better than the typical linear
annealing (with constant, positive final ε) scheduling. We conjecture that this is because non-greedy
actions can be quite detrimental (causing the environment to terminate), and exponentially decaying
ε ensures some exploration continues to occur but with increasingly fewer random actions. To ensure
the agent is not overly myopic (especially for such long episodes) we found a large discount factor
of γ = 0.999 (corresponding to an effective horizon of H = (1 − γ)−1 = 103 ) to be helpful. When
training the agent, we wait until the completion of one rollout episode, and take as many gradient
steps as environment steps have occurred.

A.1   H YPERPARAMETERS

We find that sweeping over a range of hyperparameters (as shown in Table 2) did not have a signif-
icant effect on performance, though for reproducibility we list the final hyperparameters used (for
µ = 0.7) below for DQN and FQF experiments, respectively. (N/A indicates the value was not
swept over, and fixed to the finetuned value.) The discount factor γ = 0.999, gradient steps per
update (1), frames stacked (5) and buffer size (100,000) are fixed throughout.

                            Table 2: Hyperparameters for Double DQN

             Hyperparameter           Sweep Values                    Finetuned Value
             batch size               16, 32, 64                      32
             exploration rate         0.01 − 0.2                      0.05
             learning rate            10−5 − 10−3                     3.60 × 10−4
             target update interval   1,000, 5,000, 10,000, 30,000    1,000


                          Table 3: Hyperparameters for (NoisyNet) FQF

               Hyperparameter             Sweep Values               Finetuned Value
               batch size                 8, 64                      8
               exploration rate           0.02 − 0.2                 0.2
               learning rate              5 × 10−4 − 5 × 10−3        2.7 × 10−3
               target Polyak averaging    0.001, 0.005, 0.01         0.005
               n-step TD                  1, 2, 4, 32                1
               entropy coeff.             0, 0.0005, 0.001, 0.003    0.003


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    F URTHER E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS


Figure 6: We find that the simulation time can have a significant effect on RL performance. For
each choice of ∆, we run a random sweep of size 30 over various hyperparameters, selecting the
highest-performing run for each ∆. Since smaller values of ∆ require longer compute-times for
simulations, there is a tradeoff between the amount of time (also, the maximum pulsing frequency,
relevant in clinical settings) and the best performance. We have chosen to use ∆ = 0.01 throughout.


Figure 7: Robustness experiment on changing switching rates α, δ. The black box in the center
highlights the rates at which the agent was trained. On each axis, the rate is varied by ±20%,
representing a large range of biologically plausible parameters. As α increases (or δ decreases), the
cells are more often in the resistant state (cf. Fig. 1), making the control problem more difficult for
the agent.


                                                  15
