Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EVERAGING S UB -O PTIMAL DATA FOR H UMAN - IN -
THE -L OOP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Calarina Muslimani                            Matthew E. Taylor
 University of Alberta                         University of Alberta
 musliman@ualberta.ca                          Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute
                                               matthew.e.taylor@ualberta.ca



                                            A BSTRACT

         To create useful reinforcement learning (RL) agents, step zero is to design a suit-
         able reward function that captures the nuances of the task. However, reward
         engineering can be a difficult and time-consuming process. Instead, human-in-
         the-loop RL methods hold the promise of learning reward functions from human
         feedback. Despite recent successes, many of the human-in-the-loop RL methods
         still require numerous human interactions to learn successful reward functions. To
         improve the feedback efficiency of human-in-the-loop RL methods (i.e., require
         less human interaction), this paper introduces Sub-optimal Data Pre-training, SDP,
         an approach that leverages reward-free, sub-optimal data to improve scalar- and
         preference-based RL algorithms. In SDP, we start by pseudo-labeling all low-
         quality data with the minimum environment reward. Through this process, we
         obtain reward labels to pre-train our reward model without requiring human la-
         beling or preferences. This pre-training phase provides the reward model a head
         start in learning, enabling it to recognize that low-quality transitions should be as-
         signed low rewards. Through extensive experiments with both simulated and hu-
         man teachers, we find that SDP can at least meet, but often significantly improve,
         state of the art human-in-the-loop RL performance across a variety of simulated
         robotic tasks.



1   I NTRODUCTION

In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent’s objective is to interact with an environment and maximize
its total (discounted) expected reward. The reward hypothesis further maintains that a well-specified
reward function is sufficient for an agent to learn to solve a task (Sutton & Barto, 2018). However,
defining a reward function that precisely captures all task complexities is often tedious and non-
trivial (Booth et al., 2023). There have been notable examples of reward misspecification, in which
RL agents discovered and exploited unintended shortcuts in the reward function (Skalse et al., 2022).
One notorious example is the CoastRunners game, in which the goal should be to finish a boat race
as fast as possible — an RL agent instead gained the most reward by spinning its boat in a circle
despite concurrently catching on fire and crashing into other boats (Clark & Amodei, 2016).
A promising alternative is to learn reward functions directly from human feedback. In this paradigm,
humans can provide feedback in the form of preferences or scalar signals, which can then be used
to learn a reward function that is consistent with human desires (Daniel et al., 2014; Christiano
et al., 2017). Despite recent progress, existing preference- and scalar-based RL methods still suffer
from high human labeling costs that can require thousands of human queries to learn an adequate
reward function (Christiano et al., 2017). Prior work attempts to mitigate this issue through several
mechanisms, including active learning (Lee et al., 2021a), data augmentation (Park et al., 2022),
semi-supervised learning (Park et al., 2022), and meta-learning (Hejna III & Sadigh, 2023).
Alternatively, our work draws on recent advances in offline RL that have demonstrated the value of
low-quality data (Yu et al., 2021). However, its potential in human-in-the-loop RL remains unex-
plored. As low-quality data is often readily accessible or easy to obtain, this work addresses this gap
by asking the question:


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Can we leverage sub-optimal, unlabeled data
                      to improve learning in human-in-the-loop RL methods?
To that end, we present Sub-optimal Data Pre-training, SDP, a tool for human-in-the-loop RL al-
gorithms to increase human feedback efficiency. SDP leverages sub-optimal trajectories by pseudo-
labeling all transitions with the minimum environment reward. The now pseudo-labeled sub-optimal
data serves two purposes. First, we pre-train a regression-based reward model by applying standard
supervised learning to minimize the mean squared loss. Intuitively, this pre-training provides the
reward model a head start, biasing it towards assigning lower reward values to these low-quality
transitions. Second, we initialize the RL agent’s replay buffer with the sub-optimal data and make
learning updates to the RL agent. This process changes the RL agent’s policy and provides differ-
ent behaviors for the human to provide feedback on (relative to learning with no initial sub-optimal
data). This ensures that when the human teacher provides feedback, their time is used efficiently,
avoiding redundant feedback on the existing sub-optimal data. Afterward, we follow the standard
preference- or scalar-based RL protocol.
This paper’s core contribution is showing that we can harness the availability of low-quality, reward-
free data for human-in-the-loop RL approaches by pseudo-labeling it with minimum rewards and
treating it as a prior for learning reward models. We first validate the utility of SDP in extensive
simulated teacher experiments, combining it with four scalar- and preference-based RL algorithms.
These experiments show that SDP significantly improves the feedback efficiency in complex tasks
from both the DeepMind Control (DMControl) (Tassa et al., 2018) and Meta-World (Yu et al., 2020)
suites. Crucially, we further highlight the real-world applicability of SDP by demonstrating its
success with human teachers in a 16-person user study. Overall, this work takes an important step
toward considering how human-in-the-loop RL approaches can take advantage of readily available
sub-optimal data.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Human-in-the-Loop RL Several approaches in human-in-the-loop RL allow agents to leverage
human feedback to adapt or learn new behavior. Learning from demonstration is one such methodol-
ogy that allows a human to provide examples of desired agent behavior (Argall et al., 2009). Human
demonstration data has been used to shape the environment’s reward function (Brys et al., 2015),
develop a reward function from scratch (Abbeel & Ng, 2004), or bias the agent’s policy towards
certain actions (Taylor et al., 2011). Although demonstrations can be a rich source of feedback, they
are often expensive to obtain and may require domain experts (Dragan & Srinivasa, 2012).
Another approach is learning from preference-based feedback where a teacher provides preferences
between two or more sets of agent behavior (Christiano et al., 2017). Preference learning has been
popularized in recent years as it can require less effort and expertise compared to providing demon-
strations. To further reduce the amount of human interaction required, several strategies have been
introduced. This has included combining preferences with demonstrations (Ibarz et al., 2018; Bıyık
et al., 2022), unsupervised pre-training (Lee et al., 2021a), bi-level optimization (Liu et al., 2022),
semi-supervised learning (Park et al., 2022), data augmentation (Park et al., 2022), uncertainty-based
exploration (Liang et al., 2022), meta-learning (Hejna III & Sadigh, 2023), and active learning ap-
proaches (Hu et al., 2024). Despite its popularity, some argue that comparison feedback might not
capture the full intricacies of human preferences, as oftentimes the human is limited to choosing
between two options (Daniel et al., 2014; White et al., 2024).
As a result, another body of work focuses on learning from scalar feedback where human teachers
can provide scalar signals to evaluate an agent’s behavior (Knox & Stone, 2009; Griffith et al., 2013;
Loftin et al., 2016; White et al., 2024). Several works use scalar feedback to either learn a reward
model (Daniel et al., 2014; Cabi et al., 2020) or an action-value function (Knox & Stone, 2009;
2013; Warnell et al., 2018) via regression.

Learning from Sub-Optimal Data SDP aims to leverage sub-optimal data for scalar- and
preference-based RL algorithms. However, learning from low-quality data or negative examples has
been applied in other areas of RL and imitation learning (Chen et al., 2021; Tangkaratt et al., 2021).
In standard RL, several works use sub-optimal demonstrations to initialize a policy (Taylor et al.,
2011; Hester et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2019). In goal-conditioned RL, Hindsight-Experience-Replay


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


uses failed episodes by treating them as a success with respect to a different goal (Andrychowicz
et al., 2017). In inverse reinforcement learning (IRL), Shiarlis et al. (2016) proposed a constrained
optimization formulation that can accommodate both successful and failed demonstrations. Brown
et al. (2019) makes use of ranked demonstrations to learn a reward function in IRL. Later work in
IRL automatically generates ranked trajectories by adding increasing amounts of noise to a learned
policy (Brown et al., 2020). Lastly, in offline RL, Singh et al. (2020) leverages sub-optimal tran-
sitions from multiple prior tasks and assigns reward labels according to the current task reward
function. Our work is most closely related to Yu et al. (2022), which leverages reward-free, sub-
optimal data in the offline RL setting by pseudo-labeling all transitions with zero and adding them
to the RL agent’s replay buffer. However, we found that directly applying this approach to the
human-in-the-loop RL setting was ineffective (see Appendix D.5).

3     BACKGROUND
In the RL paradigm, agents interact with an environment to maximize the total (discounted) expected
reward it can achieve. This interaction is modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) which con-
sists of ⟨S, A, T, r, γ⟩. At every time-step t, the agent receives a state st ∈ S from the environment
and chooses an action at ∈ A. The transition function, T , determines the probability of transitioning
to state st+1 and receiving reward rt+1 , given the agent was in state st and executed action at . The
environment then provides the agent rt+1   P. ∞The agent attempts to learn a policy, π : S → A, that
maximizes the expected return E[G] = k=0 γ k rt+k+1 , which is defined as the expected sum of
discounted future rewards with discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1).

3.1   R EWARD L EARNING FROM H UMAN F EEDBACK

This paper assumes that we are in a reward-free paradigm, an MDP/R setting, where our goal is to
(1) learn a reward function, r̂, from human feedback and (2) learn a policy that maximizes the total
(discounted) expected r̂. We follow the standard reward learning framework that uses supervised
learning to learn a parameterized reward function, r̂θ , with parameters θ (Christiano et al., 2017). In
both scalar- and preference-based settings, we consider trajectory segments σ, where σ consists of a
sequence of states and actions: {st , at , st+1 , at+1 , ..., st+k , at+k }, with k as the segment size.

Preference-based Reward Learning In preference-based learning, two segments, σ 0 and σ 1 , are
compared by a teacher, yielding y ∈ {0, 0.5, 1}. Specifically, if the teacher preferred segment σ 1
over segment σ 0 , then y is set to 1, and if the converse is true y is set to 0. If both segments are
equally preferred, then y is set to 0.5. As feedback is collected, it is stored as tuples (σ 0 , σ 1 , y) in
the reward model data set DRM . In general, if σ i > σ j , then the segment σ i is preferred by the
teacher over segment σ j . We follow the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley & Terry, 1952) to define a
preference predictor using the reward function r̂θ :
                                                  exp( t r̂θ (s1t , a1t ))
                                                       P
                                 1      0
                           Pθ (σ > σ ) =      P              P           i i
                                                                                                         (1)
                                                i∈{0,1} exp(   t r̂θ (st , at ))

Intuitively, this model assumes that the probability of the teacher preferring a segment depends
exponentially on the total sum of predicted rewards along the segment. To train the reward function,
we can use supervised learning where the teacher provides the labels y. More specifically, we update
r̂θ by minimizing the standard binary cross-entropy objective:

    LCE (θ, D) = − E(σ0 ,σ1 ,y)∼D (1 − y) logPθ (σ 0 > σ 1 ) + y logPθ (σ 1 > σ 0 ) (2)



Scalar-based Reward Learning The primary difference between scalar and preference-based re-
ward learning is that in scalar-based learning, the human teacher assigns numerical ratings to trajec-
tory segments. In this setting, the comparisons between segments are implicit. More concretely, a
teacher assigns a scalar value y to a segment σ i , and as feedback is collected, it is stored as tuples
(σ i , y) in the reward model data set DRM . We then apply standard regression and update r̂θ by
minimizing the mean squared error:
                                                            X
                          LM SE (θ, D) = E(σi ,y)∼D (y −        r̂θ (sit , ait ))2

                                                                                                     (3)
                                                                t


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Human Studies in Human in the Loop RL To evaluate human-in-the-loop RL algorithms, a
common protocol is the use of simulated teachers, where feedback is provided according to a ground
truth reward function. This can be useful, as it offers an efficient and controlled evaluation setting.
However, we argue that it is essential to evaluate human-in-the-loop RL algorithms with real human
feedback. This is especially important in light of recent work finding discrepancies between prefer-
ence learning algorithms when using simulated teacher feedback versus human feedback (Metcalf
et al., 2024).


4   S UB - OPTIMAL DATA P RE - TRAINING

In this section, we present SDP, a tool that leverages sub-optimal trajectories to improve the feedback
efficiency for human-in-the-loop RL. We refer to sub-optimal trajectories as sequences of (s, a) pairs
such that:

                   r(st , at ) − rmin < ϵ ∀t ∈ [t, t + k] for some small ϵ > 0,                      (4)

where k is the segment size and rmin is the minimum possible environment reward. Equation 4
essentially expresses that the rewards achieved along a sub-optimal trajectory should be close to rmin .
However, it is important to note that in practice we do not have access to the ground truth reward.
This prevents us from directly identifying sub-optimal trajectories using Equation 4. Instead, we rely
on selecting trajectories that we estimate will align with this criterion, such as gathering trajectories
via a random policy.
Once sub-optimal trajectories are collected, we take the approach of pseudo-labeling all transitions
with rmin . The goal of SDP is then to use this pseudo-labeled data to create a prior for reward
models in human-in-the-loop RL methods (see Figure 1). Its simplicity enables SDP to be used in
conjunction with any off-the-shelf human-in-the-loop RL algorithm that learns a reward function
from human feedback.
SDP comprises two phases: (1) the reward model pre-training phase and (2) the agent update phase.
In the reward model pre-training phase, we first gather a data set, Dsub , of N sub-optimal state,
action transitions. We then pseudo-label all transitions in Dsub with rewards of rmin , resulting in
Dsub = {si , ai , rmin }N
                        i=1 . Dsub is then used to optimize the reward model r̂θ with the mean squared
loss in Equation 3. As a result, the reward model r̂θ learns to associate all sub-optimal transitions
with a low reward. Without such a prior, the reward model would initially have random estimates
for these transitions; while the only way to improve such estimates is to obtain feedback from a
teacher. Therefore, the reward model pre-training phase provides a valuable reward initialization
without requiring any human feedback.
Next, in the agent update phase, we initialize the RL agent’s replay buffer Dagent with Dsub . The RL
agent then briefly interacts with its environment and performs gradient updates according to its loss
functions. The agent update process changes the RL agent’s policy and generates new transitions,
which are then stored in both the agent’s replay buffer Dagent and the reward model’s data set DRM .
It is important to note that in standard scalar- and preference-based reward learning, we query the
teacher for feedback on trajectory segments sampled from DRM . Therefore, adding new transitions
into DRM during the agent update phase is necessary to ensure that the teacher does not provide
redundant feedback to the original sub-optimal transitions (as DRM was empty prior to the agent
update phase). When it is time for the teacher to provide their first set of feedback, the feedback can
cover a different region of the state and action space, relative to the original sub-optimal data. In Ap-
pendix D.1, Figure 8 we empirically show that the agent update phase changes the RL agent’s policy
by performing policy rollouts and analyzing the differences in state distributions. See Algorithm 1
for the complete pseudocode.
At first glance, labeling sub-optimal transitions with an incorrect reward may seem problematic, as
incorrect labels do introduce statistical bias into the reward model and the RL agent’s value network.
However, as the transitions are sub-optimal, we observe that the bias for using an incorrect reward
is low (see Figure 9 in Appendix D.2). Moreover, by using the sub-optimal transitions, we increase
the overall amount of data used by both models, which can decrease the models’ variance, as shown
in the offline RL setting (Yu et al., 2022).


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Agent            Reward model
                                                                    Reward
                       replay buffer        pre-training            model
                                               phase

                                             get



                                            Agent update
                                               phase


                                             take action


Figure 1: Overview of SDP: After obtaining a data set of sub-optimal trajectories, we pseudo-label
the transitions with rewards of rmin (e.g., rmin = 0). We then pre-train the reward model r̂θ using
this data set. During the agent update phase, we initialize the RL agent’s replay buffer with the same
pseudo-labeled data set. The agent then interacts in the environment and makes learning updates to
obtain new behaviors for a teacher to give feedback.

Algorithm 1 SDP
Require: Reward model r̂θ ← θ randomly initialized, Reward model data set DRM ← ∅, RL agent
with replay buffer Dagent ← ∅, Sub-optimal data set Dsub with reward labels rmin
 1: // REWARD MODEL PRE-TRAIN PHASE
 2: for each gradient step do
 3:         Optimize r̂θ on Dsub with LM SE (Equation 3)
 4: end for
 5: // AGENT UPDATE PHASE
 6: Dagent ← Dsub
 7: for each time-step t do
 8:         Collect st+1 by taking action at ∼ π(st )
 9:         Store (st , at , r̂θ , st+1 ) in Dagent
10:         Store (st , at ) in DRM
11:         Update RL agent with Dagent
12: end for
13: Begin scalar- or preference-based RL using pre-trained r̂θ , RL agent, and Dagent , DRM



5     E XPERIMENTS

This section considers the following four research questions (RQ’s):

    RQ 1: Can SDP improve upon existing scalar- and preference-based RL methods?
    RQ 2: Can SDP effectively leverage sub-optimal trajectories from different tasks to improve per-
          formance on a target task?
    RQ 3: Can SDP be used with real human feedback?
    RQ 4: How sensitive is SDP to various hyperparameters?


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1   E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN

To demonstrate the versatility of SDP, we apply SDP to both preference and scalar-based RL ap-
proaches. However, as preference feedback can be less time-consuming than scalar feedback, we
primarily concentrate on preference-based RL in our experiments, exploring scalar feedback in a
smaller capacity. For the preference-based experiments, we combine SDP with four contemporary
preference-based algorithms: PEBBLE (Lee et al., 2021a), RUNE (Liang et al., 2022), SURF (Park
et al., 2022), and MRN (Liu et al., 2022). We benchmark the performance of the four algorithms
augmented with SDP against their original versions without SDP, as well as against SAC. We treat
SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) as an oracle (i.e., upper bound) because it learns while accessing the
ground truth reward function, which is unavailable to the other algorithms. For the scalar-based
experiments, we combine SDP with R-PEBBLE (a regression variant of PEBBLE). We compare
SDP + R-PEBBLE against R-PEBBLE, Deep TAMER (Warnell et al., 2018) (a scalar feedback RL
algorithm), and SAC. We note that SAC is the core RL algorithm used across all baselines.

Implementation Details For SDP, we collected sub-optimal trajectories via a random policy. In
particular, we used 50000 state, action transitions for all experiments in Section 5.2. Note that we
do not require explicit access to a sub-optimal policy; we only require state, action transitions from
said policy. Moreover, to ensure a fair comparison across algorithms, we maintained equal feedback
budgets for all algorithms within each environment, while adjusting the budget across environments
to reflect their degree of difficulty. See Appendix A for a complete overview of the implementation
process and specific hyperparameters for all algorithms.

Evaluation We show average offline performance (i.e., freeze the policy and evaluate it with no
exploration) over ten episodes using either the ground truth reward function (DMControl experi-
ments) or the success rate (Meta-World experiments). It is important to note that only SAC has
access to the ground truth reward function. We perform this evaluation every 10000 training steps.
To systemically evaluate performance, we use a simulated teacher that provides either a scalar rat-
ing of a single trajectory segment or preferences between two trajectory segments according to the
ground truth reward function. To thoroughly test the effectiveness of SDP, we perform evaluations on
four robotic locomotion tasks from the DMControl Suite: Walker-walk, Cheetah-run, Quadruped-
walk, and Cartpole-swingup, and five robotic manipulation tasks from Meta-World: Hammer, Door-
unlock, Door-lock, Drawer-open, and Window-open. In our experiments, the results are averaged
over five seeds with shaded regions or error bars indicating 95% confidence intervals. To test for
significant differences in final performance (i.e., the undiscounted return) and learning efficiency
(i.e., the total area under the return curve, AUC), we perform Welch t-tests (equal variances not
assumed) with a p-value of 0.05. See Appendices D.8 and D.9, Tables 9-14 for a summary of final
performance and AUC across all experiments.

5.2   L OCOMOTION AND M ANIPULATION R ESULTS

Preference Feedback Experiments We first address RQ 1 by evaluating the utility of SDP in the
preference-based RL setting. Considering all four preference-based algorithms in the nine environ-
ments, SDP significantly (p < 0.05) improved learning (i.e., either final performance or AUC) in 23
out of the 36 experiments (see Figure 2). In the remaining experiments, there were no significant
differences in the performance between SDP and the baseline algorithms. The addition of SDP (i.e.,
SDP + base algorithm) never statistically hurt performance.

Scalar Feedback Experiments Continuing our investigation into RQ 1, we now evaluate the
performance of SDP in the scalar-based RL setting. We performed evaluations in Walker-walk,
Cheetah-run, and Quadruped-walk. In Figure 3, we found that SDP (purple curve) significantly im-
proves either the final performance or AUC compared to R-PEBBLE (navy curve) and Deep TAMER
(yellow curve). More impressively, we found that SDP achieves comparable final performance to
SAC (red curve), which uses the ground truth reward function, using as little as 60 feedback queries.

Leveraging Different Task Data in SDP Our previous experiments showed that SDP can lever-
age sub-optimal data from the target task to improve human-in-the-loop RL methods. Now, ad-
dressing RQ 2, we investigate whether SDP can similarly use sub-optimal data from related tasks to


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         *


                *         *                                *
          *                                    *
                                         *             *


          *                                                              *         *
                          *                            *
                                          *                *
                                               *


                                                       *                           *
                                               *
          *                               *


Figure 2: Results from the preference feedback experiments in the DMControl and Meta-World
suites show mean AUC ± 95% confidence intervals. * indicates that SDP + the base preference
learning algorithm achieves a statistically greater score than the base preference learning algorithm.


Figure 3: In the scalar feedback experiments on the DMControl environments, SDP significantly
outperforms R-PEBBLE and Deep TAMER and achieves comparable performance to SAC.


improve performance on the target task. We perform three preference learning experiments, com-
paring PEBBLE with SDP + PEBBLE, using sub-optimal data from a different prior task that has
the same virtual robot: (1) Walker-stand for Walker-walk, (2) Quadruped-walk for Quadruped-run,
and (3) Drawer-open for Door-open. To obtain the sub-optimal data for the prior tasks, we gath-
ered transitions from partially trained policies as opposed to using random policies. Each partially
trained policy achieved a final score of approximately 15-20% of that achieved by a fully trained
policy. This ensured that the distribution of sub-optimal data differed between the prior and target
tasks. See Appendix A.2 for further details on the experiment setup. Figure 4 demonstrates that
in all three tested environments, SDP can successfully leverage sub-optimal data from related tasks
(green curve) as it achieved similar performance to SDP when leveraging target task data (purple
curve).


5.3   P REFERENCE L EARNING WITH H UMAN F EEDBACK

To evaluate human-in-the-loop RL algorithms, we argue that it is critical to understand their efficacy
with human teachers. However, human user studies do not appear to be widely adopted in the current
literature. To empirically investigate this, we conducted a survey of 45 preference learning studies


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: This highlights that SDP can leverage sub-optimal data from different prior tasks as it
performed comparable to SDP when using target task sub-optimal data.


from 2012 to 20241 to understand the prevalence of human user studies in the preference learning
literature. We found that fewer than 50% tested their proposed algorithms with human participants
who were not also the authors. Moreover, of those studies that did involve human participants,
only 41% included non-expert individuals, while none provided sufficient demographic information
about their participants (e.g., gender, race/ethnicity, level of education). These limitations raise
significant concerns about whether and how current preference learning algorithms generalize to
different populations.
To that end, we now address RQ 3 and evaluate the efficacy of SDP with real human feedback. We
conduct an ethics-approved human-subject study of 16 participants (9 male, 7 female). Age ranges
were collected: 18-24 (6), 25-30 (7), and 50-70 (3). Participants self-identified their membership
in racial groups: South Asian (6), East Asian (3), White (4), Middle Eastern or North African (2),
and multi-racial (1). The participants’ highest educational attainments were: high school diploma
(3), Bachelor’s degrees (8), and Master’s degrees (5), and their expertise varied across AI/ML (12),
other computer science topics (1), and non-computer science fields (3). This highlights the diversity
of our participants in terms of demographics and expertise.
This user study compares the performance of SDP and PEBBLE in two DMControl environments:
Pendulum-swingup (with 7 participants) and Cartpole-swingup (with 12 participants). We focused
our comparison to PEBBLE as it performed comparably to the other preference learning baselines
in Section 5.2. We use a between-subjects experimental design — each participant provides prefer-
ences for a single seed of both SDP and PEBBLE algorithms. The preference budgets for Pendulum-
swingup and Cartpole-swingup were 40 and 48, respectively. We selected these environments specif-
ically because they could be solved with fewer preferences, aiming to reduce the overall time com-
mitment required from participants. Each trial for a single environment lasted approximately 1–1.5
hours. See Appendix B for more details including user instructions and interface.
We visualize both algorithms’ final performance and AUC in Figure 5. We found that in both en-
vironments SDP (purple plots) maintains significant (p < 0.05) performance gains over PEBBLE
(blue plots) in terms of either final performance or AUC. In Cartpole-swingup, we also observed
consistent performance from SDP regardless of whether the teacher was human or simulated. This
suggests that our prior results with simulated teachers can generalize to settings where human feed-
back is provided. Moreover, we observed no significant differences in SDP’s effectiveness across
demographic factors, including gender, age, educational, and computer science background (see
Appendix C, Tables 7 and 8). This finding is particularly encouraging for the potential real-world
deployment of SDP, highlighting its usability for non-expert users across diverse demographics.

5.4      A BLATION AND S ENSITIVITY S TUDIES

To further understand the effectiveness of SDP, we perform further analysis of SDP across three
dimensions: (1) the phases of SDP, (2) the number of feedback queries, and (3) the amount of
sub-optimal data. This analysis aims to address RQ 4 and provide a deeper understanding of the
factors influencing SDP’s performance. For these experiments, we focus on SDP + R-PEBBLE in
the Walker-walk environment. Additional results for Cheetah-run can be found in Appendix D.5.
   1
       See Appendix B.2 for more details.


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                   *                     *
                *


Figure 5: This demonstrates that SDP can significantly outperform PEBBLE in terms of both AUC
(left) and final performance (right) even when human teachers are providing preferences. * denotes
a statistically significant difference between SDP and PEBBLE.


       Figure 6: These figures show ablation and sensitivity studies of SDP in Walker-walk.


SDP Component Analysis First, we evaluate the effect of each phase of SDP individually, the
reward model pre-train phase, and the agent update phase. Figure 6 (leftmost) demonstrates the
importance of using both phases in SDP for scalar-based RL approaches. We found that the SDP
variants that only use one of the phases (green and gray curves) result in worse performance than
the full SDP (purple curve).

Effect of Feedback Amount We evaluate SDP and R-PEBBLE with feedback budgets
∈ [60, 100, 200] to analyze the impact of feedback quantity on performance. As shown in Fig-
ure 6 (middle), SDP (purple curves) consistently outperforms R-PEBBLE (navy curves), further
demonstrating its effectiveness across varying feedback levels.

Effect of Sub-Optimal Data Amount We evaluate the performance of SDP using varying
amounts of sub-optimal transitions ∈ [5000, 15000, 50000]. Figure 6 (rightmost) indicates that
while 5000 transitions (gray curve) led to the poorest performance, increasing this amount to 15000
or 50000 (green and purple curves) yielded comparable or improved results, suggesting that more
sub-optimal data can benefit SDP.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we present SDP, an approach that improves the feedback efficiency for human-in-
the-loop RL algorithms. SDP is specifically designed to leverage reward-free, sub-optimal data for
scalar- and preference-based RL approaches. By pseudo-labeling low-quality data with the mini-
mum environment rewards, we can pre-train the reward model without the need for human labeling.
This provides the reward model with a head start in learning. This head start allows the reward model
to learn to associate low-quality transitions with low reward values, even before receiving any actual


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


human feedback. Our simulated teacher experiments in DMControl and Meta-World suites demon-
strate that SDP can significantly improve a variety of preference- and scalar-based reward learning
algorithms. Importantly, we further validate the real-world applicability of SDP by demonstrating
its success in a 16-person user study. This work takes an important step towards considering how
sub-optimal data can be leveraged for human-in-the-loop RL.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Part of this work has taken place in the Intelligent Robot Learning Lab at the University of Alberta,
which is supported in part by research grants from Alberta Innovates; Alberta Machine Intelligence
Institute (Amii); a Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Amii; Digital Research Alliance of Canada; Mitacs;
and the National Science and Engineering Research Council.

E THICS S TATEMENT

The goal of preference and scalar-based RL is to learn reward functions that encode human prefer-
ences. However, this necessitates interaction with human users, raising concerns about potential bi-
ases in the collected preferences. If these preferences are primarily drawn from a non-representative
group, the resulting RL system may unfairly prioritize the desires or needs of that group over others.
To that end, we performed a human subject study that was reviewed and approved by an external
ethics committee. This ensured the responsible and ethical collection of human preferences. In ad-
dition, we took care to gather participants from a wide range of both demographic and educational
backgrounds, which we detail in Section 5.3.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

To ensure the reproducibility of our work, we provide a link to our code repository: https://
github.com/cmuslima/SDP_ICLR. We also provide pseudocode in Section 4. Moreover, we
outline extensive training and evaluation details in Section 5.1 and Appendix A.2. We also outline
all hyperparameters used for all algorithms and environments in Appendix A.2, Tables 1− 5. Lastly,
for the human subject study, we provide details on the instructions provided to the participants in
Appendix B as well as a description of the preference interface used. In our released codebase, we
also provide the specific code files used to run the experiments in the user study. In addition, an
anonymized version of the human subject data will be released, as stated in our ethics approval.

R EFERENCES
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship Learning via Inverse Reinforcement Learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2004.

Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight Experience Re-
 play. Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.

Brenna D Argall, Sonia Chernova, Manuela Veloso, and Brett Browning. A Survey of Robot Learn-
  ing from Demonstration. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 2009.

Peter Barnett, Rachel Freedman, Justin Svegliato, and Stuart Russell. Active Reward Learning from
  Multiple Teachers. In Workshop on Artificial Intelligence Safety at AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligenc, 2023.

Erdem Biyik and Dorsa Sadigh. Batch Active Preference-Based Learning of Reward Functions. In
  Conference on Robot Learning, 2018.

Erdem Bıyık, Dylan P Losey, Malayandi Palan, Nicholas C Landolfi, Gleb Shevchuk, and Dorsa
  Sadigh. Learning Reward Functions from Diverse Sources of Human Feedback: Optimally Inte-
  grating Demonstrations and Preferences . The International Journal of Robotics Research, 2022.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yaniv Blumenfeld, Dar Gilboa, and Daniel Soudry. Beyond Signal Propagation: Is Feature Diver-
  sity Necessary in Deep Neural Network Initialization? In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2020.

Serena Booth, W. Bradley Knox, Julie Shah, Scott Niekum, Peter Stone, and Alessandro Allievi.
  The Perils of Trial-and-Error Reward Design: Misdesign through Overfitting and Invalid Task
  Specifications. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2023.

Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E. Terry. Rank Analysis of Incomplete Block Designs. Biometrika,
  1952.

Daniel Brown, Wonjoon Goo, Prabhat Nagarajan, and Scott Niekum. Extrapolating Beyond Subop-
  timal Demonstrations via Inverse Reinforcement Learning from Observations . In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.

Daniel S. Brown, Wonjoon Goo, and Scott Niekum. Better-than-Demonstrator Imitation Learning
  via Automatically-Ranked Demonstrations. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2020.

Tim Brys, Anna Harutyunyan, Halit Bener Suay, Sonia Chernova, Matthew E Taylor, and Ann
  Nowé. Reinforcement Learning from Demonstration through Shaping. In International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2015.

Erdem Bıyık, Nicolas Huynh, Mykel J. Kochenderfer, and Dorsa Sadigh. Active Preference-Based
  Gaussian Process Regression for Reward Learning. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2020.

Serkan Cabi, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Ksenia Konyushkova, Scott Reed,
  Rae Jeong, Konrad Zolna, Yusuf Aytar, David Budden, Mel Vecerik, et al. Scaling Data-Driven
  Robotics with Reward Sketching and Batch Reinforcement Learning. Robotics: Science and
  Systems, 2020.

Letian Chen, Rohan Paleja, and Matthew Gombolay. Learning from Suboptimal Demonstration via
  Self-Supervised Reward Regression. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2021.

Jie Cheng, Gang Xiong, Xingyuan Dai, Qinghai Miao, Yisheng Lv, and Fei-Yue Wang. RIME:
   Robust Preference-based Reinforcement Learning with Noisy Preferences. In International Con-
   ference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  Reinforcement Learning from Human Preferences. In Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2017.

Jack Clark and Dario Amodei. Faulty Reward Functions in the Wild, 2016.

Christian Daniel, Malte Viering, Jan Metz, Oliver Kroemer, and Jan Peters. Active Reward Learning.
  In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2014.

Oliver Daniels-Koch and Rachel Freedman. The Expertise Problem: Learning from Specialized
  Feedback. In ML Safety Workshop at Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Anca Dragan and Siddhartha Srinivasa. Formalizing Assistive Teleoperation. Robotics: Science and
  Systems, 2012.

Yang Gao, Huazhe Xu, Ji Lin, Fisher Yu, Sergey Levine, and Trevor Darrell. Reinforcement Learn-
  ing from Imperfect Demonstrations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.

Joseph Giovanelli, Alexander Tornede, Tanja Tornede, and Marius Lindauer. Interactive Hyperpa-
  rameter Optimization in Multi-objective Problems via Preference Learning. In AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.

Shane Griffith, Kaushik Subramanian, Jonathan Scholz, Charles L Isbell, and Andrea L Thomaz.
  Policy Shaping: Integrating Human Feedback with Reinforcement Learning. In Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 2013.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft Actor-Critic: Off-Policy
  Maximum Entropy Deep Reinforcement Learning with a Stochastic Actor. In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Donald Joseph Hejna III and Dorsa Sadigh. Few-Shot Preference Learning for Human-in-the-Loop
  RL. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2023.
Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Dan Horgan,
  John Quan, Andrew Sendonaris, Ian Osband, et al. Deep Q-learning from Demonstrations . In
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.
Simon Holk, Daniel Marta, and Iolanda Leite. PREDILECT: Preferences Delineated with Zero-Shot
  Language-based Reasoning in Reinforcement Learning. In International Conference on Human-
  Robot Interaction, 2024.
Xiao Hu, Jianxiong Li, Xianyuan Zhan, Qing-Shan Jia, and Ya-Qin Zhang. Query-Policy Misalign-
  ment in Preference-Based Reinforcement Learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024.
Minyoung Hwang, Gunmin Lee, Hogun Kee, Chan Woo Kim, Kyungjae Lee, and Songhwai Oh.
 Sequential Preference Ranking for Efficient Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback. In
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023a.
Minyoung Hwang, Luca Weihs, Chanwoo Park, Kimin Lee, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Kiana
 Ehsani. Promptable Behaviors: Personalizing Multi-Objective Rewards from Human Preferences.
 In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023b.
Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
  learning from Human Preferences and Demonstrations in Atari. In Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2018.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
W Bradley Knox and Peter Stone. Interactively Shaping Agents via Human Reinforcement. In
 International Conference on Knowledge Capture, 2009.
W Bradley Knox and Peter Stone. Learning Non-Myopically from Human-Generated Reward. In
 International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, 2013.
W. Bradley Knox, Stephane Hatgis-Kessell, Serena Booth, Scott Niekum, Peter Stone, and Alessan-
  dro Allievi. Models of Human Preference for Learning Reward Functions. Transactions on
  Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Kimin Lee, Laura Smith, and Pieter Abbeel. PEBBLE: Feedback-Efficient Interactive Reinforce-
  ment Learning via Relabeling Experience and Unsupervised Pre-training . In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, 2021a.
Kimin Lee, Laura Smith, Anca Dragan, and Pieter Abbeel. B-Pref: Benchmarking Preference-Based
  Reinforcement Learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
  Track, 2021b.
Xinran Liang, Katherine Shu, Kimin Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Reward Uncertainty for Exploration in
  Preference-based Reinforcement Learning. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2022.
Runze Liu, Fengshuo Bai, Yali Du, and Yaodong Yang. Meta-Reward-Net: Implicitly Differen-
  tiable Reward Learning for Preference-based Reinforcement Learning. In Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
Runze Liu, Yali Du, Fengshuo Bai, Jiafei Lyu, and Xiu Li. PEARL: Zero-shot Cross-task Preference
  Alignment and Robust Reward Learning for Robotic Manipulation. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2024.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yi Liu, Gaurav Datta, Ellen Novoseller, and Daniel S. Brown. Efficient Preference-Based Rein-
  forcement Learning Using Learned Dynamics Models. In International Conference on Robotics
  and Automation, 2023.
Robert Loftin, Bei Peng, James MacGlashan, Michael L Littman, Matthew E Taylor, Jeff Huang,
  and David L Roberts. Learning Behaviors via Human-Delivered Discrete Feedback: Modeling
  Implicit Feedback Strategies to Speed up Learning. Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems,
  2016.
Daniel Marta, Simon Holk, Christian Pek, Jana Tumova, and Iolanda Leite. VARIQuery: VAE
  Segment-Based Active Learning for Query Selection in Preference-Based Reinforcement Learn-
  ing. In International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2023a.
Daniel Marta, Simon Holk, Christian Pek, Jana Tumova, and Iolanda Leite. Aligning Human Pref-
  erences with Baseline Objectives in Reinforcement Learning. In International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation, 2023b.
Daniel Marta, Simon Holk, Christian Pek, and Iolanda Leite. SEQUEL: Semi-Supervised
  Preference-based RL with Query Synthesis via Latent Interpolation. In International Conference
  on Robotics and Automation, 2024.
Thommen George Karimpanal Maxence Hussonnois and Santu Rana. Controlled Diversity with
  Preference: Towards Learning a Diverse Set of Desired Skills. In International Conference on
  Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2023.
Shaunak A Mehta and Dylan P Losey. Unified Learning from Demonstrations, Corrections, and
  Preferences during Physical Human–Robot Interaction. ACM Transactions on Human-Robot In-
  teraction, 2024.
Katherine Metcalf, Miguel Sarabia, Natalie Mackraz, and Barry-John Theobald. Sample-Efficient
  Preference-based Reinforcement Learning with Dynamics Aware Rewards. In Conference on
  Robot Learning, 2023.
Katherine Metcalf, Miguel Sarabia, Masha Fedzechkina, and Barry-John Theobald. Can You Rely
  on Synthetic Labellers in Preference-Based Reinforcement Learning? It’s Complicated. In AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.
Vivek Myers, Erdem Bıyık, Nima Anari, and Dorsa Sadigh. Learning Multimodal Rewards from
  Rankings. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
Vivek Myers, Erdem Biyik, and Dorsa Sadigh. Active Reward Learning from Online Preferences.
  In International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2023.
Jongjin Park, Younggyo Seo, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Kimin Lee. SURF:
  Semi-supervised Reward Learning with Data Augmentation for Feedback-efficient Preference-
  based Reinforcement Learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Zhizhou Ren, Anji Liu, Yitao Liang, Jian Peng, and Jianzhu Ma. Efficient Meta Reinforcement
  Learning for Preference-based Fast Adaptation. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Kyriacos Shiarlis, Joao Messias, and Shimon Whiteson. Inverse Reinforcement Learning from Fail-
  ure. In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2016.
Avi Singh, Albert Yu, Jonathan Yang, Jesse Zhang, Aviral Kumar, and Sergey Levine. Cog: Con-
  necting New Skills to Past Experience with Offline Reinforcement Learning. In Conference on
  Robot Learning, 2020.
Joar Skalse, Nikolaus Howe, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, and David Krueger. Defining and Character-
  izing Reward Gaming. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press, 2018.
Gokul Swamy, Christoph Dann, Rahul Kidambi, Zhiwei Steven Wu, and Alekh Agarwal. A Mini-
  maximalist Approach to Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback. In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Voot Tangkaratt, Nontawat Charoenphakdee, and Masashi Sugiyama. Robust Imitation Learning
  from Noisy Demonstrations . In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  2021.

Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind Control Suite. CoRR,
  2018.

Matthew E Taylor, Halit Bener Suay, and Sonia Chernova. Integrating Reinforcement Learning with
 Human Demonstrations of Varying Ability. In International Conference on Autonomous Agents
 and Multiagent Systems, 2011.

Mudit Verma and Katherine Metcalf. Hindsight PRIORs for Reward Learning from Human Prefer-
 ences. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Mudit Verma, Siddhant Bhambri, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Exploiting Unlabeled Data for Feed-
 back Efficient Human Preference based Reinforcement Learning. In Workshop on Representation
 Learning for Responsible Human-Centric AI at AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligenc, 2023.

Ngo Anh Vien, Wolfgang Ertel, and Tae Choong Chung. Learning via Human Feedback in Contin-
  uous State and Action Spaces. Applied Intelligence, 2013.

Ren-Jian Wang, Ke Xue, Yutong Wang, Peng Yang, Haobo Fu, Qiang Fu, and Chao Qian. Di-
  versity from Human Feedback. In Workshop on Agent Learning in Open-Endedness at Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2023.

Ruiqi Wang, Weizheng Wang, and Byung-Cheol Min. Feedback-efficient Active Preference Learn-
  ing for Socially Aware Robot Navigation. In International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
  Systems, 2022.

Xiaofei Wang, Kimin Lee, Kourosh Hakhamaneshi, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. Skill Pref-
  erences: Learning to Extract and Execute Robotic Skills from Human Feedback. In Conference
  on Robot Learning, 2021.

Garrett Warnell, Nicholas Waytowich, Vernon Lawhern, and Peter Stone. Deep TAMER: Interactive
  Agent Shaping in High-Dimensional State Spaces. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  2018.

Devin White, Mingkang Wu, Ellen Novoseller, Vernon J Lawhern, Nicholas Waytowich, and Yong-
  can Cao. Rating-based Reinforcement Learning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  2024.

Nils Wilde, Erdem Bıyık, Dorsa Sadigh, and Stephen L Smith. Learning Reward Functions from
  Scale Feedback. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2021.

Aaron Wilson, Alan Fern, and Prasad Tadepalli. A Bayesian Approach for Policy Learning from
  Trajectory Preference Queries. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2012.

Wanqi Xue, Bo An, Shuicheng Yan, and Zhongwen Xu. Reinforcement Learning from Diverse
 Human Preferences. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.

Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A Benchmark and Evaluation for Multi-task and Meta Reinforcement Learn-
  ing. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2020.

Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
  Conservative Data Sharing for Multi-task Offline Reinforcement Learning. Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.

Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. How
  to Leverage Unlabeled Data in Offline Reinforcement Learning . In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2022.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Guoxi Zhang and Hisashi Kashima. Learning State Importance for Preference-based Reinforcement
  Learning. Machine Learning, 2024.
Jiawei Zhao, Florian Tobias Schaefer, and Anima Anandkumar. ZerO Initialization: Initializing
   Neural Networks with only Zeros and Ones. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Tianchen Zhu, Yue Qiu, Haoyi Zhou, and Jianxin Li. Decoding Global Preferences: Temporal and
  Cooperative Dependency Modeling in Multi-Agent Preference-Based Reinforcement Learning.
  In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A     S IMULATED E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

A.1   B ENCHMARKS

PEBBLE PEBBLE has two primary components: unsupervised exploration and off-policy learn-
ing with relabeling. The purpose of the unsupervised exploration phase is to collect diverse expe-
riences for a human teacher to provide feedback on. More specifically, PEBBLE optimizes state
entropy to explore the environment. Furthermore, PEBBLE uses off-policy reinforcement learning
to learn a policy. PEBBLE specifically uses an off-policy RL algorithm as they are more sample
efficient compared to their on-policy counterparts. Then as the reward model changes, PEBBLE
relabels all transitions in the RL agent’s replay buffer with the latest reward model. This is integral
as the reward model is non-stationary, and relabeling the transitions stabilizes the learning process.
To adapt PEBBLE to the scalar feedback setting, we make one minor change to the reward model.
In the scalar feedback setting, we use a scripted teacher that provides a scalar rating of a single
trajectory segment. Therefore, the only update to PEBBLE is with respect to the loss function.
Instead of using the cross-entropy loss in Equation 2, we use the mean-squared error loss in Equation
3.


RUNE RUNE is a preference learning algorithm (built on top of PEBBLE) that uses an
uncertainty-based exploration strategy to improve feedback efficiency. To encourage exploration
for the SAC agent, RUNE adds an intrinsic reward component based on the standard deviation in
the reward model.


SURF SURF is another preference learning algorithm (built on top of PEBBLE) that improves
feedback efficiency by using semi-supervised and data augmentation approaches. To incorporate
semi-supervised learning, SURF generates pseudo-labels for unlabeled trajectories by querying the
learned reward model. If the reward model confidently (e.g., low output standard deviation) pre-
dicts the pseudo-label, then the trajectory, label pair is added to the reward model training data set.
Further, SURF proposes a new data augmentation technique that crops sub-sequences of trajectories.


MRN MRN is a preference learning algorithm also integrated with PEBBLE. Unlike other PbRL
algorithms, MRN is a bi-level optimization algorithm in which the actor and critic are updated in the
inner loop, and the reward model is updated in the outer loop. Importantly, the reward model takes
into account the performance of the critic on the preference data.


Deep TAMER In our scalar feedback experiments, we also consider the Deep TAMER bench-
mark. In Deep TAMER, scalar feedback is used to learn a human reward function via regression.
Then the agent acts greedily with respect to this reward function. Furthermore, the original im-
plementation of Deep TAMER was built on top of DQN. Therefore, there was no separate actor-
network. In addition, Deep TAMER only used discrete feedback ∈ [−1, 0, 1].
To make Deep TAMER a fair benchmark, we made a few adjustments. To start, we allow Deep
TAMER to learn from real-valued feedback as done in the other scalar-based experiments. However,
instead of using the ground truth reward function as feedback, we use the state-action values from a
fully-trained SAC agent. We do this because, in TAMER (and Deep TAMER), the teacher is intended
to provide feedback representative of the return. Secondly, in Deep TAMER, feedback is provided
per (state, action) pair. Therefore, to make sure Deep TAMER received the same amount of feedback
as the other baselines, we used trajectory segment size × feedback amount for Deep TAMER only.
The other benchmarks receive a scalar feedback value that is the sum of rewards along a trajectory
segment. Third, to learn the reward model we use standard regression as described in Section 3.1.
Lastly, as our testing environments are continuous state and action, we learn a separate actor policy,
similarly done in (Vien et al., 2013).


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2   T RAINING D ETAILS

In all of our experiments, we use the hyperparameters in Table 1 for the reward models used in all
benchmarks. For the agent update phase of SDP, an additional hyperparameter is associated with the
number of environment interactions made before the standard preference/scalar feedback learning
loop begins. However, for simplicity, we kept the same value as the existing feedback frequency
hyperparameter, as feedback frequency also dictates the number of environment interactions made
between feedback sessions
Furthermore, we use most of the existing reward model hyperparameters used in PEBBLE, however,
we adjusted the following four hyperparameters: feedback frequency, amount of feedback per ses-
sion, trajectory segment size (only for Meta-world), and activation function for the final NN layer.
We adjusted the first two hyperparameters because PEBBLE originally used a significantly larger
feedback budget, therefore we wanted the feedback schedule to better reflect a smaller feedback
budget. We used a different trajectory segment size for Meta-world because we wanted to keep the
segment sizes the same across both the DMControl and Meta-world environments. Moreover, we
found that the output activation function could significantly affect learning, therefore we tested all
benchmarks using both Tanh (original activation used) and Leaky-ReLU and chose the reward model
that achieved better final performance. For the RUNE and SURF baselines, we use any hyperpa-
rameters associated with their specific algorithm according to the original paper (see Table 2). For a
fair comparison with SDP, we provide all human-in-the-loop baselines (e.g., PEBBLE, R-PEBBLE,
Deep TAMER, RUNE, and SURF) with the sub-optimal data set to be used in both the reward model
and by the RL agent.
Furthermore, to select trajectory segments for the teacher to provide feedback on, we use uniform
sampling in the DMControl tasks and disagreement sampling in the Meta-world tasks. Disagreement
sampling is a popular active learning approach in which trajectories with higher uncertainty (based
on an ensemble of neural networks) are more likely to be sampled (Christiano et al., 2017). As for
the SAC hyperparameters, we use the values found in Tables 3-4.
For the experiments in which we leveraged sub-optimal data from a different task (i.e., Walker-stand,
Quadruped-walk, Drawer-open), we gathered 50,000 transitions from partially trained policies. We
note that for these experiments, we purposely did not use transitions gathered from a random policy.
In these experiments, the prior and target tasks were environments in which the simulated robot was
identical. The only difference is the environmental reward. Therefore, the random policy for both
environments would be the same. To truly demonstrate transfer, we wanted to ensure we obtained
low-quality transitions of the prior task that were different from the target task.
Each partially trained policy achieved a final score of approximately 15-20% of that achieved by a
fully trained policy. More specifically, we used the following procedure to train the SAC policies.
First, for Walker-stand, we trained a SAC policy for 5,000 time steps, and the average final perfor-
mance was approximately 194. Second, for Quadruped-walk, we trained a SAC policy for 100,000
timesteps, and the average final performance was approximately 184. Lastly, for Drawer-open, we
trained a SAC policy for 50,000 time steps, and the average final success rate was approximately
14%.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 H YPERPARAMETER                                 VALUE
 S EGMENT S IZE                                  50

 R ANDOM S TEPS
 ( I . E ., S UB - OPTIMAL DATA T RANSITIONS )   50000

 U NSUPERVISED E XPLORATION S TEPS               9000

 C ONSIDER U NSUPERVISED E XPLORATIONS
 AS S UB - OPTIMAL                               FALSE (WALKER - WALK , C ARTPOLE - SWINGUP, Q UADRUPED - WALK – P B RL)
                                                 T RUE ( OTHERS )

 F REQUENCY OF F EEDBACK                         20000 (DMC ONTROL )
                                                 10000 (W INDOW- OPEN , D OOR - UNLOCK , D OOR - LOCK )
                                                 5000 (H AMMER , D RAWER - OPEN )

 F EEDBACK B UDGETS IN A BLATIONS                2000 (D OOR - OPEN )
                                                 1000 (C HEETAH - RUN , WALKER - WALK )

 F EEDBACK Q UERIES PER S ESSION                 50 (H AMMER , D RAWER - OPEN )
                                                 8 (C ARTPOLE - SWINGUP )
                                                 20 ( OTHERS )

 S AMPLING S CHEME                               D ISAGREEMENT S AMPLING (M ETAWORLD )
                                                 U NIFORM S AMPLING (DMC ONTROL )

 T RAINING E POCHS                               200 (W INDOW- OPEN , SURF AND SDP + SURF)
                                                 50 ( OTHERS )

 L EARNING R ATE                                 3 ×10−4
 I NTERMEDIATE N EURAL N ETWORK ACTIVATION       L EAKY R E LU
 BATCH S IZE                                     128
 H IDDEN L AYERS                                 4
 N EURONS PER H IDDEN L AYER                     128

 L OSS F UNCTION                                 M EAN S QUARED E RROR (S CALAR F EEDBACK )
                                                 C ROSS E NTROPY L OSS (P REFERENCE F EEDBACK )

 O PTIMIZER                                      A DAM

 For Reward Model Pre-training Phase in SDP
 L AST L AYER N EURAL N ETWORK ACTIVATION        TANH

 For Human-in-the-Loop Algorithm
 L AST L AYER N EURAL N ETWORK ACTIVATION        L EAKY R E LU (PEBBLE, RUNE, SURF)
                                                 TANH (SDP – H AMMER , D RAWER - OPEN , WALKER - WALK )
                                                 L EAKY R E LU (SDP – OTHERS )



Table 1: Hyperparameters for the reward model used in all experiments (both preference and scalar
feedback variants).


                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 H YPERPARAMETER                                          VALUE
 Specific RUNE Hyperparameters
 B ETA S CHEDULE                                         L INEAR D ECAY
 B ETA I NIT                                             0.05
 B ETA D ECAY                                            10−5

 Specific SURF Hyperparameters
 T HRESHOLD λ                                             0.99
 U NLABELED BATCH R ATIO                                  4
 L OSS W EIGHT                                            1
 M IN /M AX L ENGTH OF C ROPPED S EGMENT                  [45, 55]
 S EGMENT L ENGTH B EFORE C ROPPING                       60

 Specific MRN Hyperparameters
 M ETA S TEPS                                             1000 (WALKER - WALK )
                                                          3000 (Q UADRUPED - WALK )
                                                          10000 (D OOR - OPEN )
                                                          5000 ( OTHERS )


                         Table 2: Baseline Specific Hyperparameters.


 H YPERPARAMETER                                      VALUE
 O PTIMIZER                                           A DAM (Kingma & Ba, 2015)
 D ISCOUNT                                            0.99
 A LPHA L EARNING R ATE                               10−4
 ACTOR B ETAS                                         0.9, 0.999
 C RITIC B ETAS                                       0.9, 0.999
 A LPHA B ETAS                                        0.9, 0.999
 TARGET S MOOTHING C OEFFICIENT                       0.005
 ACTOR U PDATE F REQUENCY                             1
 C RITIC TARGET U PDATE F REQUENCY                    2
 I NIT T EMPERATURE                                   0.1
 N ETWORK T YPE                                       MLP
 N ONLINEARITY                                        R E LU
 G RADIENT U PDATES PER S TEP                         1
Table 3: Hyperparameters for SAC that were shared by all algorithms. SAC is the standard RL
algorithm that learns from the environment’s true reward signal, not via preference learning.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 H YPERPARAMETER                      VALUE
 DMControl
 BATCH S IZE                          512 (C ARTPOLE - SWINGUP )
                                      1024 ( OTHERS )

 H IDDEN L AYERS                      2
 N EURONS PER H IDDEN L AYER          256 (C ARTPOLE - SWINGUP )
                                      1024 ( OTHERS )

 ACTOR /C RITIC L EARNING R ATE       5 × 10−5 (C HEETAH - RUN PREFERENCE FEEDBACK )
                                      10−4 (C HEETAH - RUN SCALAR FEEDBACK )
                                      5 × 10−4 (WALKER - WALK )
                                      10−4 ( OTHERS )

 T RAINING S TEPS                     0.5 × 106 (WALKER - WALK , C ARTPOLE - SWINGUP )
                                      106 ( OTHERS )

 Metaworld
 BATCH S IZE                          512
 H IDDEN L AYERS                      3
 N EURONS PER H IDDEN L AYER          256
 ACTOR /C RITIC L EARNING R ATE       3 × 10−4

 T RAINING S TEPS                     0.5 × 106 (D OOR - LOCK AND W INDOW- OPEN )
                                      106 ( OTHERS )


Table 4: Specific SAC hyperparameters that were tuned for the DMControl and Metaworld exper-
iments. The majority of these hyperparameters were selected from the PEBBLE repo (Lee et al.,
2021a).



 H YPERPARAMETER                                                VALUE
 SAC
 T RAINING S TEPS                                               0.3 × 106
 BATCH S IZE                                                    1024
 H IDDEN L AYERS                                                2
 N EURONS PER H IDDEN L AYER                                    1024
 ACTOR /C RITIC L EARNING R ATE                                 10−4

 Reward Model
 C ONSIDER U NSUPERVISED E XPLORATIONS AS S UB - OPTIMAL        FALSE
 F REQUENCY OF F EEDBACK                                        20000

 F EEDBACK Q UERIES PER S ESSION                                10 (P ENDULUM - SWINGUP )
                                                                8 (C ARTPOLE - SWINGUP )

 S AMPLING S CHEME                                              U NIFORM S AMPLING
 BATCH S IZE                                                    128
 L AST L AYER N EURAL N ETWORK ACTIVATION                       L EAKY R E LU


               Table 5: Tuned hyperparameters for human feedback experiments.



                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     H UMAN S UBJECT S TUDY D ETAILS
Our study was approved by an external ethics committee. In total, 16 users participated in our study,
3 of which participated in both Pendulum-swingup and Cartpole-swingup tasks. As for the amount
of participation per task, 7 users provided preferences in Pendulum-swingup and 12 users provided
preferences in Cartpole-swingup. During the timeline of our user study, we initially had participants
interacting in Pendulum-swingup, however we found that it was very simple, therefore we decided
to include Cartpole-swingup, as a more difficult task. Each participant provided preferences for a
single run of the environment, as each session took approximately 1 to 1.5 hours. Table 5 shows the
specific hyperparameters used.

B.1   P ROTOCOL S TEPS

The study took place in person, where the participant was first provided the consent from to review
and sign. Then, participants and the researcher, together, reviewed the instructions outlining the
objective of the study. The instructions had two components. First, they outlined participant’s goal
in the study. Second, as done in Christiano et al. (2017), we provided a guide on what constitutes
good and bad behavior in each domain.

Pendulum-swingup The first set of instructions for the study are as follows:

      1. Objective: for the pole to swing up and balance.
      2. Agent controls how much torque (or force or twist) to apply
      3. It does not matter which way the pole swings, left or right, as long as the pole balances.
      4. Your task: You will see two clips of behaviors, and your job is to select the clip you think
         is better given the above objective. If you think both clips are identical in behavior, you can
         select equally preferable.

The second set of instructions (i.e., advice) for the study are as follows:

      1. The first priority is for the pole to begin swinging back and forth (i.e., picking up momen-
         tum). Therefore, the video clip where the pole has swung higher is better. Even if the agent
         is not behaving well in either clips, if you can tell that the pole is higher in one clip than
         the other, it is better to prefer that clip.
      2. In general, if the pole is swinging rapidly in a circle (e.g., complete 360), then this is usually
         worse behavior than if the pole is barely moving.

Cartpole-swingup The first set of instructions for the study are as follows:

      1. Pole is attached to a cart.
      2. Agent can move the cart left and right.
      3. Goal is for the agent to move the cart such that the pole swings up and balances
      4. Your task: You will see two clips of behaviors, and your job is to select the clip you think
         is better given the above objective. If you think both clips are identical in behavior, you can
         select equally preferable.

The second set of instructions (i.e., advice) for the study are as follows:

      1. The first priority is for the pole to begin swinging back and forth (i.e., picking up momen-
         tum). Therefore, the video clip where the pole has swung higher is better. Even if the agent
         is not behaving well in either clips, if you can tell that the pole is higher in one clip than
         the other, it is better to prefer that clip.
      2. In general, if the pole is swinging rapidly in a circle (e.g., complete 360), then this is usually
         worse behavior than if the pole is barely moving.
      3. If the pole is balancing then falls over, then is is better behavior than if the pole is barely
         moving.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


During the instruction period, participants also watched video clips of what successful and unsuc-
cessful behavior looks like. In addition, participants were able to ask questions about the environ-
ment’s objective.
Once the instruction period was complete, participants completed a practice round in providing
preferences. This was included so users could gain familiarity with the interface. Figure 7 shows
a screenshot of the interface used. Participants would use keyboard input to move from one video
clip to the next. Then, participants had the opportunity to rewatch either clips as many times as they
liked. Afterwards, participants chose which clip they preferred (or equally preferred) via keyboard
input. Each video clip consisted of a 50 step segment, which was approximately 2 seconds long.
The total study time was ∼ (1 − 1.5) hours. After the study was complete, participants filled out a
demographic survey which included questions pertaining to their age, race/ethnicity, education level
completed, and area of expertise.


Figure 7: This shows the user interface used for the human subject study. Participants would view
each video clip, sequentially, then decide which clip they preferred.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2   P REFERENCE L EARNING S URVEY D ETAILS

Table 6 provides a list of all papers included in our preference learning survey. We now describe
the criteria for inclusion and exclusion in our survey. To find papers, we used Google Search with
key words: preference learning, reinforcement learning from human feedback, and preference based
reinforcement learning. We also found papers by reviewing those that cited popular preference
learning works. This included Christiano et al. (2017) and Lee et al. (2021a), as these were two of
the first papers that popularized preference learning. We included conference, journal and workshop
papers in our survey. We did not include papers that were strictly on Arxiv. To keep the survey within
scope, we did not include any preference learning works related to large language or foundation
models. We also did not include any works that were entirely theoretical (e.g., no empirical results
were provided).


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Articles used in Preference Learning Survey from Section 5.3. NA indicates no information
was provided.

PAPER R EFERENCE                        H UMAN U SERS (N ON -AUTHOR )       N UMBER OF U SERS
(Myers et al., 2023)                    Yes                                 22
(Metcalf et al., 2024)                  Yes                                 50
(Myers et al., 2022)                    Yes                                 50
(Christiano et al., 2017)               Yes                                 NA
(Hejna III & Sadigh, 2023)              Yes                                 4
(Hwang et al., 2023b)                   Yes                                 5
(Biyik & Sadigh, 2018)                  Yes                                 10
(Hwang et al., 2023a)                   Yes                                 5
(Bıyık et al., 2020)                    Yes                                 10
(Wilde et al., 2021)                    Yes                                 18
(Bıyık et al., 2022)                    Yes                                 15
(Ibarz et al., 2018)                    Yes                                 NA
(Knox et al., 2023)                     Yes                                 143
(Holk et al., 2024)                     Yes                                 32
(Metcalf et al., 2023)                  Yes                                 40
(Marta et al., 2024)                    Yes                                 NA
(Marta et al., 2023a)                   Yes                                 70
(Marta et al., 2023b)                   Yes                                 20
(Ren et al., 2022)                      Yes                                 NA
(Mehta & Losey, 2024)                   Yes                                 15
(White et al., 2024)                    Yes                                 20
(Wang et al., 2022)                     Yes                                 10
(Wang et al., 2023)                     No
(Zhang & Kashima, 2024)                 No
(Lee et al., 2021a)                     No
(Liang et al., 2022)                    No
(Park et al., 2022)                     No
(Hu et al., 2024)                       No
(Liu et al., 2022)                      No
(Liu et al., 2023)                      No
(Xue et al., 2024)                      No
(Daniels-Koch & Freedman, 2022)         No
(Verma et al., 2023)                    No
(Barnett et al., 2023)                  No
(Verma & Metcalf, 2024)                 No
(Metcalf et al., 2023)                  No
(Swamy et al., 2024)                    No
(Lee et al., 2021b)                     No
(Wang et al., 2021)                     No
(Maxence Hussonnois & Rana, 2023)       No
(Wilson et al., 2012)                   No
(Liu et al., 2024)                      No
(Giovanelli et al., 2024)               No
(Zhu et al., 2024)                      No
(Cheng et al., 2024)                    No


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C      A DDITIONAL H UMAN T EACHER R ESULTS

 TASK                  F EEDBACK   BACKGROUND    AUC                  P VALUE   F INAL P ERFORMANCE   P VALUE
                                   Non-CS        8258.44 ± 1898.47              648.88 ± 35.17
 C ARTPOLE - SWINGUP   48                                             0.183                           0.692
                                   CS            10208.11 ± 2311.16             614.14 ± 114.81

                                   Non-CS        7677.84 ± 3540.70              327.65 ± 407.80
 P ENDULUM - SWINGUP   40                                             0.258                           0.23
                                   CS            10188.70 ± 3858.94             641.68 ± 237.76


Table 7: This table shows the AUC and final performance of SDP (mean ± 95% confidence intervals)
for CS and non-CS participants in the human subject study.


Task                        Feedback   Demographic                              AUC                    P Value
C ARTPOLE - SWINGUP         48         F EMALE                                  8720.03 ± 3185.4       0.085
                                       M ALE                                    11770.22 ± 1669.96
P ENDULUM -S WINGUP         40         F EMALE                                  8587.13 ± 2772.96      0.331
                                       M ALE                                    10134.67 ± 4822.22
C ARTPOLE - SWINGUP         48         AGE 18-30                                10109.54 ± 2370.61     0.313
                                       AGE 50-70                                10923.05 ± 1292.83
P ENDULUM -S WINGUP         40         AGE 18-30                                8619.07 ± 3381.48      0.318
                                       AGE 50-70                                10607.93 ± 5249.72
C ARTPOLE - SWINGUP         48         E DUCATION : BACHELORS OR HIGHER         11044.55 ± 1783.25     0.794
                                       E DUCATION : H IGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA        6247.99 ± 5186.47
P ENDULUM -S WINGUP         40         E DUCATION : BACHELORS OR HIGHER         10188.88 ± 3858.95     0.742
                                       E DUCATION : H IGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA        7677.85 ± 3540.7

Table 8: This table shows the AUC of SDP (mean ± 95% confidence intervals) for different de-
mographic conditions. This table highlights that SDP can be effective irrespective of demographic
background (gender, age, and educational background).

Tables 7-8 highlight that there is no significant difference in the performance of SDP when human
teachers have differing backgrounds. This includes a background in CS, educational level, age,
and gender. We note that we did not perform statistical analysis comparing racial groups as some
experiments had only one participant of a particular racial background, making comparisons less
meaningful.


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     A DDITIONAL S IMULATED T EACHER R ESULTS
For simplicity, in all additional experiments in this section, we only compare SDP + PEBBLE with
PEBBLE (or R-PEBBLE).

D.1   S TUDY OF AGENT U PDATE P HASE

Figure 8 emphasizes how the agent update phase does result in new transitions, therefore the teacher
provides feedback to transitions that are different from the original sub-optimal transitions used for
pre-training.


Figure 8: Door open, preference learning exp. These plots show how the agent’s policy has changed
from the reward model pre-training phase (purple histograms) to the agent update phase (blue his-
tograms), thereby resulting in a different distribution for the state features.


D.2   T RUE R EWARD VALUES OF R ANDOM P OLICY

Figure 9 shows the true reward values for sub-optimal data gathered through a random policy in the
DMControl suite. This emphasizes that the true reward value is close to the value we pseudo-label
the sub-optimal transitions with (i.e., zero), therefore SDP should not yield a large incorrect reward
bias.


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   10000-

                    8000-
       Frequency
                    6000-

                    4000-

                    2000-

                       0-
                            0.0015 < R   0.0596 < R     0.1176 < R    0.1757 < R   0.2337 < R
                            R < 0.0596   R < 0.1176     R < 0.1757    R < 0.2337   R < 0.2918

                                               Reward value
                                                 (a) Walker-walk.



                   10000-

                    8000-
       Frequency


                    6000-

                    4000-

                    2000-

                       0-
                             0.0 < R     0.0014 < R     0.0028 < R    0.0042 < R   0.0056 < R
                            R < 0.0014   R < 0.0028     R < 0.0042    R < 0.0056   R < 0.007

                                               Reward value
                                                  (b) Cheetah-run.


                    5000-

                    4000-
       Frequency


                    3000-

                    2000-

                    1000-

                       0-
                             0.0 < R     0.1999 < R     0. 3999 < R   0.5998 < R   0.7998 < R
                            R < 0.1999   R < 0.3999     R < 0.5998    R < 0.7998   R < 0.9997

                                               Reward value
                                               (c) Quadruped-walk.

    Figure 9: Distribution of true reward values for transitions obtained with a random policy
                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.3   Z ERO W EIGHT S TUDY

To understand the effect of each component of SDP, we performed two additional ablations. First,
in the reward model pre-training phase, the goal is for the reward model to learn to output zero.
However, a trivial means to achieve an output of zero is to set all weights and biases in the neural
network to zero. Therefore, we compare the full SDP to SDP using a zero-weight initialization as
a replacement for the reward model pre-training. We found that using a zero-weight initialization
for the reward model in place of the pre-training phase results in significantly degraded performance
(see the green curve in Figure 10–right). This is not surprising, as previous works have found that
a zero-weight initialization can negatively affect the training of neural networks (Blumenfeld et al.,
2020; Zhao et al., 2022). In addition, Figure 11 demonstrates that the reward model pre-training
phase does not produce reward model weights of zero, emphasizing why we do not experience the
same performance degradation that occurs if we use a zero-weight initialization.

D.4   FAKE I NPUT S TUDY

Second, SDP makes use of state, action transitions that are gathered through a sub-optimal policy.
Therefore, these are transitions that an agent experiences while interacting with its environment.
However, as previously noted, the goal of the reward model pre-training phase is for the reward
model to learn to output zero. Therefore, is it necessary for the reward model to pre-train on inputs
that are real environment transitions? Instead, can we pre-train the reward model on transitions that
did not result from an agent-environment interaction? To test this, we created “fake” inputs of size
dim(state) + dim(action), and for each input dimension, we randomly sampled a value from N (0, 1).
We obtained 50,000 “fake” transitions and used this data for the reward model pre-training phase.
In this experiment, our goal is to understand the effect of the type of inputs on the reward model
pre-training phase, therefore we kept the agent update phase as is (i.e., provided the true sub-optimal
data for this phase). We then compared SDP using true transitions to SDP using “fake” transitions in
Figures 10–left and 12. We found that the full SDP (purple curve) in which we pre-train the reward
model on true sub-optimal transitions yields significantly greater final performance than SDP using
“fake” transitions (green curve). This highlights the importance of using true sub-optimal transitions
in SDP.


                   Figure 10: Zero weights and fake input studies in Walker-walk


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            (a) Scalar feedback experiment in Walker-walk.

Figure 11: This figure shows the reward model weights of SDP after the reward model pre-training
phase. This demonstrates that the reward model pre-train phase of SDP does not result in zero neural
network weights.


                 Figure 12: Fake Input Study in Cheetah Run Preference Learning



D.5   SDP C OMPONENT S TUDIES

Figure 13 shows additional phase ablations in the preference learning experiments done on the
Cheetah-run environment. This highlights the importance of using both phases in SDP. In addition,
we ran an experiment in Walker-walk where we directly apply the procedure Yu et al. (2022) uses
for leveraging sub-optimal data in the offline RL setting. They simply store the sub-optimal transi-
tions in the RL agent’s replay buffer with the pseudo reward label of 0 and follow standard offline
RL. We repeated this with the other difference of following standard preference learning (PEBBLE)
afterwards. We found that the average final performance was 104.32 with a 95% confidence interval
of 46.12, which is close to 4 times less than the final performance of SDP.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Figure 13: Phase Ablation Study in Cheetah Run Preference Learning


Figure 14 shows an additional ablation over the amount of prior data used in SDP. We observed
similar performance gains as described in section 5.4.


            Figure 14: Prior Data Amount Study in Cheetah Run Preference Learning


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.6   E FFECT OF R ELABELLING R EPLAY B UFFER

SDP is combined with four preference learning algorithms, PEBBLE, RUNE, SURF, and MRN.
A core feature of these algorithms is that every time the reward model is updated, all transitions
inside the RL agent’s replay buffer are updated using the latest reward model. Figure 15 shows the
effects of not relabeling the sub-optimal data (i.e., the reward labels) with the latest learned reward
model. This means the reward labels remain frozen at zero throughout the entire training process.
This ablation was to demonstrate that if the sub-optimal data in the agent’s replay buffer is not
updated with the latest reward model, then performance will suffer. This is likely the case because
the incorrect reward bias from the pseudo-labeling process persists, whereas when we relabel the
transitions with the updated reward model, the incorrect reward bias may reduce over time.


              Figure 15: Relabeling sub-opt data study: Walker-walk, scalar feedback


D.7   E FFECT OF T RANSITION Q UALITY IN SDP

Moreover, we show that the effectiveness of SDP relies on the use of sub-optimal data transitions. If
we use high-quality data transitions (i.e., transitions that came from a fully trained RL agent policy),
SDP will fail (see Figure 16). This unsurprising result confirms that pseudo-labeling high-reward
transitions with zero can significantly hurt the reward model and the agent’s performance


        Figure 16: Using high-quality data in SDP study: Cheetah-run, preference feedback


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.8     S CALAR - BASED E XPERIMENT S TATISTICS

Tables 9 and 10 provide a summary of the mean final performance and the mean area under the
curve for all environments and benchmarks in the scalar feedback setting

                        L EARNING FROM S CALAR F EEDBACK
 Task                              SDP                R-PEBBLE             D EEP TAMER
 WALKER - WALK               931.31 ± 36.59         362.99 ± 181.23*       33.10 ± 11.10*
 C HEETAH - RUN              862.72 ± 49.13         522.10 ± 238.87*       30.71 ± 16.26*
 Q UADRUPED - WALK          777.38 ± 156.74         543.92 ± 193.21*       73.74 ± 48.38*

Table 9: This table shows the mean final performance plus and minus the 95% confidence interval.
* indicates SDP achieves a significantly greater mean final performance.


                            L EARNING FROM S CALAR F EEDBACK
 Task                           SDP                  R-PEBBLE               D EEP TAMER
 WALKER - WALK          34981.65 ± 1559.24       13147.1 ± 6102.31*       1823.42 ± 578.48*
 C HEETAH - RUN         55144.89 ± 4266.94      33557.58 ± 15185.47*     2459.23 ± 1226.34*
 Q UADRUPED - WALK     58370.85 ± 10759.00      37076.52 ± 11968.48*     7365.68 ± 3556.27*

Table 10: This table shows the mean area under the learning curve (AUC) plus and minus the 95%
confidence interval. * indicates SDP achieves a significantly greater AUC.


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.9   P REFERENCE L EARNING E XPERIMENT S TATISTICS

Tables 11-14 provide a summary of the mean final performance and the mean area under the curve
for all environments and benchmarks in the preference feedback setting.

 TASK                      F EEDBACK      M ETHOD             F INAL R ETURN      P VALUE
                                          PEBBLE              226.4 ± 136.35      0.007*
                                          SDP + PEBBLE        533.94 ± 57.71
                                          RUNE                263.48 ± 176.2
                                          SDP + RUNE          561.77 ± 108.17     0.021*
 C ARTPOLE - SWINGUP       48
                                          SURF                83.12 ± 44.53
                                          SDP + SURF          324.19 ± 179.8      0.039*
                                          MRN                 151.05 ± 76.31
                                          SDP + MRN           644.03 ± 57.99      0.0*
                                          PEBBLE              173.9 ± 100.26      0.001*
                                          SDP + PEBBLE        490.07 ± 50.07
                                          RUNE                160.6 ± 61.85       0.0*
                                          SDP + RUNE          575.71 ± 104.52
 WALKER - WALK             100
                                          SURF                202.1 ± 95.17       0.005*
                                          SDP + SURF          435.99 ± 39.45
                                          MRN                 215.14 ± 58.09      0.0*
                                          SDP + MRN           672.3 ± 85.53
                                          PEBBLE              582.51 ± 67.62      0.062
                                          SDP + PEBBLE        704.63 ± 102.27
                                          RUNE                681.59 ± 68.05      0.645
                                          SDP + RUNE          616.78 ± 279.34
 C HEETAH - RUN            200
                                          SURF                642.52 ± 84.3       0.266
                                          SDP + SURF          682.34 ± 65.08
                                          MRN                 728.36 ± 38.69      0.305
                                          SDP + MRN           748.99 ± 55.59
                                          PEBBLE              350.24 ± 228.91     0.017*
                                          SDP + PEBBLE        753.18 ± 104.79
                                          RUNE                363.65 ± 163.93     0.009*
                                          SDP + RUNE          704.1 ± 102.16
 Q UADRUPED - WALK         500
                                          SURF                550.51 ± 211.19     0.089
                                          SDP + SURF          767.78 ± 140.67
                                          MRN                 200.12 ± 63.04      0.0*
                                          SDP + MRN           733.83 ± 62.87

Table 11: This table shows the final performance (mean ± 95% confidence intervals) for all DM-
Control preference learning experiments. * indicates significant differences.


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 TASK                    F EEDBACK     M ETHOD            AUC                      P VALUE
                                       PEBBLE             8248.14 ± 2148.59        0.0*
                                       SDP + PEBBLE       21519.9 ± 2435.02
                                       RUNE               8817.21 ± 3534.57        0.004*
                                       SDP + RUNE         20970.54 ± 4643.96
 C ARTPOLE - SWINGUP     48
                                       SURF               5593.44 ± 1099.56        0.074
                                       SDP + SURF         10288.22 ± 4584.16
                                       MRN                6774.95 ± 1783.95        0.0*
                                       SDP + MRN          22564.32 ± 3846.6
                                       PEBBLE             7571.79 ± 2903.09        0.001*
                                       SDP + PEBBLE       18458.81 ± 1224.69
                                       RUNE               6525.52 ± 2566.88        0.0*
                                       SDP + RUNE         21059.76 ± 3056.28
 WALKER - WALK           100
                                       SURF               7675.24 ± 2857.99        0.001*
                                       SDP + SURF         16700.51 ± 1449.62
                                       MRN                7711.05 ± 1295.46        0.0*
                                       SDP + MRN          25184.26 ± 3071.65
                                       PEBBLE             39245.94 ± 5189.16       0.006*
                                       SDP + PEBBLE       51121.68 ± 3488.87
                                       RUNE               45824.63 ± 4459.04       0.792
                                       SDP + RUNE         37202.31 ± 16330.83
 C HEETAH - RUN          200
                                       SURF               40522.18 ± 2989.22       0.218
                                       SDP + SURF         42777.1 ± 3775.07
                                       MRN                47569.45 ± 2191.57       0.106
                                       SDP + MRN          49968.24 ± 2187.97
                                       PEBBLE             20584.95 ± 9814.49       0.018*
                                       SDP + PEBBLE       42044.34 ± 11183.84
                                       RUNE               22861.89 ± 9861.31       0.082
                                       SDP + RUNE         32664.79 ± 3929.32
 Q UADRUPED - WALK       500
                                       SURF               30884.8 ± 11660.52       0.074
                                       SDP + SURF         44176.44 ± 8404.76
                                       MRN                14805.07 ± 1860.39       0.002*
                                       SDP + MRN          35209.32 ± 6225.09

Table 12: This table shows the AUC (mean ± 95% confidence intervals) for all DMControl prefer-
ence learning experiments. * indicates significant differences.


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 TASK                  F EEDBACK       M ETHOD               F INAL R ETURN        P VALUE
                                       PEBBLE                10.0 ± 13.58          0.003*
                                       SDP + PEBBLE          66.0 ± 21.18
                                       RUNE                  4.0 ± 7.01            0.001*
                                       SDP + RUNE            68.0 ± 17.0
 H AMMER               7500
                                       SURF                  0.0 ± 0.0             0.033*
                                       SDP + SURF            36.0 ± 25.16
                                       MRN                   4.0 ± 7.01            0.027*
                                       SDP + MRN             46.0 ± 27.5
                                       PEBBLE                42.0 ± 34.35          0.066
                                       SDP + PEBBLE          80.0 ± 15.68
                                       RUNE                  26.0 ± 22.59          0.02*
                                       SDP + RUNE            36.0 ± 38.65
 D OOR - UNLOCK        500
                                       SURF                  20.0 ± 35.06          0.354
                                       SDP + SURF            80.0 ± 22.17
                                       MRN                   48.0 ± 38.17          0.399
                                       SDP + MRN             56.0 ± 37.02
                                       PEBBLE                38.0 ± 30.06          0.035*
                                       SDP + PEBBLE          80.0 ± 7.84
                                       RUNE                  62.0 ± 32.51          0.793
                                       SDP + RUNE            40.0 ± 30.87
 D OOR - LOCK          500
                                       SURF                  70.0 ± 31.85          0.684
                                       SDP + SURF            60.0 ± 13.58
                                       MRN                   66.0 ± 26.93          0.268
                                       SDP + MRN             78.0 ± 17.88
                                       PEBBLE                4.0 ± 7.01            0.045*
                                       SDP + PEBBLE          36.0 ± 25.16
                                       RUNE                  0.0 ± 0.0             0.001*
                                       SDP + RUNE            66.0 ± 14.24
 D RAWER - OPEN        1000
                                       SURF                  20.0 ± 35.06          0.018*
                                       SDP + SURF            80.0 ± 14.67
                                       MRN                   20.0 ± 35.06          0.136
                                       SDP + MRN             56.0 ± 40.21
                                       PEBBLE                34.0 ± 37.44          0.234
                                       SDP + PEBBLE          54.0 ± 26.35
                                       RUNE                  12.0 ± 21.04          0.014*
                                       SDP + RUNE            38.0 ± 24.42
 W INDOW- OPEN         200
                                       SURF                  14.0 ± 20.44          0.098
                                       SDP + SURF            66.0 ± 26.35
                                       MRN                   46.0 ± 32.61          0.208
                                       SDP + MRN             68.0 ± 31.06

Table 13: This table shows the final performance (mean ± 95% confidence intervals) for all Meta-
world preference learning experiments. * indicates significant differences.


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 TASK                 F EEDBACK      M ETHOD              AUC                   P VALUE
                                     PEBBLE               424.0 ± 175.18        0.017*
                                     SDP + PEBBLE         2222.0 ± 1009.47
                                     RUNE                 490.0 ± 300.85        0.001*
                                     SDP + RUNE           2520.0 ± 627.47
 H AMMER              7500
                                     SURF                 482.0 ± 215.59        0.006*
                                     SDP + SURF           3042.0 ± 1073.54
                                     MRN                  494.0 ± 311.76        0.016*
                                     SDP + MRN            2494.0 ± 1108.52
                                     PEBBLE               2142.0 ± 1738.06      0.031*
                                     SDP + PEBBLE         4838.0 ± 1251.13
                                     RUNE                 1272.0 ± 1275.71      0.047*
                                     SDP + RUNE           1836.0 ± 2063.68
 D OOR - UNLOCK       500
                                     SURF                 1580.0 ± 2462.83      0.348
                                     SDP + SURF           4802.0 ± 1537.81
                                     MRN                  3082.0 ± 2232.43      0.342
                                     SDP + MRN            3842.0 ± 2230.38
                                     PEBBLE               876.0 ± 647.87        0.008*
                                     SDP + PEBBLE         2300.0 ± 135.0
                                     RUNE                 1342.0 ± 590.05       0.809
                                     SDP + RUNE           884.0 ± 633.87
 D OOR - LOCK         500
                                     SURF                 1892.0 ± 842.85       0.429
                                     SDP + SURF           1986.0 ± 184.83
                                     MRN                  1966.0 ± 751.51       0.306
                                     SDP + MRN            2236.0 ± 479.9
                                     PEBBLE               314.0 ± 533.02        0.117
                                     SDP + PEBBLE         1702.0 ± 1706.12
                                     RUNE                 38.0 ± 49.71          0.004*
                                     SDP + RUNE           3794.0 ± 1306.6
 D RAWER - OPEN       1000
                                     SURF                 696.0 ± 1167.88       0.015*
                                     SDP + SURF           4078.0 ± 1839.07
                                     MRN                  1550.0 ± 2690.98      0.211
                                     SDP + MRN            3206.0 ± 2114.16
                                     PEBBLE               794.0 ± 1015.04       0.131
                                     SDP + PEBBLE         1698.0 ± 822.8
                                     RUNE                 230.0 ± 334.14        0.01*
                                     SDP + RUNE           948.0 ± 631.92
 W INDOW- OPEN        200
                                     SURF                 242.0 ± 248.44        0.064
                                     SDP + SURF           2048.0 ± 867.93
                                     MRN                  1252.0 ± 796.8        0.223
                                     SDP + MRN            1728.0 ± 666.48

Table 14: This table shows the area under the curve (mean ± 95% confidence intervals) for all
Metaworld preference learning experiments. * indicates significant differences.


                                               36
