Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONVERGENCE AND I MPLICIT B IAS OF G RADIENT
D ESCENT ON C ONTINUAL L INEAR C LASSIFICATION
 Hyunji Jung∗                                          Hanseul Cho∗ , Chulhee Yun
 Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence            Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
 POSTECH                                               KAIST
 jeonghj2001@postech.ac.kr                             {jhs4015, chulhee.yun}@kaist.ac.kr


                                                     A BSTRACT
             We study continual learning on multiple linear classification tasks by sequentially
             running gradient descent (GD) for a fixed budget of iterations per task. When
             all tasks are jointly linearly separable and are presented in a cyclic/random order,
             we show the directional convergence of the trained linear classifier to the joint
             (offline) max-margin solution. This is surprising because GD training on a single
             task is implicitly biased towards the individual max-margin solution for the task,
             and the direction of the joint max-margin solution can be largely different from
             these individual solutions. Additionally, when tasks are given in a cyclic order,
             we present a non-asymptotic analysis on cycle-averaged forgetting, revealing that
             (1) alignment between tasks is indeed closely tied to catastrophic forgetting and
             backward knowledge transfer and (2) the amount of forgetting vanishes to zero as
             the cycle repeats. Lastly, we analyze the case where the tasks are no longer jointly
             separable and show that the model trained in a cyclic order converges to the unique
             minimum of the joint loss function.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Continual learning (CL) aims to sequentially learn a model from a stream of tasks or datasets, to
extend its knowledge continuously. The main challenge in CL is catastrophic forgetting, meaning
that their performance on previous tasks degrades after learning new ones (McCloskey & Cohen,
1989; Goodfellow et al., 2013). It has led to a growing body of works focusing on heuristic methods
of mitigating forgetting, including regularization-based methods (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Aljundi
et al., 2018; Li & Hoiem, 2017), replay-based methods (Chaudhry et al., 2019; Lopez-Paz & Ranzato,
2017; Shin et al., 2017), and optimization-based methods (Farajtabar et al., 2020; Javed & White,
2019; Mirzadeh et al., 2020).
As CL is receiving significant attention in practice, it is also important to theoretically understand the
mechanism of continual learning. A vast amount of the theoretical works on CL so far has focused on
regression problems (Bennani et al., 2020; Doan et al., 2021; Asanuma et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2021;
Evron et al., 2022; Goldfarb & Hand, 2023; Li et al., 2023), whereas most of the practical application
of deep learning is based on classification. Thus, theoretical analysis of continual classification
methods and their learning dynamics is of significant interest and importance. Indeed, a few results
study continual classification (Raghavan & Balaprakash, 2021; Kim et al., 2022; 2023; Shi & Wang,
2023), albeit focusing on theoretical perspectives that are different from ours; we review these related
works in Appendix A.
This paper is mainly motivated by a recent result studying continual linear classification on a collection
of jointly separable datasets (Evron et al., 2023). The authors consider continual training of a linear
classifier under weak regularization, where the linear classifier is trained until convergence at every
given task. By taking the limit of the regularization coefficient λ → 0, this training procedure is
shown to be equivalent (in terms of the parameter direction as λ → 0) to a projection-based scheme
called Sequential Max-Margin (SMM): every time we encounter a new binary classification task, we
project the current model parameter vector to a convex set defined by the margin conditions of the
given dataset. Then, under this framework of projection onto convex sets, the authors show linear
convergence of the iterates of SMM to an offline solution (i.e., a classifier that solves all tasks at once)
under cyclic/random ordering of the tasks. More details can be found in Appendix B.
    ∗
        Authors contributed equally to this paper.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In light of the insightful analyses by Evron et al. (2023), we now highlight some aspects of their
work that motivate the setup of our interest. First of all, Evron et al. (2023) consider minimizing the
regularized training loss of each task until convergence; however, it is far more common to spend a
finite budget of iterations per task in practice (i.e., online one-pass setting, or fixed-epoch setting).
Training until convergence, combined with sending the regularization coefficient λ → 0, also raises
an issue on the claimed equivalence of weakly regularized training and the projection-based scheme.
As λ → 0, the solution of the training objective diverges to infinity, which does not match the fact
that the iterate of the SMM travels only for a finite distance at every stage.1 Another noteworthy
characteristic of the considered SMM scheme is that it does not always converge to the offline
max-margin solution, i.e., the hard-margin support vector machine solution that solves all tasks
jointly, which is known to be beneficial in terms of generalization (Vapnik, 2013). Lastly, in their
concluding section, Evron et al. (2023) also suggest studying unregularized continual training with
early stopping and highlight that the behavior may be different. These observations triggered our
investigation into a gradient-based algorithm for continual linear classification and its convergence
and algorithmic bias.
In this work, we theoretically study continual linear
                                                                                                Task 0 datapoints
classification via sequentially running gradient de-                                            Task 1 datapoints
scent (GD) on the unregularized logistic loss for a                                             Task 0 Only
fixed budget of iterations at every stage.2 When all                                            Task 1 Only
tasks are jointly separable and revealed in the cyclic                                          Joint Training
                                                                                                Continual (Cyclic)
order (as studied by Evron et al. (2023)), we show
that sequential GD converges in the direction of the
offline max-margin solution, unlike SMM. We high-
light that this is an interesting result for at least two
reasons:

• It reveals a clear difference between sequential GD
  and the projection-based SMM algorithm in terms
  of algorithmic bias.
• It is well-known that GD applied to an individ-
  ual task has its implicit bias towards the task’s            Figure 1: Trajectory of sequential GD on
  own max-margin direction (Soudry et al., 2018).              a two-task toy example (Appendix C.1) in
  However, the direction of the offline max-margin             which the offline max-margin direction is not
  solution can largely differ from the max-margin              on the subspace spanned by individual task
  directions of individual tasks, not even lying on            max-margin solutions. Sequential GD iterates
  the subspace spanned by the individual directions            initially oscillate but quickly start to evolve
  (see Figure 1 and Appendix C.1).                             along the same direction as the offline max-
                                                               margin direction.
Therefore, the convergence of sequential GD to the
offline max-margin solution highlights that repeated continual training eventually drives the model to
learn all tasks well, overcoming the biases towards individual tasks. In addition to the implicit bias
result, we also characterize the convergence rate in terms of total loss and the vanishing rate of the
per-cycle forgetting. Our analysis reveals a surprising but intuitive link between positive/negative
task alignments and forgetting. Furthermore, we broaden the scope of our analysis to the random task
ordering case and a jointly non-separable case. We summarize our main contributions below.

1.1      S UMMARY OF C ONTRIBUTIONS
We study continual linear classification using sequential GD, where the model is updated by K
iterations of GD on the unregularized training loss of each given task.

 • In Section 3, we study the scenario where the tasks are jointly separable and are given in
   a cyclic order. We prove that the joint (full) training loss asymptotically converges to zero
   (Theorem 3.1) and the sequential GD iterates in fact align with the joint (offline) max-margin
   solution (Theorem 3.2). We also provide a non-asymptotic analysis of the cycle-averaged
                                                4
   forgetting, diminishing at the rate of O( lnJ 2J ) (Theorem 3.4), based on a non-asymptotic loss
   1
       Recall that Evron et al. (2023) show their equivalence in terms of parameter direction.
   2
       We focus on this setup instead of early stopping because it is closer to common practice in deep learning.


                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                       2
      convergence bound of rate O( lnJ J ) which holds for all number of cycles J > 1. Our analysis
      delivers a clear intuition on how positive or negative task alignment has an impact on forgetting.
    • In Section 4, we again consider the jointly separable setup but with the tasks given in a uniformly
      random order. We show that the asymptotic loss convergence and directional convergence to the
      joint max-margin solution still happen, albeit almost surely (Theorems 4.1 and 4.2).
    • Lastly, in Section 5 we consider the case where the tasks are no longer jointly separable, in which
      the global minimum of the joint training loss uniquely exists. We derive a fast non-asymptotic
                                2
      convergence rate of O( lnJ 2J ) towards the global minimum when the tasks are presented cyclically.


2        P ROBLEM S ETUP

In this section, we outline the problem setup considered throughout the paper.
Notation. We denote the joint data matrix as X ∈ Rd×N , whose columns are the d-dimensional data
points xi ’s. For a square matrix A, we denote the maximum/minimum
                                                          p            eigenvalue of it by λmax (A)
and λmin (A), respectively. In particular, we write σmax = λmax (XX ⊤ ) as the maximum singular
value of X. The Euclidean (ℓ2 ) norm of a vector v is denoted as ∥v∥. Let RN   ≥0 be the set of N -
dimensional vectors whose elements are greater than or equal to zero. Also, for a pair of integers
K1 ≤ K2 , we write [K1 : K2 ] to denote a set of consecutive integers {K1 , K1 + 1, . . . , K2 }.

2.1        C ONTINUAL L INEAR B INARY C LASSIFICATION

We consider binary classification, where each input data x ∈ Rd has its own label y ∈ {−1, +1}. We
assume that our learning algorithm encounters M different binary classification tasks in a sequential
manner, and our goal is to find an offline solution that jointly solves all the tasks. Each task consists
of a set of data pairs {(xi , yi )}i∈Im , where Im ⊂ [0 : N − 1] is the set of data indices in task
m ∈ [0 : M − 1]. Let us use the notation that the total index set I := [0 : N − 1] is partitioned into
     UM −1
I = m=0 Im ; thus, we use disjoint index sets for distinct tasks.
We consider a simple linear model f (x; w) = x⊤ w parameterized by a weight vector w ∈ Rd . With
a differentiable loss function ℓ(u), we aim to minimize offline (joint) training loss defined as
                                     X                       X
                                                               ℓ yi x⊤

                           L(w) :=       ℓ (yi f (xi ; w)) =         i w .
                                       i∈I                   i∈I

Likewise, the training loss of task m ∈ [0 : M − 1] is defined as
                                               X
                                                    ℓ yi x⊤

                                    Lm (w) :=              i w .
                                                  i∈Im

Consider a CL setup run in multiple stages. At each stage t ≥ 0, the only available dataset for training
is taken from a single task mt ∈ [0 : M − 1]: we denote the corresponding index set at stage t as
I (t) = Imt . Note that the learning algorithm does not have the freedom to choose the next task; we
assume that the task is presented to the algorithm by the “environment.” We study two common
scenarios that dictate the order of the tasks to be learned:
(1) Cyclic task ordering. The tasks are revealed in a predefined cyclic order, i.e., mt = t mod M .
(2) Random task ordering.           Every task is independently sampled uniformly at random, i.e.,
    iid
mt ∼ Unif([0 : M − 1]).
Both ordering schemes have been studied theoretically and empirically (Evron et al., 2022; 2023;
Cossu et al., 2022; Houyon et al., 2023). Indeed, such schemes naturally occur in real-world
scenarios. For instance, cyclic task ordering covers search engines influenced by periodic events3 and
seasonal financial data (Gultekin & Gultekin, 1983; Yang et al., 2022). Random task ordering bears a
resemblance to autonomous driving in randomly recurring environments (Verwimp et al., 2023).
     3
         A trend of interest about a keyword, e.g., trends.google.com/trends/


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.2   A LGORITHM : S EQUENTIAL G RADIENT D ESCENT
At every stage t, we run GD with a fixed learning rate η > 0 on the corresponding training loss
                                             X
                    L(t) (w) := Lmt (w) =         ℓ yi x⊤       (∵ I (t) = Imt )

                                                         i w                                    (1)
                                                  i∈I (t)
for a fixed budget (K ≥ 1). We call this algorithm sequential GD and its update rule is written as
              (t)      (t)              (t)                                 (t+1)       (t)
           wk+1 = wk − η∇L(t) (wk ) for k ∈ [0 : K − 1];                  w0         = wK .           (2)
That is, for the task mt given at stage t, we run K steps of GD updates and move on to the next task
                                                  (t+1)                                           (t)
by setting the initial iterate of the next stage w0     as the last iterate of the current stage wK .

3     C YCLIC L EARNING OF J OINTLY S EPARABLE TASKS
In this section, we focus on the jointly linearly separable datasets (Evron et al., 2023). We dive deep
into the case of cyclic task ordering and prove that sequential GD on separable linear classification
tasks converges in a direction to the offline max-margin solution of the total dataset. Additionally,
through a non-asymptotic analysis of the loss convergence, we also characterize the average forgetting
within cycles and show that the forgetting vanishes to zero faster than the loss convergence.
3.1   D EFINITIONS AND A SSUMPTIONS
The first assumption is that the total dataset is linearly separable.
Assumption 3.1 (Joint Separability). There exists w ∈ Rd such that yi x⊤
                                                                       i w > 0 for ∀i ∈ I.

Under Assumption 3.1, we can state an important definition central to our analysis. We define the
joint (offline) ℓ2 max-margin solution (where we usually omit “ℓ2 ” for convenience)
                                              2
                       ŵ := arg min ∥w∥           subject to yi x⊤
                                                                  i w ≥ 1, ∀i ∈ I.                    (3)
                               w∈Rd
It can be shown that the optimization problem in Equation (3) has a unique solution ŵ (Mohri
et al., 2018). The max-margin solution is of key interest in the study of linear classification, because
it is well known that it has a good generalization guarantee (Vapnik, 2013) and GD applied to
a single separable binary classification problem has an implicit bias towards its ℓ2 max-margin
solution (Soudry et al., 2018). To be more specific, it is shown in Soudry et al. (2018) that the norm of
GD iterates diverges to infinity, but their direction converges to ∥ŵ
                                                                     ŵ∥ . In our CL setting, we consider
running multiple steps of GD on a single task before switching to a different task, and still aim to find
the joint max-margin solution that solves all tasks at once.
Given the definition of joint max-margin solution, we now define several key quantities. The
maximum margin of (normalized) ŵ is defined as
                                                   yi x ⊤
                                                        i ŵ
                                        ϕ := min             .                                  (4)
                                              i∈I    ∥ŵ∥
In fact, it can be shown that ϕ = 1/ ∥ŵ∥. A support vector is a data point xi that attains this
minimum ϕ; we define the index set of support vectors as S := {i ∈ I : yi x⊤  ŵ
                                                                           i ∥ŵ∥ = ϕ}, and define
the index sets of support vectors of each task Sm := S ∩ Im for all m ∈ [0 : M − 1]. Let the
support vector matrix be XS ∈ Rd×|S| , a submatrix of the data matrix X that only contains columns
corresponding to support vectors. Lastly, we define the second margin θ := mini∈I\S yi x⊤ i ŵ > 1,
which will appear in our techincal analyses.
To show directional convergence to the joint max-margin solution (Theorem 3.2), we additionally
pose a mild assumption on the support vectors.
Assumption 3.2 (Non-Degeneracy of Support   P Vectors, e.g., Soudry et al., 2018). For each i ∈ S,
there exists a unique αi > 0 satisfying ŵ = i∈S αi · yi xi : i.e., no support vectors are degenerate.
It is worth mentioning that Assumption 3.2 is valid for almost all linearly separable datasets sampled
from a continuous distribution where no more than d support vectors can be on the same hyperplane.
In the upcoming sections, we present several results on convergence, implicit bias, and forgetting of
sequential GD. They rely on different assumptions on ℓ(u); we collect them here. It is noteworthy
that the renowned logistic loss ℓ(u) = ln(1 + e−u ) satisfies all the assumptions listed below.


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Assumption 3.3. The loss function ℓ(u) is positive, β-smooth, monotonically decreasing to zero
(i.e., limu→+∞ ℓ(u) = 0), and satisfies lim supu→−∞ ℓ′ (u) < 0.
Assumption 3.4 (Tight Exponential Tail, Soudry et al., 2018). The negative loss derivative −ℓ′ (u)
has a tight exponential tail, i.e., there exist positive constants µ+ , µ− , and ū such that for all u > ū:
                     (1 − exp(−µ− u))e−u ≤ −ℓ′ (u) ≤ (1 + exp(−µ+ u))e−u .
Assumption 3.5 (Convexity). The loss ℓ(u) is convex, i.e., ℓ(u) ≥ ℓ(v) + ℓ′ (v) · (u − v) (u, v ∈ R).

3.2     A SYMPTOTIC R ESULTS : L OSS C ONVERGENCE & I MPLICIT B IAS TO J OINT M AX -M ARGIN
Now, we analyze the asymptotic convergence of offline training loss and characterize the directional
convergence of sequential GD (2) on jointly separable cyclic tasks. We start by understanding the
asymptotic behavior of the joint task loss L(w).
                        (t)
Theorem 3.1. Let {wk }k∈[0:K−1],t≥0 be the sequence of GD iterates (2) from any starting point
  (0)
w0 , where tasks are given cyclically. Under Assumptions 3.1 and 3.3, if the learning rate satisfies
            ϕ2
η < 2Kβσ3 (M   ϕ+σmax ) , then
           max


                                         (t)
1. Loss converges to zero: lim L(wk ) = 0, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1].
                               t→∞
                                                                          (t)
2. All data points are eventually classified correctly: lim yi x⊤
                                                                i wk = ∞, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1], i ∈ I.
                                                        t→∞
                                                  P∞ PK−1          (t)   (t)
3. Square sum of the change of weight is finite: t=0 k=0 ∥wk+1 − wk ∥2 < ∞.

The theorem above shows that cyclic continual learning on the jointly separable data will eventually
learn all tasks, or equivalently, find an offline solution without any additional techniques such as
regularization. This result matches the recent empirical findings that DNN can mitigate catastrophic
forgetting when tasks are given repetitively (Lesort et al., 2023). The last part on the sum of squared
changes is used for proving the upcoming Theorem 3.2. We note that Theorem 3.1 does not require
convexity of ℓ. The proof can be found in Appendix E.1.
Although Theorem 3.1 shows that the joint training loss converges to zero, due to the joint separability
                                                           (t)
(Assumption 3.1), there are multiple directions in which wk could evolve to make the offline training
loss decay to zero. That is, the loss convergence only guarantees finding an offline solution, but does
not characterize which. Under additional assumptions of non-degeneracy and tight exponential tails,
                                     (t)
we characterize which direction wk diverges to, and show that the model parameter in fact aligns
with the joint ℓ2 max-margin solution ŵ (3).
                         (t)
Theorem 3.2. Let {wk }k∈[0:K−1],t≥0 be the sequence of GD iterates (2) from any initial point
  (0)
w0 , where tasks are given cyclically. Suppose that Assumptions 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4 hold. Then,
                                                           (t)
under the same learning rate condition as in Theorem 3.1, wk will behave as
                                               (t)                (t)
                                            wk = ln(t)ŵ + ρk ,
                                      (t)
for all sufficiently large t, where ∥ρk ∥ stays bounded as t → ∞.

The proof is in Appendix E.2. A key implication of Theorem 3.2 is that the weight vector converges
in the direction of the joint max-margin solution while diverging in magnitude at a rate O(ln t):
                                        (t)
                                      wk              ŵ
                               lim              =         ,   ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1].                          (5)
                               t→∞ ∥w (t) ∥          ∥ŵ∥
                                     k

It implies that sequential GD without any regularization not only learns every task, but also implicitly
biased towards the joint max-margin direction whose corresponding linear classifier separates the
total dataset with the largest margin, even without full access to it at all update steps of the classifier
weight. This implication is visually verified in Figure 2.
Remark 3.6 (Asymptotic Convergence Rate of Joint Training Loss). Recall that Theorem 3.2 relies
on Assumption 3.2 as well as the assumptions about the shape of the loss function ℓ(·), namely,


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                               Sine Angle( = (1 cossim2))
                                                                                                          between Linear Model vs. Joint Max-Margin
                                                                                                                                       Continually learned model
                                                                                                                                       Jointly trained model

                                         Joint Max-margin Direction
                                         Joint Training trajectory
                                         Continual Learning trajectory


                                                                               Sine Angle
                                         Task 0 Data (y = + 1)                              10 1
                                         Task 0 Data (y = 1)
                                         Task 1 Data (y = + 1)
                                         Task 1 Data (y = 1)
                                         Task 2 Data (y = + 1)
                                         Task 2 Data (y = 1)


                                                                                            10 2
                                                                                                   100                 101                     102
                                                                                                                             Stage

 (a) Data points, training trajectory (beginning-of-stage                      (b) Sine angles, implying the implicit bias toward
 iterates), and the decision boundaries (dashed).                              joint max-margin direction.
Figure 2: Comparison between continually learned and jointly trained linear classifier. We
generate three jointly separable binary classification tasks (with 2D inputs) and run (1) sequential
GD in a cyclic task ordering and (2) full-batch GD. It is well-known that the offline full-batch GD
converges to the offline ℓ2 max-margin solution (Soudry et al., 2018). We verify a similar implicit
bias of sequential GD iterates (which we proved in Theorem 3.2) by observing the decrease in angle
between the model weight and the joint max-margin direction (set as (1, 1)). We also observe similar
phenomena for a more general experimental setup (e.g., random task ordering): see Appendix C.2.

Assumptions 3.3 and 3.4. Combining these assumptions again with the theorem, we can show that
         (t)
the L(wk ) will eventually converge to zero at a rate O(1/t), given that t is sufficiently large. We
prove this claim in Appendix E.3. Moreover, we will compare it with a forthcoming non-asymptotic
loss convergence rate (Theorem 3.3) later in Section 3.3.

Remark on Assumption 3.2. As noted earlier, the non-degeneracy assumption (Assumption 3.2)
is borrowed from Soudry et al. (2018); the purpose of adopting this assumption is to facilitate a
                                         (t)
more complete analysis of the residual ρk . In fact, in Soudry et al. (2018), the conclusion on the
directional convergence (similar to Equation (5), but for single-task GD training) still holds even
under the absence of Assumption 3.2. In light of this, we also believe that directional convergence
of sequential GD (5) will hold even without Assumption 3.2, but we did not pursue removing the
assumption because it does not offer substantial additional insights.
Additional Experiments. Although we analyze continual learning in a setting where each task
has a fixed dataset, the insight of our analysis extends to general setups. To show this, we conduct
experiments in a setting where each task has its own (separable) data distribution and a dataset
is freshly sampled at every new stage. We observe the same directional convergence behavior of
sequential GD toward the true joint max-margin direction. The detailed results are in Appendix C.2.4.
In addition, we provide experiments with shallow ReLU networks, verifying analogous insights on
implicit bias and loss convergence of continually learned models: see Appendix C.4.
3.3   N ON -A SYMPTOTIC R ESULTS : L OSS C ONVERGENCE AND F ORGETTING B OUNDS
In Section 3.2, we presented asymptotic results characterizing the convergence of total training loss to
zero and the directional convergence of sequential GD iterates to the max-margin solutions. We now
supplement these results with an additional non-asymptotic convergence analysis on total training
loss, which we can use to obtain a non-asymptotic analysis of cycle-averaged forgetting as well.
As aforementioned, the main challenge in CL is mitigating catastrophic forgetting. Analyses of
continual learning methods aim to show that methods decrease forgetting, theoretically or empirically.
In this paper, we are interested in how strong forgetting is in our continual linear classification setup.
We start by stating a common definition of forgetting, which quantifies the amount of loss increase at
the end of stage t compared to the end of K steps of GD on L(s) executed in stage s ≤ t.
Definition 3.7 (Forgetting). The forgetting at stage t of the task learned in stage s (≤ t) is the change
of the task loss L(s) from the moment the K GD steps were finished in stage s. That is,
                                                                         (t)                             (s)
                                  F (s) (t) := L(s) (wK ) − L(s) (wK ).


                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Notice that forgetting is zero by definition when t = s. While it is usually expected that forgetting is
a positive quantity, it could also be negative by definition. Such a case can happen when the tasks
seen in stages between s and t are well-aligned with L(s) , so that the model improves on the task
previously seen in stage s. This phenomenon is called backward knowledge transfer.
When CL tasks do not necessarily repeat, it is common to evaluate the average forgetting that occurred
                                   Pt−1
during all past stages, namely 1t s=0 F (s) (t). However, since we consider the case where tasks are
given cyclically, it is natural to define our quantity of interest as below:
Definition 3.8 (Cycle-Averaged Forgetting). The cycle-averaged forgetting at cycle j is the average
loss change of previous tasks from the stage in which it was learned. That is,
                                         M −1
                                     1 X (M j+m)
                       Fcyc (j) :=         F     (M j + M − 1)
                                     M m=0
                                         M −1
                                     1 X        (M j+M )          (M j+m)
                                =          Lm (w0        ) − Lm (wK       ).
                                     M m=0

By studying cycle-averaged forgetting, we would like to understand how much forgetting happens
during the cyclic learning process, and how the amount of forgetting changes as we repeat the cycles.
Although the asymptotic convergence to joint max-margin solution (Theorem 3.2) suggests that the
model will suffer a diminishing level of forgetting in the long run, characterizing the amount of
forgetting for a given cycle count J necessitates a more careful non-asymptotic analysis of the loss
convergence. For this purpose, we present an additional theorem characterizing the non-asymptotic
convergence of offline training loss L; we then build on this theorem to prove upper and lower bounds
on cycle-averaged forgetting. The new convergence theorem requires the same set of assumptions as
Theorem 3.1, except for an additional assumption of convex ℓ(u).
Theorem 3.3. Suppose that Assumptions 3.1, 3.3, and 3.5 hold under the cyclic task ordering
                                                                           ϕ2
setup. Then, if we choose a learning rate satisfying η < 4Kβσ3 (M             ϕ+σmax ) , we have for any
                                                                       max
m ∈ [0 : M − 1] and k ∈ [0 : K − 1] that
                               Pm−1                     !
                                              k                             (0)
         (M J+m)                  i=0 |Si | + K |Sm |                   ∥w0 − ŵ ln M J∥2        D1
    L(wk          ) ≤ |S| +                               ℓ(ln M J) +                          +
                                         J                                      2ηKJ               J
                                         Pm−1                                       !
                                                                  k
                                                (|Ii | − |Si |) + K (|Im | − |Sm |)
                       + |I| − |S| + i=0                                              ℓ(θ ln M J),
                                                              J
where θ > 1 is the second margin defined in Section 3.1, and D1 is a constant independent to J.

The proof, as well as the detailed expression of D1 , can be found in Appendix E.4. One can revisit
Section 3.1 to recall the definitions of symbols such as σmax , ϕ, and β. The bound in Theorem 3.3
may be a bit difficult to parse. First of all, notice that whenever ℓ(u) ≤ e−u , which is true for logistic
loss ℓ(u) = ln(1 + e−u ), we have ℓ(ln M J) ≤ M1J and ℓ(θ ln M J) ≤ (M1J)θ . Combined with other
                                     2
terms, this implies an overall O( lnJ J ) upper bound for the offline training loss.
Unlike the asymptotic result, Theorem 3.3 enables capturing the behavior of training for any small J.
we can notice for any fixed J, the upper bound in fact grows with k and m. This unusual growth of
the upper bound reflects the effect of forgetting that can happen within cycles. We demonstrate this
mid-cycle increase of joint loss using a toy example in Appendix C.3. Moreover, despite the possible
forgetting, Theorem 3.3 indicates that if tasks are given cyclically, then the loss bound is guaranteed
to decrease at the end of every cycle.
We can now use Theorem 3.3 to derive bounds on cycle-averaged forgetting we defined in Defi-
nition 3.8. We characterize how fast the cycle-averaged forgetting Fcyc (J) converges to zero as
the cycles replay. For this theorem, we specifically consider logistic loss, which satisfies all the
assumptions about loss in the paper.
Theorem 3.4. Suppose Assumption 3.1 and let ℓ(u) = ln(1 + e−u ) be the logistic loss, which
                                                                                  ϕ2
satisfies Assumptions 3.3, 3.4, and 3.5. If the learning rate satisfies η < 4Kβσ3 (M ϕ+σmax ) , then
                                                                                       max


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         2                            2
                                                                                                   0.020                                contradict
                                                                                                                                        aligned


                                                                       Average Forgetting cyc(J)
         1                            1                                                            0.015
                                                                                                   0.010
         0                            0
                                                                                                   0.005
                                                                                                   0.000
         1                            1
                                                                                                   0.005
         2                            2                                                            0.010
                                                                                                           0   20     40       60       80      100
          0.5 0.0   0.5   1.0   1.5    0.5 0.0   0.5   1.0   1.5                                                    Number of cycle J

       (a) Contradicting case             (b) Aligned case                                            (c) Cycle-averaged Forgetting

Figure 3: We compare two continual learning scenarios with the same joint dataset D =
{(1, 2), (1.1, 1.8), (1.2, 1.9), (1, −2), (1.1, −1.8), (1.2, −1.9)}, where labels are all +1 and hence
omitted. We mark Task 1’s data as ‘o’ and Task 2’s data as ‘+’. We used M = 2 and K = 10.
Figure 3(a) displays a data composition that makes large A−       1,2 , whereas Figure 3(b) displays a data
composition that makes relatively small A−     1,2 and large A +
                                                               1,2 . Figure 3(c) is a plot of cycle-averaged
forgetting (Fcyc ), evolving over cycles. For the “contradict” scenario (red), Fcyc is always positive
and diminishing to 0. In contrast, for the “aligned” scenario (blue), Fcyc is always negative and rising
to 0.


the cycle-averaged forgetting Fcyc (J) for cycle J satisfies the following upper and lower bounds:
                                        +                                            −
                               P                                            P
                            2     p̸=q Ap,q                              2    p̸=q Ap,q
             −ηK · {L(J)} ·                 ≤ Fcyc (J) ≤ ηK · {L(J)} ·                  ,
                                    M                                           M
                   2
where L(J) = O lnJ J and A+                        x⊤         −
                                                                                x⊤
                                            P                            P
                                p,q :=              i xj , Ap,q :=                i xj .
                                                 (i,j)∈Ip ×Iq                                                  (i,j)∈Ip ×Iq
                                                   x⊤i xj >0                                                     x⊤i xj <0


The proof and the detailed expressions are in Appendix E.5. Theorem 3.4 shows a nonnegative upper
bound and a nonpositive lower bound on the cycle-averaged forgetting at cycle J. Note that both
                                                                                            4
upper and lower bounds decay to zero as J grows. Convergence of Fcyc (J) is of rate O( lnJ 2J ), which
                                         2
is faster than the convergence rate O( lnJ J ) of joint training loss shown in Theorem 3.3.
The bounds in Theorem 3.4 reflect how positive/negative data alignment between different tasks
                                              −
impact forgetting. The quantities A+ p,q and Ap,q capture show P
                                                               how similar and different (respectively)
data points are, for a pair of tasks (p, q). In particular, if p̸=q A−  p,q = 0, it is guaranteed that
(non-negative) cycle-averaged forgetting will not happen regardless of J. Rather, training on a task
will decrease the loss for all previously learned tasks,
                                                       Pwhich can be considered an extreme form of
backward knowledge transfer. On the other hand, if p̸=q A+     p,q = 0, it is guaranteed that the model
will suffer forgetting at every cycle; however, even in this case, Theorem 3.4 implies that repeating
tasks over cycles mitigates catastrophic forgetting.
Even when the joint dataset D is the same, forgetting behavior can differ depending on how the data
points are distributed over different tasks. This matches the former theoretical explanation of how
distribution affects forgetting. For instance, Lin et al. (2023) show that a larger distance between each
task’s optimal solution leads to larger forgetting. For a straightforward interpretation, consider the
following example of two tasks: their cycle-averaged forgetting for two different decompositions of D
is plotted in Figure 3. We can observe that two tasks contradicting each other (i.e., large A−   1,2 ) result
in positive forgetting, whereas two tasks aligning better (i.e., large A+ 1,2 ) exhibit negative forgetting.
Nevertheless, cycle-averaged forgetting converges to zero in both cases.
Remark 3.9. When ℓ(u) is the logistic loss, a direct application of an asymptotic loss convergence
rate mentioned in Remark 3.6 implies the forgetting convergence of rate O( J12 ) without any additional
logarithmic factors, which can be shown by almost an identical proof as Theorem 3.4. However, it is
guaranteed for a sufficiently large number of cycles J. See Appendix E.3 for discussion about it.


                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4         R ANDOM -O RDER L EARNING OF J OINTLY S EPARABLE TASKS
In this section, we consider the scenario where tasks are given in a random order, while still assuming
that the tasks are jointly separable. Formally, at the end of the K-th GD iteration of stage t, the next
task is sampled independently and uniformly at random. Even in this case, our analysis reveals that
the asymptotic results shown in Section 3.2 continue to hold almost surely.
We first show that the offline training loss converges to zero almost surely, which is a random-order
counterpart of Theorem 3.1. The proof is in Appendix F.1.
                        (t)
Theorem 4.1. Let {wk }k∈[0:K−1],t≥0 be the sequence of GD iterates (2) from any starting point
    (0)
w0 , where tasks are given randomly. Under Assumptions 3.1 and 3.3, if the learning rate satisfies
         2
η < βσ2ϕ4 , then the following statements hold with probability 1:
           max

                                       (t)
1. Loss converges to zero: lim L(wk ) = 0, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1].
                              t→∞
                                                                      (t)
2. All data points are eventually classified correctly: lim yi x⊤
                                                                i wk = 0, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1], i ∈ I.
                                                        t→∞
                                                  P∞ PK−1          (t)    (t)
3. Square sum of the change of weight is finite: t=0 k=0 ∥wk+1 − wk ∥2 < ∞.
We derive the same asymptotic loss convergence result, with a minor difference that the learning rate
can be chosen independently of the number of tasks M and the iteration count K.
We now state the random-order counterpart of Theorem 3.2, which implies that the sequential GD
iterates converge to the joint ℓ2 max-margin solution almost surely. The proof is in Appendix F.2.
                        (t)
Theorem 4.2. Let {wk }k∈[0:K−1],t≥0 be the sequence of GD iterates (2) from any starting point
  (0)
w0 , where tasks are given randomly. Suppose that Assumptions 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4 hold. Then,
                                                             (t)
under the same learning rate condition as in Theorem 4.1, wk will behave as:
                                       (t)               (t)
                                     wk = ln (t) ŵ + ρk ,
         (t)
where ∥ρk ∥ stays bounded as t grows.

5         B EYOND J OINTLY S EPARABLE TASKS
Now we turn our attention to the CL on a strictly non-separable set of M tasks, where the tasks are
presented in a cyclic manner. In this section, we assume that the set of all data points spans the whole
space Rd without loss of generality. This is a mild assumption because every gradient update happens
in the span of data points. In this case, if we assume the strict non-separability on the full dataset
                                                             PM −1
(see Assumption 5.1), the offline training loss L(w) = m=0 Lm (w) defined with logistic losses
becomes strictly convex and coercive (i.e., lim∥w∥→∞ L(w) = +∞); thus, it has a unique minimum
w⋆ ∈ Rd . We show that, under cyclic task ordering, the iterates of sequential GD converge to w⋆
                  2
with a rate O( lnJ 2J ), which is faster than the loss convergence rate of the separable case.
The core idea of the analysis is to identify the local strong convexity of the offline training loss on a
compact set on which every end-of-cycle iterates lie (Freund et al., 2018). To this end, we introduce a
strict non-separability of the joint dataset as defined below.
Assumption 5.1 (Joint Strict Non-Separability Condition (Freund et al., 2018)). Assume that the
whole collection of data points is of full rank: span({xi : i = 0, . . . , N − 1}) = Rd . Additionally,
assume that there exists b > 0 defined as
                                                    XN −1
                                  b :=     min              [yi x⊤   −
                                                                 i v] ,
                                       v∈Rd :∥v∥=1       i=0
             −
where [a] := max{0, −a}.
Note that a large b means that the joint data points are highly non-separable: for any classifier vector
v, there exist some data points with the incorrect prediction of the label with a large margin. We also
remark that individual tasks are not necessarily strictly non-separable. Hence, our analysis covers the
case where all individual tasks are separable but the full dataset is not separable.
We additionally assume some mild properties of the loss function ℓ(·).


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Assumption 5.2. The loss function ℓ : R → R+ is a strictly convex, β-smooth function with a
positive second derivative such that ℓ(u) ≥ G · [u]− for some G > 0.

Note that the logistic loss ℓ(u) = ln(1+e−u ) satisfies the assumption above withP β = 1/4 and G = 1.
From the assumptions, we have that (1) the training loss of m-th task Lm (w) = i∈Im ℓ(yi x⊤       i w) is
                                                     ⊤                  d×|Im |

convex and βm -smooth for βm := βλmax Xm Xm , where Xm ∈ R                      is a data matrix of task
m consisting of columns {xi : i ∈ Im }; (2) due to the strict non-separability, the offline training loss
          PM −1
L(w) = m=0 Lm (w) has a unique minimum w⋆ . Furthermore, we can prove that the end-of-cycle
iterates of the sequential GD stay bounded in a compact set W around w⋆ . Consequently, we obtain
local strong convexity of the offline training loss on W. The proof is in Appendix G.1.
Lemma 5.1. Consider learning M linear classification tasks cyclically. Suppose that Assumptions 5.1
                       PM −1                    PM −1                     2
and 5.2 hold. Let B := m=0 βm and V⋆ := m=0 β1m ∥∇Lm (w⋆ )∥ . Take a step size η ≤
                                                                         (jM )
 √1   . Then, there exists a compact set W ⊂ Rd containing w⋆ and every w0     (j = 0, 1, 2, . . .),
2 2KB
whose radius is independent of J (the number of cycles) but depends on other parameters like b, G,
B, and V⋆ . Also, the offline training loss L is µ-strongly convex on W, where

                    µ := mini∈[0:N −1],w∈W ℓ′′ yi x⊤           · λmin XX ⊤ > 0.

                                                        i w                                    (6)

We remark that the radius of the set W largely depends on the non-separability b (Assumption 5.1):
loosely speaking, W can be arbitrarily large if b goes to zero since ∥w − w⋆ ∥ = O(1/b) for any
w ∈ W. In particular, for the logistic loss ℓ, the local strong convexity coefficient µ can get small if b
is small, because of the (possibly) large radius of W. With the local strong convexity, we finally have
a fast non-asymptotic convergence rate of Õ(J −2 ) towards the global minimum. The proof can be
found in Appendix G.2.
Theorem 5.2. Suppose we learn M tasks cyclicallynfor J > o
                                                          1 cycles. We adopt the notation from
                                        1         1 ln(J)
Lemma 5.1. Then, with a step size η = O K · min B , J        , sequential GD satisfies

                                                                                  B 2 V⋆ ln2 J

                         2                 µJ                               2
           (M J)                                                   (0)
          w0     − w⋆        ≤ O exp −       √                ·   w0 − w⋆       +                    .   (7)
                                       (1 + 2 2)B                                    µ3 J 2

Remark on the Loss Convergence Rate. Since the L(w) is B-smooth, it satisfies that
                                                          B             B
            L(w) − L(w⋆ ) ≤ ⟨∇L(w⋆ ), w − w⋆ ⟩ +            ∥w − w⋆ ∥2 = ∥w − w⋆ ∥2 .                    (8)
                                                          2             2
Thus, our Theorem 5.2 naturally implies the loss convergence at the same rate (in terms of J).
Experiments on a Real-World Dataset. For those interested, we also provide an experiment on a
real-world dataset CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009), which is not guaranteed to be linearly separable:
see Appendix C.5.

6    C ONCLUSION
We considered continual linear classification by running gradient descent for a fixed number of
iterations per task. When there exist solutions that can solve every task, we found that even without
any regularization or CL methods, the classifier eventually converges to the joint max-margin direction.
This implicit bias was shown to exist in both cyclic/random task ordering. We further presented a
non-asymptotic analysis on cycle-averaged forgetting with respect to positive/negative alignments
of tasks and the number of cycles. Lastly, we showed that if no linear classifier solves all tasks
simultaneously, the model converges to the unique minimum of the offline training loss.
Future Works. We believe the convergence on continual classification can be extended to other
model structures, bridging the gap between empirical findings and theoretical understanding of the
impact of task repetition. Also, our results are restricted to the “small learning rate” regime, and do
not cover larger learning rates or even the “edge of stability” regime (Wu et al., 2024); relaxing this
restriction is left for future work.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partly supported by the Institute for Information & communications Technology Plan-
ning & Evaluation (IITP) grants funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (No. RS-2019-II190075,
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (KAIST); No. RS-2022-II220184, Development
and Study of AI Technologies to Inexpensively Conform to Evolving Policy on Ethics; No. RS-
2019-II191906, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (POSTECH)). This research was
supported in part by the NAVER-Intel Co-Lab. The work was conducted by KAIST and reviewed by
both NAVER and Intel.

R EFERENCES
Rahaf Aljundi, Francesca Babiloni, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Marcus Rohrbach, and Tinne Tuytelaars.
  Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget. In Proceedings of the European Conference
  on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 139–154, 2018. 1
Haruka Asanuma, Shiro Takagi, Yoshihiro Nagano, Yuki Yoshida, Yasuhiko Igarashi, and Masato
  Okada. Statistical mechanical analysis of catastrophic forgetting in continual learning with teacher
  and student networks. Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, 90(10):104001, 2021. 1
Mehdi Abbana Bennani, Thang Doan, and Masashi Sugiyama. Generalisation guarantees for continual
 learning with orthogonal gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11942, 2020. 1, 16
Arslan Chaudhry, Marcus Rohrbach, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, Puneet K
  Dokania, Philip HS Torr, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. On tiny episodic memories in continual
  learning. ICML Workshop on Multi-Task and Lifelong Reinforcement Learning, 2019. 1
Andrea Cossu, Gabriele Graffieti, Lorenzo Pellegrini, Davide Maltoni, Davide Bacciu, Antonio
  Carta, and Vincenzo Lomonaco. Is class-incremental enough for continual learning? Frontiers in
 Artificial Intelligence, 5:829842, 2022. 3
Thang Doan, Mehdi Abbana Bennani, Bogdan Mazoure, Guillaume Rabusseau, and Pierre Alquier.
  A theoretical analysis of catastrophic forgetting through the ntk overlap matrix. In Proceedings
  of International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 1072–1080.
  PMLR, 2021. 1, 16
Rick Durrett. Probability: theory and examples, volume 49. Cambridge university press, 2019. 56,
  57
Itay Evron, Edward Moroshko, Rachel Ward, Nathan Srebro, and Daniel Soudry. How catastrophic
   can catastrophic forgetting be in linear regression? In Proceedings of Conference on Learning
   Theory (COLT), pp. 4028–4079. PMLR, 2022. 1, 3
Itay Evron, Edward Moroshko, Gon Buzaglo, Maroun Khriesh, Badea Marjieh, Nathan Srebro, and
   Daniel Soudry. Continual learning in linear classification on separable data. In Proceedings of the
   International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 9440–9484. PMLR, 2023. 1, 2, 3, 4,
   14, 16, 17
Mehrdad Farajtabar, Navid Azizan, Alex Mott, and Ang Li. Orthogonal gradient descent for continual
 learning. In Proceedings of International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics
 (AISTATS), pp. 3762–3773. PMLR, 2020. 1, 16
Robert M Freund, Paul Grigas, and Rahul Mazumder. Condition number analysis of logis-
  tic regression, and its implications for standard first-order solution methods. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1810.08727, 2018. 9
Daniel Goldfarb and Paul Hand. Analysis of catastrophic forgetting for random orthogonal trans-
  formation tasks in the overparameterized regime. In Proceedings of International Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 2975–2993. PMLR, 2023. 1
Ian J Goodfellow, Mehdi Mirza, Da Xiao, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. An empirical investi-
  gation of catastrophic forgetting in gradient-based neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6211,
  2013. 1


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mustafa N Gultekin and N Bulent Gultekin. Stock market seasonality: International evidence. Journal
 of Financial Economics, 12(4):469–481, 1983. 3
Joachim Houyon, Anthony Cioppa, Yasir Ghunaim, Motasem Alfarra, Anaïs Halin, Maxim Henry,
  Bernard Ghanem, and Marc Van Droogenbroeck. Online distillation with continual learning for
  cyclic domain shifts, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.01239. 3
Khurram Javed and Martha White. Meta-learning representations for continual learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 32, 2019. 1
Ziwei Ji and Matus Telgarsky. Risk and parameter convergence of logistic regression. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.07300, 2018. 16
Ziwei Ji and Matus Telgarsky. Characterizing the implicit bias via a primal-dual analysis. In
  Proceedings of Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT), pp. 772–804. PMLR, 2021. 16
Ryo Karakida and Shotaro Akaho. Learning curves for continual learning in neural networks: Self-
  knowledge transfer and forgetting. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2022. 16
Gyuhak Kim, Changnan Xiao, Tatsuya Konishi, Zixuan Ke, and Bing Liu. A theoretical study on
  solving continual learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 35:
  5065–5079, 2022. 1, 16
Gyuhak Kim, Changnan Xiao, Tatsuya Konishi, and Bing Liu. Learnability and algorithm for
  continual learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  pp. 16877–16896. PMLR, 2023. 1
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcoming
  catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114
  (13):3521–3526, 2017. 1
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical re-
  port, University of Toronto, 2009. URL https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/
  learning-features-2009-TR.pdf. 10, 23
Sebastian Lee, Sebastian Goldt, and Andrew Saxe. Continual learning in the teacher-student setup:
  Impact of task similarity. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), pp. 6109–6119. PMLR, 2021. 1, 16
Timothée Lesort, Oleksiy Ostapenko, Pau Rodríguez, Diganta Misra, Md Rifat Arefin, Laurent
  Charlin, and Irina Rish. Challenging common assumptions about catastrophic forgetting and
  knowledge accumulation. In Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, pp. 43–65. PMLR, 2023. 5
Haoran Li, Jingfeng Wu, and Vladimir Braverman. Fixed design analysis of regularization-based
  continual learning. In Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents, pp. 513–533. PMLR, 2023. 1
Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence (TPMAI), 40(12):2935–2947, 2017. 1
Sen Lin, Peizhong Ju, Yingbin Liang, and Ness Shroff. Theory on forgetting and generalization of
  continual learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  pp. 21078–21100. PMLR, 2023. 8, 16
David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 30, 2017. 1
Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
 sequential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation, volume 24, pp. 109–165.
 Elsevier, 1989. 1
Seyed Iman Mirzadeh, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Razvan Pascanu, and Hassan Ghasemzadeh. Understand-
  ing the role of training regimes in continual learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 33:7308–7320, 2020. 1


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M. Mohri, A. Rostamizadeh, and A. Talwalkar. Foundations of Machine Learning. Adaptive
 Computation and Machine Learning series. MIT Press, 2 edition, 2018. ISBN 9780262351362.
 URL https://books.google.co.kr/books?id=dWB9DwAAQBAJ. 4
Mor Shpigel Nacson, Nathan Srebro, and Daniel Soudry. Stochastic gradient descent on separable
 data: Exact convergence with a fixed learning rate. In Proceedings of International Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), volume 22, pp. 3051–3059. PMLR, 2019. 16, 32
Binghui Peng and Andrej Risteski. Continual learning: a feature extraction formalization, an efficient
  algorithm, and fundamental obstructions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 35:28414–28427, 2022. 16
Krishnan Raghavan and Prasanna Balaprakash. Formalizing the generalization-forgetting trade-
  off in continual learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 34:
  17284–17297, 2021. 1, 16
Haizhou Shi and Hao Wang. A unified approach to domain incremental learning with memory:
  Theory and algorithm. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 36, 2023.
 1, 16
Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim. Continual learning with deep generative
  replay. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 30, 2017. 1
Daniel Soudry, Elad Hoffer, Mor Shpigel Nacson, Suriya Gunasekar, and Nathan Srebro. The implicit
  bias of gradient descent on separable data. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 19(70):
 1–57, 2018. 2, 4, 5, 6, 16, 33
Vladimir Vapnik. The nature of statistical learning theory. Springer science & business media, 2013.
  2, 4
Eli Verwimp, Kuo Yang, Sarah Parisot, Lanqing Hong, Steven McDonagh, Eduardo Pérez-Pellitero,
  Matthias De Lange, and Tinne Tuytelaars. Clad: A realistic continual learning benchmark for
  autonomous driving. Neural Networks, 161:659–669, 2023. 3
Jingfeng Wu, Vladimir Braverman, and Jason D Lee. Implicit bias of gradient descent for logistic
   regression at the edge of stability. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
   36, 2024. 10, 16
Yingxiang Yang, Zhihan Xiong, Tianyi Liu, Taiqing Wang, and Chong Wang. Fourier learning with
  cyclical data. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
  25280–25301. PMLR, 2022. 3


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONTENTS

1   I NTRODUCTION                                                                               1
    1.1 S UMMARY OF C ONTRIBUTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            2

2   P ROBLEM S ETUP                                                                             3
    2.1 C ONTINUAL L INEAR B INARY C LASSIFICATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            3
    2.2 A LGORITHM : S EQUENTIAL G RADIENT D ESCENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             4

3   C YCLIC L EARNING OF J OINTLY S EPARABLE TASKS                                              4
    3.1 D EFINITIONS AND A SSUMPTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           4
    3.2 A SYMPTOTIC R ESULTS : L OSS C ONVERGENCE & I MPLICIT B IAS TO J OINT M AX -
        M ARGIN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       5
    3.3 N ON -A SYMPTOTIC R ESULTS : L OSS C ONVERGENCE AND F ORGETTING B OUNDS                 6

4   R ANDOM -O RDER L EARNING OF J OINTLY S EPARABLE TASKS                                      9

5   B EYOND J OINTLY S EPARABLE TASKS                                                           9

6   C ONCLUSION                                                                                10

A OTHER R ELATED W ORKS                                                                        16

B B RIEF OVERVIEW OF E VRON ET AL . (2023) AND C OMPARISONS                                    17

C E XPERIMENT D ETAILS & O MITTED E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS                                       18
    C.1 E XPERIMENT D ETAILS OF F IGURE 1        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
    C.2 E XPERIMENT D ETAILS OF F IGURE 2 & M ORE R ESULTS . . . . . . . . . . . .             18
         C.2.1 E XPERIMENTAL D ETAIL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         18
         C.2.2 O MITTED L OSS C ONVERGENCE R ESULT IN F IGURE 2            . . . . . . . . .   19
         C.2.3 R ANDOM TASK O RDERING          . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
         C.2.4 B EYOND T HEORETICAL S ETUP : T OWARDS C ONTINUAL L EARNING ON
               O NLINE DATA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19
    C.3 T OY E XAMPLE FOR I NCREASING L OSS IN A C YCLE . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            20
    C.4 E XPERIMENTS WITH N EURAL N ETWORKS : B EYOND L INEAR M ODELS                . . . .   21
    C.5 E XPERIMENT ON A R EAL -W ORLD DATASET           . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23

D P ROOF S KETCHES                                                                             25
    D.1 A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE (P ROOF S KETCH OF T HEOREM 3.1) . . . .                25
    D.2 D IRECTIONAL C ONVERGENCE (P ROOF S KETCH OF T HEOREM 4.2)               . . . . . .   25
         D.2.1 P ROOF S KETCH OF L EMMA E.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          26
    D.3 N ON -A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF S KETCH OF T HEO -
        REM 3.3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 3: C YCLIC TASK O RDERING , J OINTLY S EPARABLE                        29
   E.1 A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1) . . .                29
         E.1.1 P ROOF OF L EMMA E.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31
         E.1.2 P ROOF OF L EMMA E.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31
   E.2 D IRECTIONAL C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2)               . . . . .   33
         E.2.1 P ROOF OF L EMMA E.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       35
         E.2.2 P ROOF OF L EMMA E.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       36
                                  (t)
         E.2.3   C ONVERGENCE OF ρk       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   41
   E.3 A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE R ATE A FTER M ANY C YCLES . . . . . . .                43
   E.4 N ON -A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.3)                45
         E.4.1 P ROOF OF L EMMA E.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       48
         E.4.2 P ROOF OF L EMMA E.9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       49
   E.5 F ORGETTING A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           50

F P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4: R ANDOM TASK O RDERING , J OINTLY S EPARABLE                        53
   F.1 A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1) . . .                53
   F.2 D IRECTIONAL C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2)               . . . . .   54
         F.2.1   P ROOF OF L EMMA F.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     56
                                  (t)
         F.2.2   C ONVERGENCE OF ρk .     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   58

G P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 5: C YCLIC TASK O RDERING , J OINTLY N ON -S EPARABLE                  60
   G.1 L OCAL S TRONG C ONVEXITY A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF L EMMA 5.1) . . . . . . .               61
         G.1.1 P ROOF OF L EMMA G.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       62
         G.1.2 P ROOF OF L EMMA G.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       63
   G.2 N ON -A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2)                65
         G.2.1 P ROOF OF L EMMA G.6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       66


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    OTHER R ELATED W ORKS
Theoretical Results on Continual Learning. Continual regression has been studied under various
regimes and algorithms. The work by Lin et al. (2023) analyzes empirical and population risks by
drawing Gaussian samples for each task. It also investigates the impact of overparameterization and
task similarity on forgetting. Bennani et al. (2020); Doan et al. (2021); Karakida & Akaho (2022)
study forgetting in NTK regime. Specifically, Bennani et al. (2020); Doan et al. (2021) analyze
forgetting of orthogonal GD (OGD, Farajtabar et al., 2020), while Karakida & Akaho (2022) studies
continual transfer learning. Other settings, such as teacher-student setup (Lee et al., 2021), and feature
extraction (Peng & Risteski, 2022) have been considered in task-incremental learning.
On the other hand, most of the works on continual classification focus on analyzing the performance
of the model without assuming its architecture. Instead, they focus on the specific types of continual
learning (Kim et al., 2022; Shi & Wang, 2023). In class-incremental learning (CIL), Kim et al. (2022)
prove that attaining strong within-task prediction (WP) and strong task-id prediction (TP) are neces-
sary and sufficient for achieving strong CIL. Furthermore, they relate TP to the out-of-distribution
detection problem. On the other hand, Shi & Wang (2023) consider the domain-incremental learning
setup. They especially suggest a framework with a memory buffer that unifies earlier methods. The
work by Raghavan & Balaprakash (2021) studies the generalization-forgetting trade-off by viewing it
as a two-player sequential game. However, to the best of our knowledge, no other work—apart from
Evron et al. (2023)—considers specific model architectures and analyzes the behavior of specific
algorithms as in continual regression.

Implicit Bias of GD for Linear Classification. As far as we know, the work by Soudry et al. (2018)
is the first to prove the implicit bias of GD towards the max-margin direction for a separable linear
classification problem. Another work by Ji & Telgarsky (2018) also considers the data that are not
necessarily (strictly) separable, yet the GD iterate may diverge to infinity, although the convergence
rate is slower due to the absence of the non-degeneracy condition. The work by Nacson et al. (2019)
shows a similar implicit bias result for the stochastic GD. Ji & Telgarsky (2021) show a faster
convergence rate under decreasing learning rate via a primal-dual analysis. Very recently, it has been
proved by Wu et al. (2024) that GD on logistic loss eventually converges to the max-margin direction
even when the learning rate is large, which contrasts with the existing findings requiring small enough
learning rates.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    B RIEF OVERVIEW OF E VRON ET AL . (2023) AND C OMPARISONS
To highlight how our sequential GD algorithm differs from Evron et al. (2023), we briefly summarize
the Sequential Max-Margin (SMM) framework considered in the existing paper and its theoretical
results.
Evron et al. (2023) consider minimizing the regularized training loss of each task untiln convergence,
                                                                                                o
                                                                                            (t)
where the loss function is chosen to be the exponential loss ℓ(u) = exp(−u). Let wλ                be the
                                                                                                 t
iterates trained by regularized continual learning with regularization coefficient λ. The algorithm can
be written as follows:
                                                                λ                  2
                       (t+1)                                                   (t)
                                          X
                    wλ       = arg min          exp −yi x⊤i w +        w − wλ        .                 (9)
                                   w∈Rd
                                            (t)
                                                                   2
                                            i∈I
           (t)
Also, let wSMM be the weight trained by the Sequential Max-Margin algorithm. The update rule is
                                                    2
    (t+1)          (t)                         (t)
 wSMM = P (t) (wSMM ) := arg min w − wSMM              subject to yi x⊤
                                                                      i w ≥ 1, ∀i ∈ I
                                                                                      (t)
                                                                                          , (10)
                                 w∈Rd

where the operator P (t) is the orthogonal projection onto a convex polyhedral set
                                 n                                    o
                                   w ∈ Rd : yi x⊤
                                                i  w ≥  1, ∀i ∈ I (t)
                                                                                                       (11)
                                                                                 (t)
defined by the margin conditions on the data points in I (t) . That is, wSMM is the same as the
                                                                                         (t)
sequential projection onto such convex sets. Evron et al. (2023) showed the relation of wλ and
  (t)
wSMM , when the regularization coefficient λ → 0:
Theorem B.1 (Theorem 3.1 of Evron et al. (2023)). For almost all jointly separable dataset, in
                                  (t)      (t)                               1

        of λ → 0, it holds that wλ → wSMM with a residual of O(t log log λ ). Hence, at any
the limit
          log(1/λ)
t=o     log log(1/λ)   , we get
                                                   (t)          (t)
                                                  wλ          wSMM
                                          lim            =              .
                                          λ→0 ∥w (t) ∥          (t)
                                                              ∥wSMM ∥
                                                λ

Based on this equivalence in terms of parameter direction, Evron et al. (2023) expect that the behavior
    (t)                                         (t)
of wλ can be analyzed
                         through  the lens of wSMM as long as λ is close to 0, since Theorem B.1
                         log(1/λ)
holds for all t = o    log log(1/λ)   .

Given this background, we now highlight some differences between Evron et al. (2023) and our
analysis. First of all, as seen in (9), Evron et al. (2023) study regularized exponential loss trained until
convergence, whereas we study unregularized logistic loss trained for a fixed number of iterations.
Training the weakly regularized loss until convergence, in conjunction with the limit λ → 0, sends
       (t)
each wλ to infinity. Hence, each stage requires a growing number of iterations, and the grounds for
the equivalence between (9) and (10) become weaker, since the solutions become vastly different in
terms of magnitude.
Second, thanks to the connection between weakly-regularized continual learning and SMM, Evron
et al. (2023) could obtain the exact trajectory of every stage via the projection method. On the
other hand, in our sequential GD setting, it is very difficult to keep track of the exact location of the
iterate after a task is trained, since the iterates are updated multiple times, but training stops before
convergence. This makes it challenging to analyze implicit bias and forgetting by tracking the exact
trajectory stage by stage. To overcome this challenge, we use different proof techniques from Evron
et al. (2023). Rather than pinpointing the exact position of the iterate after each stage, we focus on
the direction in which the sequential GD eventually converges.
On top of that, importantly, our analysis of sequential GD reveals that training on unregularized loss
using a fixed number of GD iterations results in the joint/offline max-margin solution. In contrast,
although the convergence to some offline solutions is already shown for SMM (Evron et al., 2023),
the converged offline solution can be different from the offline max-margin solution. In fact, in the
next section (Appendix C.1), we demonstrate by a toy example that SMM can indeed converge to a
point other than the joint max-margin solution.


                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS & O MITTED E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

C.1     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS OF F IGURE 1

In this section, we present a simple toy example that demonstrates interesting facts about max-margin
solutions in continual linear classification:

    • The joint max-margin direction of the joint dataset can be quite different from the max-margin
      solutions of individual tasks. Specifically, the joint solution may not be on the subspace spanned
      by the individual solutions.
    • The limit of Sequential Max-Margin (SMM) iterations can be different from the joint max-margin
      solution, whereas the limit direction of sequential GD does align with it.

We consider the case of M = 2 tasks, where the input points come from R3 . Without loss of
generality, we assume that all the labels are +1, and hence omit them. We let {(1, 1, 0), (1, −2, 1)}
be the dataset of task 1, and {(1, 0, 1), (1, 1, −2)} be the data of task 2. One can verify that:

 • Their joint max-margin direction is (1, 0, 0).
 • The max-margin direction for tasks 1 and 2 are ( 10    1   3          10 3       1
                                                    11 , 11 , 11 ) and ( 11 , 11 , 11 ), respectively.

Therefore, the joint max-margin solution does not belong to the span of individual max-margin
solutions.
We ran numerical experiments running the SMM iterations, which are done by solving the constrained
minimization problems using fmincon in MATLAB Optimization Toolbox. The code is provided
in our supplementary material. We find that SMM converges to ( 12      1    1
                                                                 11 , 11 , 11 ); the trajectory for 10
cycles can be seen in Figure 4.


Figure 4: We run SMM iterations on the toy example by solving the projection problems using an
optimization solver.


C.2     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS OF F IGURE 2 & M ORE R ESULTS

Here we present the experimental details of Figure 2. We also provide omitted results related to it.
Then, more importantly, we extend our experimental setups beyond the cyclic task ordering and the
fixed total offline dataset.

C.2.1    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAIL
Data Generation. We carefully design three 2D synthetic datasets. Each dataset (of size 100) is
randomly sampled from a bounded support. Below, we describe the data distribution from which we
draw samples. Note that the label y ∈ {±1} is uniformly randomly sampled before sampling the 2D
input points.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  • Task 0, x|y = +1: Uniform distribution on a round disk (i.e., inside of a circle) with radius 0.9
    and centered at (0.6, 4.5).
  • Task 0, x|y = −1: Uniform distribution on a rectangle [0, 1.5] × [−3.9, −2.7].
  • Task 1, x|y = +1: Uniform distribution on a round disk with radius 0.75 and centered at (5.1, 0).
  • Task 1, x|y = −1: Uniform distribution on a rectangle [−4.2, −2.1] × [−0.9, 0.9].
  • Task 2, x|y = +1: Uniform distribution on a rectangle [0.6, 3] × [0.6, 2.7].
  • Task 2, x|y = −1: Uniform distribution on a disk with radius 1.2 and centered at (−3, −2.4).

Among all 300 data points, we randomly choose 3 points (one for each task) and replace them
by (x = (1.5, −2.7), y = −1) (for task 0), (x = (−2.1, 0.9), y = −1) (for task 1), and (x =
(0.6, 0.6), y = +1) (for task 2), which are the points included in the support of the data distribution(s).
These three points play the role of supporting vectors so that the joint max-margin√ direction becomes
  ŵ      √1 √1
 ∥ŵ∥ = ( 2 , 2 ), where the size of maximum margin (Equation (4)) is ϕ = 0.6 2 > 0 (thus, jointly
separable).
Optimization. We run sequential GD for 300 stages in total. Since there are three tasks, for the
cyclic ordering case, it is equivalent to J = 100. The step size we used is η = 0.1. Also, we allow
and conduct K = 1,000 updates per stage. For the joint training case, we run full-batch GD on the
union of all datasets for M JK = 300,000 steps.

C.2.2            O MITTED L OSS C ONVERGENCE R ESULT IN F IGURE 2
Although we only displayed the directional convergence in the main text, we also observed the loss
convergence to zero, which we proved in Theorems 3.1 and 3.3: see Figure 5. Note that we depict the
loss values for a jointly trained model (with full-batch GD) every K = 1,000 gradient updates, for a
fair comparison with a continually learned model (with sequential GD). It is omitted due to space
limitations and being relatively more obvious than directional convergence.

                              Loss: Continually learned model                                                Loss: Jointly learned model
           100                                                        task0 loss                                                                 task0 loss
                                                                      task1 loss                                                                 task1 loss
                                                                      task2 loss                                                                 task2 loss
                                                                      total loss                                                                 total loss
          10 1
                                                                                           10 3

          10 2
   Loss


                                                                                    Loss


          10 3
                                                                                           10 4

          10 4


                   0     50       100       150      200        250         300                   0     50    100        150      200      250         300
                                           Stage                                                                        Stage

                 (a) Losses of continually learned model                                          (b) Losses of jointly trained model

Figure 5: Loss convergence results for cyclic task ordering. The joint training loss is divided by the
number of tasks in order to match the scale.

C.2.3            R ANDOM TASK O RDERING
In Section 4, we theoretically showed that loss convergence, as well as the implicit bias result, holds
almost surely under the random task ordering. Indeed, we observe a similar tendency of directional
convergence and loss decrease even under the random task ordering. The result is shown in Figure 6.

C.2.4            B EYOND T HEORETICAL S ETUP : T OWARDS C ONTINUAL L EARNING ON O NLINE DATA
Most theoretical analysis in this work exploits a structural assumption on the data points: there is a
pre-defined set of offline datasets, which is divided into chunks and accessible one by one at each
stage. Thus, exactly the same batch of data is guaranteed to be reused (surely or with high probability).
Can we go beyond this repetition and apply our theoretical intuition to more general setups?


                                                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                           Sine Angle( = (1 cossim2))
                                                                                                                                      between Linear Model vs. Joint Max-Margin
                                                                                                                     100                                                 Continually learned model
                                                                                                                                                                         Jointly trained model

                                                               Joint Max-margin Direction
                                                               Joint Training trajectory
                                                               Continual Learning trajectory


                                                                                                       Sine Angle
                                                               Task 0 Data (y = + 1)
                                                               Task 0 Data (y = 1)                                  10 1
                                                               Task 1 Data (y = + 1)
                                                               Task 1 Data (y = 1)
                                                               Task 2 Data (y = + 1)
                                                               Task 2 Data (y = 1)


                                                                                                                    10 2
                                                                                                                           100                     101                             102
                                                                                                                                                           Stage

                       (a) Data points and trajectories                                                (b) Sine angles (the smaller the more aligned)

                                 Loss: Continually learned model                                                                        Loss: Jointly learned model
                100                                                      task0 loss                                                                                                task0 loss
                                                                         task1 loss                                                                                                task1 loss
                                                                         task2 loss                                                                                                task2 loss
                                                                         total loss                                                                                                total loss
               10 1
                                                                                                      10 3

               10 2
        Loss


                                                                                               Loss
               10 3
                                                                                                      10 4
               10 4


                      0     50       100       150      200        250         300                                    0          50       100       150            200       250         300
                                              Stage                                                                                                Stage

               (c) Losses of continually learned model                                                         (d) Losses of jointly trained model
                      Figure 6: Experiments on 2D synthetic data under random task ordering.

Here, we demonstrate that the results of our theoretical findings are not really limited to the task
repetition setup. Instead, our insight about jointly separable continual linear classification applies to
several general setups. In this section, we showcase an analogous behavior of sequential GD when
the total dataset is no longer fixed throughout the continual learning process. We consider the setup
where there are M different (jointly separable) data distributions, rather than datasets; every time
we encounter a task, we have access to a totally new sample of data points drawn from the task’s
distribution. For simplicity of visualization, we still stick to the bounded support cases.
An implementational difference from the previous sections is that we resample the data points from a
predefined data distribution at every stage. Another minor detail is that we no longer fix the three
support vectors as mentioned in Appendix C.2.1: thus, at every stage, we never reuse the same
data point(s) from the previous stage, almost surely. We test whether a similar trend happens even
when we add the resampling process, under the same data distribution described in Appendix C.2.1.
The results are shown in Figures 7 and 8 for cyclic task ordering and random task ordering cases,
respectively.

C.3   T OY E XAMPLE FOR I NCREASING L OSS IN A C YCLE

Here, we give a toy example that shows temporarily increasing joint training loss during a cycle, even
with a small learning rate.
Let the datasets Di (i = 1, ..., 5) be as follows. We choose all labels as +1 without loss of generality,
hence we omitted them.
                                  D1 = {(1, −2)}, D2 = {(1, 2)}, D3 = {(1.1, 2.1)},
                                        D4 = {(1.1, 2.2)}, D5 = {(1.1, 2.3)}.
In this case, the max-margin direction is (1, 0), while most of the task has their individual max-margin
direction around (1, 2). We set K = 10, η = 10−6 so that η satisfies the learning rate condition.
When task 1 is being trained, joint training loss increases while it decreases when other tasks are
being trained. This is because most of the tasks have their own max-margin direction around (1, 2),
dominating the joint training loss.


                                                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                          Sine Angle( = (1 cossim2))
                                                                                                                                     between Linear Model vs. Joint Max-Margin
                                                                                                                                                                        Continually learned model
                                                                                                                                                                        Jointly trained model

                                                              Joint Max-margin Direction
                                                              Joint Training trajectory
                                                              Continual Learning trajectory


                                                                                                      Sine Angle
                                                              Task 0 Data (y = + 1)                                10 1
                                                              Task 0 Data (y = 1)
                                                              Task 1 Data (y = + 1)
                                                              Task 1 Data (y = 1)
                                                              Task 2 Data (y = + 1)
                                                              Task 2 Data (y = 1)


                                                                                                                   10 2
                                                                                                                          100                     101                             102
                                                                                                                                                          Stage

                      (a) Data points and trajectories                                                (b) Sine angles (the smaller the more aligned)

                                Loss: Continually learned model                                                                        Loss: Jointly learned model
                100                                                     task0 loss                                                                                                task0 loss
                                                                        task1 loss                                                                                                task1 loss
                                                                        task2 loss                                                                                                task2 loss
               10 1                                                     total loss                   10 3                                                                         total loss

               10 2

                                                                                                     10 4
        Loss


                                                                                              Loss
               10 3

               10 4
                                                                                                     10 5
               10 5


                      0    50       100       150      200        250         300                                    0          50       100       150            200       250         300
                                             Stage                                                                                                Stage

               (c) Losses of continually learned model                                                        (d) Losses of jointly trained model

Figure 7: 2D synthetic experiments: Cyclic task ordering, jointly separable online dataset (which is
drawn in an online/streaming fashion from a task’s predefined data distribution).



C.4   E XPERIMENTS WITH N EURAL N ETWORKS : B EYOND L INEAR M ODELS

We explore the possibility of extending our theoretical insight to nonlinear models, in particular,
wide two-layer ReLU networks.
For a linear classifier with a single linear layer, recall that we already verified that the sequentially
trained model (in cyclic/random task ordering) directionally converges to the max-margin direction.
However, it is more difficult to analyze and visualize the dynamics of the multi-layer neural net’s
parameter values. Moreover, it might be nonsense to discuss the relationship (e.g., alignment,
directional convergence) between the max-margin direction and the parameter matrices of a neural
net, because the parameter matrices themselves no longer have a semantic meaning in the data space.
Instead of inspecting the parameter values, we move our attention to the decision boundary of the
model. Observe that the decision boundary of a linear binary classifier is a hyperplane (i.e., d − 1
dimensional subspace) of the data space (of d dimensions), whose orthogonal complement is the span
of the classifier’s weight vector. Thus, the alignment between the weight vector and the max-margin
direction (i.e., the implicit bias guarantee) is semantically equivalent to the alignment between the
classifier’s decision boundary and a hyperplane determined by the max-margin solution as a normal
vector; this hyperplane can be approximated well by jointly training a single-layer linear classifier.
Thus, we can still verify the similar idea of implicit bias even for a neural network by observing,
not only that a continually learned model (with sequential GD, under task repetition) eventually
classifies all the data points correctly, but also that the decision boundary of the continually trained
model getting similar to that of a jointly trained model (both starting from an identical initialization).
Although we cannot exactly characterize to which set of points a two-layer ReLU net’s decision
boundary should converge only with our theorems, it gives an effective and efficient way to confirm
our findings beyond a simple linear model.
To intuitively visualize the decision boundaries, we again use the 2D synthetic datasets. Most of the
experimental setting is the same as in Appendix C.2.1, except for the following three differences:


                                                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                              Sine Angle( = (1 cossim2))
                                                                                                                                                                         between Linear Model vs. Joint Max-Margin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Continually learned model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jointly trained model
                                                                                                                                             10 1
                                                                                        Joint Max-margin Direction
                                                                                        Joint Training trajectory
                                                                                        Continual Learning trajectory


                                                                                                                                Sine Angle
                                                                                        Task 0 Data (y = + 1)
                                                                                        Task 0 Data (y = 1)
                                                                                        Task 1 Data (y = + 1)
                                                                                        Task 1 Data (y = 1)
                                                                                        Task 2 Data (y = + 1)
                                                                                        Task 2 Data (y = 1)


                                                                                                                                             10 2
                                                                                                                                                         100                                  101                            102
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Stage

                                         (a) Data points and trajectories                                                       (b) Sine angles (the smaller the more aligned)

                                                        Loss: Continually learned model                                                                                       Loss: Jointly learned model
                           10 2                                                                    task0 loss                                                                                                                task0 loss
                                                                                                   task1 loss                                                                                                                task1 loss
                                                                                                   task2 loss                                                                                                                task2 loss
                                                                                                   total loss                  10 3                                                                                          total loss
                           10 3


                                                                                                                               10 4
                    Loss


                                                                                                                        Loss
                           10 4


                           10 5                                                                                                10 5



                           10 6                                                                                                10 6
                                        0         50        100       150         200        250         300                                   0                 50            100         150              200       250          300
                                                                     Stage                                                                                                                Stage

                           (c) Losses of continually learned model                                                                      (d) Losses of jointly trained model

Figure 8: 2D synthetic experiments: Random task ordering, jointly separable online dataset (which is
drawn in an online/streaming fashion from a task’s predefined data distribution).


          6.933 × 10 1          1 task loss
                                2 task loss
                                3 task loss
                                4 task loss
          6.932 × 10 1          5 task loss
                                total loss                                                                                     6 × 10 1


          6.931 × 10 1
                                                                                                                               4 × 10 1
   Loss


                                                                                                                        Loss


           6.93 × 10 1                                                                                                         3 × 10 1



          6.929 × 10 1                                                                                                         2 × 10 1                1 task loss
                                                                                                                                                       2 task loss
                                                                                                                                                       3 task loss
                                                                                                                                                       4 task loss
          6.928 × 10 1                                                                                                                                 5 task loss
                                                                                                                                                       total loss
                            0                 5    10       15       20      25         30          35                                             0                  50000          100000           150000        200000          250000
                                                         Number of Stage                                                                                                             Number of Stage
                                                                                                                 e
                                                        (a) J = 7                                                                                                             (b) J = 50000
Figure 9: We take average on total loss(black) for better visualization. The current task switches
every 10 iterations. One cycle consists of 5 stages. Figure 9(a) shows the case where some task’s loss
increases within a cycle. However, it eventually decreases as Figure 9(b) shows.

 1. The classifier’s architecture is a two-layer neural network fθ : R2 → R consisting of 2-
    dimensional input, 500 hidden ReLU neurons, and scalar output:
                                                                             fθ (x) = w2⊤ ReLU(W1 x + b1 ) + b2 ,

      where θ = (W1 , b1 , w2 , b2 ) ∈ R500×2 × R500 × R500 × R and ReLU(v)i = max{vi , 0}.
 2. To make the total dataset non-separable by a linear classifier with a positive margin but still
    classifiable by a neural net, we translate all data points with positive labels (+1) by a vector
    (−1.2, −1.2). In this case, the decision boundary should not be straight but bent in a curly
    L-shape to effectively distinguish two classes.
 3. To prevent the sequential GD from behaving similarly to a mini-batch SGD with small-scale
    and lazy updates, we increase K to 3,000 to guarantee that (1) the jointly trained model can


                                                                                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      correctly classify all data points within only one stage (i.e., with initial K updates), and (2) the
      continually learned model gets sufficiently trained on a specific task at each stage. As a result,
      the jointly trained model takes M JK = 900,000 iterations. (M = 3, J = 100)

As we did for a linear classifier, we classify the input data as y = +1 if the model output is positive
and as −1 otherwise (thus, the decision boundary is a level set {x ∈ R2 : fθ (x) = 0}). We again
                              PN
use the usual logistic loss N1 i=1 ℓ(yi fθ (xi )).


                                                                Joint Training                                                                   Joint Training
                                                                Decision Boundary                                                                Decision Boundary
                                                                Continual Learning                                                               Continual Learning
                                                                Decision Boundary                                                                Decision Boundary
                                                                Task 0 Data (y = + 1)                                                            Task 0 Data (y = + 1)
                                                                Task 0 Data (y = 1)                                                              Task 0 Data (y = 1)
                                                                Task 1 Data (y = + 1)                                                            Task 1 Data (y = + 1)
                                                                Task 1 Data (y = 1)                                                              Task 1 Data (y = 1)
                                                                Task 2 Data (y = + 1)                                                            Task 2 Data (y = + 1)
                                                                Task 2 Data (y = 1)                                                              Task 2 Data (y = 1)


                     (a) At the end of the first stage.                                                    (b) After running 300 stages.

                              Loss: Continually learned model                                                      Loss: Jointly learned model
                                                                        task0 loss              10 3                                                     task0 loss
           100                                                          task1 loss                                                                       task1 loss
                                                                        task2 loss                                                                       task2 loss
                                                                        total loss                                                                       total loss
          10 1
                                                                                                10 4
          10 2
   Loss


                                                                                         Loss


          10 3

          10 4                                                                                  10 5

          10 5

          10 6                                                                                  10 6
                 0       50       100       150      200         250           300                     0      50    100        150      200       250           300
                                           Stage                                                                              Stage

             (c) Losses of continually trained model.                                                  (d) Losses of jointly trained model.

Figure 10: Two-layer ReLU network experiment under cyclic task ordering. (Top.) Each subfigure
displays the decision boundaries (and other auxiliary level sets) of a jointly trained model (dashed
red line) and a continually trained model (dashed green line). (Bottom.) Figure 10(c) demonstrates
the large amounts of forgetting at the initial few cycles and convergence of loss and (cycle-averaged)
forgetting to near zero. On the other hand, Figure 10(d) shows that the training loss of the jointly
trained model is already small (e.g., less than 10−3 ) at the initial stages.

The result of the experiment for cyclic task order is visualized in Figure 10, exhibiting decision
boundaries of a jointly trained model and a continually trained model (with sequential GD). As
we expected, the updates are aggressive enough so that even a single stage (i.e., initial K = 3,000
iterations) is sufficient to perfectly classify the total dataset with the jointly trained model, and the
same for the dataset of the task 0 with the continually trained model (Figure 10(a)). After some
number of stages (Figure 10(b)), both models not only correctly classify every data point, but also
have an almost identical decision boundary (note that the other level sets are not necessarily the
same), implying that a similar phenomenon like implicit bias is happening here. We also observe
almost the same tendencies under random task ordering and even for non-repeating dataset cases
(Appendix C.2.4). We omit their detailed results from the paper, but one can find them in our
supplementary materials.

C.5        E XPERIMENT ON A R EAL -W ORLD DATASET

In this section, we present a result of the training linear model with CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009).


                                                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We choose two classes from the CIFAR-10 dataset and design 3 tasks that have 512 data points from
the two classes (‘airplane’ and ‘automobile’). Our Theorem 5.2 on linearly non-separable data like
CIFAR-10 shows that sequential GD iterates should not diverge and instead converge to the global
minimum w∗ under the properly chosen learning rate. To estimate the distance between sequential
GD iterates and the global minimum, we first train a linear model using joint task data and obtain
wJoint as a proxy of w∗ ; we do this because offline training is guaranteed to converge to the global
minimum. Then, we train sequential GD and measure the distance between iterates and the jointly
trained solution wJoint at the end of every stage of sequential GD.


                                                                                    parameter difference                                                                                         joint task loss
                      10
                                                                                                                        100


                      8



                      6                                                                                                10 1
        l2-distance


                                                                                                                Loss
                      4


                                                                                                                       10 2
                      2



                      0
                           0   500    1000   1500        2000         2500   3000    3500        4000                         0     25000   50000   75000   100000         125000   150000   175000     200000
                                                    Number of cycles*M                                                                                  Number of Iterations


                                                (t)
                                     (a) wK − wJoint                                                                              (b) Loss of jointly trained model


Figure 11: CIFAR-10 Experiments with a linear model. We jointly train a model for 200000
iterations to achieve the global minimum. We then train each task with cyclic ordering. We set the
number of GD for each stage as 50 (K = 50), and run 1350 cycles (J = 1350). Figure 11(a) shows
that sequential GD iterate converges close to wJoint as the training goes on. However, it does not
fully converge to wJoint , as wJoint is not equal to w∗ . Figure 11(b) reveals that the loss of the jointly
trained model was decreasing after 200000 iterations.

As a result, we observe that the distance between sequential GD iterates and wJoint converges close
to 0, even when we adopt a learning rate η = 0.01, which is not as small as our theorem requires.
Yet, we couldn’t show convergence of distance to exactly 0 since the jointly trained model did not
converge all the way to w∗ .


                                                                                                           24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     P ROOF S KETCHES
In this appendix, we provide proof sketches of the main theorems of the asymptotic and non-
asymptotic convergence under the cyclic task ordering. The proof sketch for the random task ordering
is omitted, as the asymptotic loss convergence is straightforward, and the directional convergence can
be established in much the same way as for the cyclic task ordering. In addition, we include proof
sketches for Lemma E.5 whose proof is particularly intricate and challenging to follow.

D.1   A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE (P ROOF S KETCH OF T HEOREM 3.1)
              2
Since L is a σmax β-smooth function, we get
                                2                            2
          (M j+M )             σmax
                               (M j)β      (M j+M )    (M j)
      L(w0           ) − L(w0           )−w0        − w0
                                  2
            (M j) ⊤  (M j+M )     (M j)
      ≤ ∇L(w0    ) (w0        − w0      )
                                    2
                        (M j)                        (M j)              (M j+M )               (M j)                       (M j)
      ≤ −ηK ∇L(w0               )       + ∇L(w0              )        w0               − w0            + ηK∇L(w0                   ) ,

                                                                 (M j+M )              (M j)                       (M j)
for each j-th cycle (j ≥ 0). Since the term w0                                − w0             + ηK∇L(w0                   ) is bounded
                                    (M j)
above by a factor (in j) of     ∇L(w0     )         (Lemma E.2), we have a form of descent lemma,
                                                                                                                   2
                      (M j+M )               (M j)                                                     (M j)
               L(w0         ) − L(w0                 ) ≤ −ηK (1 − ηKβ ′ ) ∇L(w0                                )       ,                 (12)

for some β ′ ∈ 0, ηK
                   1
                       . Therefore,
                              ∞                                                (0)
                              X              (M j)
                                                         2           L(w0 )
                                        ∇L(w0        )       ≤                    < ∞.
                              j=0
                                                                   ηK(1 − ηKβ ′ )
                                                                   2
                                                (M j+m)
Again by Lemma E.2, the term ∇L(wk                           )         is bounded above by a constant factor (in j) of
     (M j)
 ∇L(w0     )    , which leads to the following convergence of an infinite sum of non-negative terms:

                                    ∞ M −1 K−1                                         2
                                                                       (M j+m)
                                    X X    X
                                                         ∇L(wk                     )       < ∞.
                                    j=0 m=0 k=0

                                                                               2
                                                                        (t)
This implies ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1] : lim ∇L(wk )                                        = 0. Finally, Lemma E.1 leads to
                                          t→∞
             (t)                                                 (t)
 lim ℓ (x⊤
      ′
         i w k   ) = 0 for all k ∈ [0 : K −1]. Equivalently, x⊤
                                                              i wk → ∞.
t→∞


D.2   D IRECTIONAL C ONVERGENCE (P ROOF S KETCH OF T HEOREM 4.2)
                                             (t)             (t)
First, for each k ∈ [0 : K −1], define ρk and rk as
                        (t)                        (t)
                      wk = ln (t) ŵ + ρk

                                           K            M           (t)
                         = ln (t) ŵ + ln     ŵ + w̃ +   · mt,k + rk ,
                                           M            K
where ŵ is the joint ℓ2 max-margin solution (defined in Equation (3)), w̃ is the solution of
                                                                                               (0)
                        ∀i ∈ S : η exp (−x⊤
                                          i w̃) = αi ,                        P̄ (w̃ − w0 ) = 0,
and mt,k is a vector defined in Lemma E.4 in detail. Then by definition, the following holds.

         (t)      (t)   M K           K
       rk = wk −                 ln     t ŵ + mt,k − w̃                                      (13)
                        K M           M

                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                           
                            t−1
                   (t) M    X   1 X            k X
                = wk −   K            αs xs +        αs xs  − ln K ŵ − w̃ + w̌.                                                                      (14)
                       K    u=1
                                u  (u)
                                               t  (t)              s∈S                      s∈S

                                                   (t)                                                                          (t)
To show the boundedness of ρk , it is enough to prove the boundedness of rk as w̃ is a constant
vector and mt,k converges to zero. From the fact
                                          2                2                                                                     2
                                (t)                  (t)                  (t)         (t)         (t)              (t)    (t)
                           rk+1               − rk             = 2(rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk + rk+1 − rk                                        ,
we get
                2                     2        t−1 K−1                                                     t−1 K−1                              2
          (t)              (t )                                   (u)    (u)   (u)                                        (u)             (u)
                                               X   X                                                       X   X
         r0         −     r0 1            =                    2(rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk +                                       rk+1 − rk                  .   (15)
                                               u=t1 k=0                                                    u=t1 k=0

According to Lemma E.5, the first term of the right-hand side of Equation (15) is bounded. By
Equation (13),
  T K−1                                   2        T K−1                                                                              2
  X X               (t)           (t)
                                                   X X                   (t)          (t)        M
                rk+1 − rk                      =                       wk+1 − wk −                 (mt,k+1 − mt,k )
  t=t1 k=0                                         t=t1 k=0
                                                                                                 K
                                                   T K−1                                     2        T K−1
                                                                                                         X M                   2
                                                                         (t)          (t)
                                                   X X                                               X
                                               ≤                       wk+1 − wk                 +            (mt,k+1 − mt,k )
                                                   t=t1 k=0                                          t=t
                                                                                                            K
                                                                                                           1   k=0
                                                 v
                                                 u T K−1              T K−1                    2
                                                                   2 X   X M
                                                          (t)  (t)
                                                 uX X
                                              + 2t       wk − wk+1            (mt,k+1 − mt,k ) .
                                                  t=t                t=t
                                                                            K
                                                               1   k=0                                         1   k=0

                                                                                             2
                                                               PT PK−1          (t)     (t)
We use the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality for the inequality.          t=t1   k=0   wk − wk+1
    PT PK−1                             2
and t=t1 k=0 M      K (mt,k+1 − mt,k )    are bounded as a consequence of Theorem 3.1 and
Lemma E.4, respectively. Therefore, the second term of the right-hand side of Equation (15) is
                       (t)
bounded. It concludes rk is bounded.

D.2.1     P ROOF S KETCH OF L EMMA E.5
                                                         (t)
From Theorem 3.1, ∀i ∈ I : x⊤
                            i wk → ∞. Thus for a sufficiently large t, Assumption 3.4 gives
                                                                                              ⊤      (t)
                                                                               (t)
                                                           −ℓ′ (x⊤
                                                                 i wk ) ≈ e
                                                                            −xi wk
                                                                                   .
Also, since mt,k converges to zero, for a sufficiently large t,
                            K
                          (t)              M             (t) K            (t)
                     wk = ln(  t)ŵ + w̃ +   mt,k + rk ≈ ln( t)ŵ + w̃ + rk .
                            M              K                 M
By Equation (14), for all k ∈ [0 : K −1], we get
         (t)     (t)       (t)      (t)   M X
       rk+1 − rk = wk+1 − wk −                       αs xs
                                          Kt     (t)                      s∈S
                                               X                 (t)     M                   X
                                 = −η                    ℓ′ (x⊤
                                                              s wk )xs −                              αs xs
                                                                                      Kt
                                              s∈I (t)                                       s∈S (t)

                                                                      (t)
                                                                                             X                  M

                                                                                                       ⊤ (t)
                                                   X
                                 = −η                          ℓ (x⊤
                                                                   ′
                                                                   s wk )xs −
                                                                                                    ′
                                                                                                  ηℓ (xs wk ) +    αs xs .
                                                                                                                Kt
                                              s∈I (t) \S (t)                                  (t)
                                                                                            s∈S

Hence,

   (t)    (t)
               ⊤
                  (t)                                                 (t)
                                                                                                      X                  M

                                                                          ⊤ (t)                                 ⊤ (t)              (t)
                                                   X
  rk+1 − rk      rk = −η                                       ℓ (x⊤
                                                                   ′
                                                                   s wk )xs rk −
                                                                                                             ′
                                                                                                           ηℓ (xs wk ) +    αs x⊤
                                                                                                                                s rk .
                                                                                                                         Kt
                                              s∈I (t) \S (t)                                      s∈S  (t)

                                                                                                                                                        (16)


                                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The first term of the right-hand side of Equation (16) can be upper bounded as below:

         X                 (t)   ⊤ (t)
                                           X                    K                      ⊤ (t)       (t)
−η                ℓ′ (x⊤
                       s w k   )x r
                                 s k   ≈ η          exp   − ln(   t)x ⊤
                                                                      s ŵ − x⊤
                                                                              s w̃ − x  r
                                                                                       s k     x⊤
                                                                                                s rk
         (t)  (t)                           (t) (t)
                                                                M
      s∈I      \S                                          s∈I \S
                                                                (t)
                                                            x⊤
                                                             s rk >0

             X                    K
≤η                       exp − ln( t)x⊤       ⊤
                                      s ŵ − xs w̃                      = O(t−θ ),                                    (17)
             (t)     (t)
                                  M
          s∈I \S
               (t)
           x⊤
            s rk >0


where in the last line we use the fact ∀x ≥ 0 : x exp(−x) ≤ 1, and ∀s ∈ I (t) \ S (t) : x⊤
                                                                                         s ŵ ≥ θ.

Now we examine the second term of the right-hand side of Equation (16),
      X                (t)     M
                                                X M          h                    i
                                        ⊤ (t)                          ⊤ (t)            (t)
    −        ηℓ′ (x⊤
                   s w k   ) +    αs   x r
                                        s k   ≈           αs  exp   −x  r
                                                                       s k     − 1  x⊤
                                                                                     s rk .
         (t)
                               Kt                  (t)
                                                       Kt
            s∈S                                                           s∈S

Set µ̃ = min{µ+ , µ− , 0.25}, where µ+ , µ− is defined from Assumption 3.4. We analyze each
s ∈ S (t) by dividing into cases.
                         (t)
1. if 0 ≤ x⊤
           s rk ≤ t
                    −0.5µ̃
                           :
                                       M    h
                                                      (t)
                                                               i
                                                                    (t)
                                          αs exp −x⊤
                                                   s rk     − 1 x⊤
                                                                 s rk = O(t
                                                                           −1−0.5µ̃
                                                                                    ).
                                       Kt
                                    (t)
2. if −t−0.5µ̃ ≤ x⊤s rk ≤ 0:
          M      h
                              (t)
                                        i
                                           ⊤ (t)   M     h
                                                                        ⊤ (t)
                                                                               i
                                                                                       (t)
               αs exp −x⊤   r
                          s k       − 1   x r
                                           s k   =    αs  1  − exp   −x  r
                                                                        s k      · x⊤
                                                                                    s rk
          Kt                                       Kt
                                                   M           (t)
                                                 ≤    αs x⊤ s rk   = O(t−1−0.5µ̃ ).
                                                   Kt
                                (t)
3. if t−0.5µ̃ < x⊤
                 s rk :
              M     h
                                  (t)
                                            i
                                                  (t)   M                                 (t)
                 αs exp −x⊤                   x⊤           αs exp −t−0.5µ̃ − 1 x⊤

                                r
                               s k      − 1    s rk ≤                                  s rk
              Kt                                        Kt
                                                        M                             (t)
                                                           αs −t−0.5µ̃ + t−µ̃ x⊤

                                                      ≤                            s rk ,
                                                        Kt
   where in the last line we use the fact ∀x ≤ 1 : exp x ≤ 1 + x + x2 . Since −t−0.5µ̃ decreases to
   zero more slowly than the other term, the last term is negative for a sufficiently large t.
                   (t)
4. if x⊤
       s rk < −t
                 −0.5µ̃
                        :
                         (t)                         (t)
     Since x⊤               ⊤
            s rk < 0, exp −xs rk                               > 1 holds. Therefore
                                             M    h
                                                             (t)
                                                                       i
                                                                             (t)
                                                αs exp −x⊤ r
                                                         s k       − 1   x⊤
                                                                          s rk ≤ 0.
                                             Kt
To sum up, there exist C1 , C2 > 0, t̃ ≥ max{t+ , t− } such that for all t ≥ t̃,
                                 (t)        (t)      (t)
                               (rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk ≤ C1 t−θ + C2 t−1−0.5µ̃ , ∀k ∈ [0 : K −1].

D.3        N ON -A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF S KETCH OF T HEOREM 3.3)

The analysis in Appendix D.1 can be extended similarly to arbitrary cycle number. That is,
                                                                                                              2
                                          (M j+M )                (M j)                           (M j)
                     ∀j < J : L(w0                   ) ≤ L(w0             ) − ηK (1 − ηKβ ′ ) ∇L(w0       )       .
Thus by applying Lemma E.9, we obtain
    J−1                                                         4        J−1
    X
                (M j+M )
                                                         2ηM Kσmax  β    X     ηK
                                                                                           (M j)        (M j+M )

2         ηK L(w0        ) − L(z) −                                                 ′
                                                                                        L(w0     ) − L(w0        )
    j=0
                                                     ϕ (1 − ηM Kσmax β) j=0 1 − ηKβ
                                                      2           2    2


                                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 2                   2
          (0)           (M J)
≤ w0 − z             − w0       −z       ,                                                                    (18)

for any z ∈ Rd . Thus
                            8σ 2
          (M J)                               (M J)         (0)
2ηKJ L(w0       ) − L(z) + max     2
                                      ηK L(w0       ) − L(w0 )
                                 ϕ
    J−1
    X                                  8σ 2
                  (M j+M )                              (M J)        (0)
 ≤2     ηK L(w0            ) − L(z) + max  2
                                             ηK L(w0          ) − L(w0 )
    j=0
                                         ϕ
      J−1
      X                            8σ 2     J−1
                                            X
                (M j+M )                           (M j)        (M j+M )
=2        ηK L(w0        ) − L(z) − max2
                                         ηK     L(w0     ) − L(w0        )
      j=0
                                    ϕ       j=0
    J−1                                                  4         J−1
    X
                (M j+M )
                                                  2ηM Kσmax  β     X      ηK
                                                                                       (M j)         (M j+M )

2         ηK L(w0        ) − L(z) −                                                L(w 0     ) − L(w 0        )
    j=0
                                             ϕ2 (1 − ηM Kσmax
                                                           2   β)2 j=0 1 − ηKβ ′
                 2                   2
          (0)           (M J)
≤ w0 − z             − w0       −z       ,                                                                    (19)

                                                                                   (M j)
where in the first and second inequalities we use the fact that L(w0                       ) is decreasing and η <
          1         1
min{ 2M Kβσ 2    , 2Kβ ′ }. Re-arranging gives
                max

                                                                                           2
                                                                             (0)
                                                   (0)
                                          4σ 2 L(w0 )                      w0 − z
                           (M J)
                        L(w0     ) ≤L(z) + max         +                                       .
                                           ϕ2    J                           2ηKJ
                                                                                                   2
Let z := ŵ ln(M J). Using L(ŵ ln(M J)) ≤ |I| ℓ(ln(M J)), we can obtain O( lnJ J ) upper bound
for the training loss.


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E         P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 3: C YCLIC TASK O RDERING , J OINTLY S EPARABLE
For simplicity, we set yi = 1 for all i ∈ I = [1 : N ] in the proofs, without loss of generality. If not,
we can convert every data into (e
                                xi , yei ) = (yi xi , +1) by “absorbing” the original label into the input.

E.1       A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1)

Let us restate the theorem here for the sake of readability, whose proof sketch is provided in
Appendix D.1.
                        (t)
Theorem 3.1. Let {wk }k∈[0:K−1],t≥0 be the sequence of GD iterates (2) from any starting point
    (0)
w0 , where tasks are given cyclically. Under Assumptions 3.1 and 3.3, if the learning rate satisfies
            ϕ2
η < 2Kβσ3 (M   ϕ+σmax ) , then
             max


                                          (t)
1. Loss converges to zero: lim L(wk ) = 0, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1].
                                t→∞
                                                                                (t)
2. All data points are eventually classified correctly: lim yi x⊤
                                                                i wk = ∞, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1], i ∈ I.
                                                        t→∞
                                                  P∞ PK−1          (t)   (t)
3. Square sum of the change of weight is finite: t=0 k=0 ∥wk+1 − wk ∥2 < ∞.

Let us recapPsome notation regarding the dataset and loss function. The                   task m,
                                                                         training loss ofd×|I
Lm (w) = i∈Im ℓ(yi x⊤   i w), is β m -smooth for β m := βλmax X m mX ⊤
                                                                        where  X m  ∈  R      m|
                                                                                                 is
a data matrix of task m consisting of columns {xi : i ∈ Im }. Let βmax = maxm∈[0:M −1] βm ; by
                      2
                            P
definition, βmax ≤ βσmax  ≤ m∈[0:M −1] βm holds.
In this proof, we rely on the key property of linearly separable data.
Lemma E.1. Suppose that Assumptions 3.1 and 3.3 holds. For any w ∈ Rd ,
                                                 sX
                                                                   2
                                                         ℓ′ (x⊤

                                 ∥∇L(w)∥ ≥ ϕ                  i w) .
                                                           i∈I


Proof. See Appendix E.1.1.

Also, we use the following lemma, which holds in cyclic continual learning with M tasks.
Lemma E.2. Suppose that Assumptions 3.1 and 3.3 holds. Let any t ∈ N, m ∈ [0 : M − 1], k ∈ [0 :
                                                     1
K − 1]. Then, if we choose the step size as η < (mK+k)σ 2  β , we have  max

                                                    m−1
                                                                                                !
                      (t+m)    (t)
                                                    X          (t+i)     (t)              (t)
                     wk     − w0 + η            K         ∇L           (w0 ) + k∇L(t+m) (w0 )
                                                    i=0

                                                        η 2 (mK + k)Kσmax
                                                                      3
                                                                          β       (t)
                                                    ≤                         ∇L(w0 ) ,
                                                      ϕ{1 − η(mK + k)σmax
                                                                        2  β}
                                (t+m)      (t)                 ηKσmax             (t)
                              wk        − w0        ≤                         ∇L(w0 ) ,
                                                      ϕ{1 − η(mK + k)σmax
                                                                        2  β}
                                                                  3
                        (t+m)             (t)                  ηKσmax β            (t)
                   ∇L(wk        ) − ∇L(w0 ) ≤                                  ∇L(w0 ) .
                                                        ϕ{1 − η(mK + k)σmax
                                                                        2   β}

Proof. See Appendix E.1.2.

               2
Since L is a σmax β-smooth function, we get
                                     σ2 β                           2
         (M j+M )            (M j)               (M j+M )    (M j)
   L w0              − L w0         − max      w0         − w0
                                         2
              (M j) ⊤    (M j+M )      (M j)
    ≤ ∇L(w0        ) (w0           − w0      )
                      ⊤
               (M j)       (M j+M )      (M j)             (M j)           (M j)
    = ∇L w0               w0         − w0      + ηK∇L w0           − ηK∇L w0


                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                      2
              (M j)           (M j)                                        (M j+M )        (M j)           (M j)
    ≤ −ηK ∇L w0         + ∇L w0                                          w0           − w0         + ηK∇L w0       .
By Lemma E.2,
                                     2
               (M j+M )            σmax  β
                                     (M j)        (ησmax K)2              (M j)
                                                                                  2
          L(w0            ) − L(w0           )−
                                           · 2            2
                                                                     ∇L(w 0     )
                                       2     ϕ (1 − ηM Kσmax  β)2
                               2      2     2 3                      2
                        (M j)       η M K σmax β             (M j)
          ≤ −ηK ∇L(w0         ) +               2
                                                       ∇L(w  0     )   .
                                  ϕ(1 − ηM Kσmax    β)
                   1
Given that η ≤ 2M Kσ 2 β,max
       (M j+M )        (M j)
    L(w0        ) − L(w0     )
                              3                   4

                         M σmax β               σmax  β                    2
                                                                   (M j)
     ≤ −ηK 1 − ηK                2
                                        +   2           2 2
                                                               ∇L(w0     )
                    ϕ(1 − ηM Kσmax β) 2ϕ (1 − ηM Kσmax β)
                                 3

                  2(M ϕ + σmax )σmax β                2
                                              (M j)
     ≤ −ηK 1 − ηK            2
                                          ∇L(w0     )
                           ϕ
                                                      2
                                        (M j)
     = −ηK (1 − ηKβ ′ ) ∇L(w0                     )       ,                                                                     (20)
                                    3
                       2(M ϕ+σmax )σmax β                                                  (M j+M )                  (M j)
where we set β ′ :=           ϕ2          .                     1
                                                Given that η < Kβ ′ , L(w0       ) < L(w0                                    ) holds.
           1         1
Note that Kβ ′ < 2M Kσ 2         β because, in the proof of Lemma E.1, we can show that
                           max

                      ϕ≤             min          ∥Xv∥ ≤                  max      ∥Xv∥ ≤ σmax .
                               v∈Rd
                                  ≥0
                                     :∥v∥=1                         v∈Rd
                                                                       ≥0
                                                                          :∥v∥=1

Also, by Equation (20),
          ∞                      (0)                (M j)           (0)
         X          (M j)
                           2  L(w0 ) − limt→∞ L(w0        )     L(w0 )
             ∇L(w0        ) ≤                               ≤                < ∞.
         j=0
                                     ηK(1 − ηKβ ′ )           ηK(1 − ηKβ ′ )
Coupled with Lemma E.2,
      ∞ M  −1 K−1                 2
                        (M j+m)
     X   X    X
                  ∇L(wk         )
      j=0 m=0 k=0
                          ∞ M −1 K−1
                                 X                                                                                          2
                                                              (M j)                    (M j+m)                 (M j)
                          X X
                     ≤                            ∇L(w0                  ) + ∇L(wk                 ) − ∇L(w0           )
                          j=0 m=0 k=0
                       ∞ M −1 K−1
                              X                  3
                                                              2
                                                                                  2
                       X X                   ηKσmax  β                    (M j)
                     ≤            1+                    2
                                                                   ∇L(w0        )
                      j=0 m=0 k=0
                                      ϕ{1 − η(mK + k)σmax β}
                                   3
                                              2      ∞                 2
                                ηKσmax β            X          (M j)
                     ≤ 1+              2
                                                M K       ∇L(w 0     )   < ∞.
                           ϕ{1 − ηM Kσmax β}        j=0
                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                         (t)
The boundedness of infinite sum of nonzero elements means limt→∞ ∇L(wk )                                               = 0, ∀k ∈
                                                              (t)
[0 : K − 1]. This leads to limt→∞ ℓ′ (x⊤i wk ) = 0, ∀i ∈ I, k ∈ [0 : K − 1] by Lemma E.1.
                                                       (t)
Since ℓ′ (u) → 0 only when u → ∞, we obtain x⊤      i wk → ∞, ∀i ∈ I, k ∈ [0 : K − 1] and
                                                            P∞ PK−1                     2
             (t)                                                                (t) (t)
limt→∞ L(wk ) = 0, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1]. Finally, we obtain that j=0 k=0 wk+1 − wk            <
∞ followed by
                              s                  i2     s                    i2
                    (t)
                                Xh           (t)
                                                           X h          (t)
               ∇L(wk ) ≥ ϕ            ′   ⊤
                                     ℓ (xi wk ) ≥ ϕ            ℓ′ (x⊤ w     )
                                                                    i   k
                                            i∈I                                  i∈I (t)

                                      ϕ           X                 ϕ(t)    (t)       (t)
                                 ≥                        ℓ′ (x⊤
                                                               i wk )xi = wk+1 − wk ,
                                     βm t                         β mt η
                                      i∈I (t)
                                                                                         P
where we use Lemma E.1 in the first inequality, while we use the fact ∀λs ∈ R :            s∈I λs xs 2 ≤
     pP
σmax         λ 2 in the third inequality. The last equality is true by the definition of gradient descent.
         s∈I s


                                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.1.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA E.1
Let us recall the statement of the lemma for the sake of readability.
Lemma E.1. Suppose that Assumptions 3.1 and 3.3 holds. For any w ∈ Rd ,
                                                sX
                                                                   2
                                                        ℓ′ (x⊤

                                  ∥∇L(w)∥ ≥ ϕ                i w) .
                                                                  i∈I


Let any w ∈ Rd . Observe that if we let v ′ ∈ RN                                    ′  ⊤
                                               ≥0 be a vector whose i-th entry is −ℓ (xi w), then
                ′
−∇L(w) = Xv . Because of this,
                        ∥∇L(w)∥ = ∥Xv ′ ∥
                                         ≥ ∥v ′ ∥ ·          min          ∥Xv∥
                                                      v∈RN
                                                         ≥0
                                                            :∥v∥=1
                                             sX
                                                                  2
                                                       ℓ′ (x⊤

                                         =                  i w)    ·                min       ∥Xv∥ .
                                                                              v∈RN
                                                                                 ≥0
                                                                                    :∥v∥=1
                                                i∈I

Let v̂ := arg minv∈RN
                    ≥0
                       :∥v∥=1 ∥Xv∥. Then for max-margin direction ŵ, the following holds.

                                                         ŵ⊤ X v̂
                                         ∥X v̂∥ ≥                 ≥ ϕ ∥v̂∥ = ϕ.
                                                           ∥ŵ∥
We used Cauchy-Schwarz for the first inequality and the definition of ŵ for the second one. This
concludes the proof of the lemma.

E.1.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA E.2
We restate the lemma here for readability.
Lemma E.2. Suppose that Assumptions 3.1 and 3.3 holds. Let any t ∈ N, m ∈ [0 : M − 1], k ∈ [0 :
                                                    1
K − 1]. Then, if we choose the step size as η < (mK+k)σ 2 β , we have          max

                                                         m−1
                                                                                                              !
                       (t+m)    (t)
                                                         X            (t+i)     (t)              (t)
                      wk     − w0 + η                K         ∇L             (w0 ) + k∇L(t+m) (w0 )
                                                         i=0

                                                             η 2 (mK + k)Kσmax
                                                                           3
                                                                               β       (t)
                                                         ≤                         ∇L(w0 ) ,
                                                           ϕ{1 − η(mK + k)σmax
                                                                             2  β}
                                   (t+m)        (t)                 ηKσmax             (t)
                              wk           − w0          ≤                         ∇L(w0 ) ,
                                                           ϕ{1 − η(mK + k)σmax
                                                                             2  β}
                                                                       3
                        (t+m)                  (t)                  ηKσmax β            (t)
                  ∇L(wk         ) − ∇L(w0 ) ≤                                       ∇L(w0 ) .
                                                             ϕ{1 − η(mK + k)σmax
                                                                             2   β}

To start the proof, observe that
                                      m−1
                                                                                                                   !
           (t+m)    (t)
                                      X K−1
                                          X                            (t+i)
                                                                                      k−1
                                                                                      X                      (t+m)
                                                             (t+i)                                 (t+m)
          wk     = w0 − η                             ∇L             (wh ) +                  ∇L           (wh′    )   .
                                         i=0 h=0                                      h′ =0

for all t ≥ 0, m ∈ [0 : M ], k ∈ [0 : K]. Using this, we can deduce the following with βmax -
smoothness and triangle inequality.
                             m−1
                                                                                      !
   (t+m)    (t)
                             X         (t+i)     (t)              (t)
  wk     − w0 + η        K          ∇L         (w0 ) + k∇L(t+m) (w0 )
                             i=0
        m−1
        X K−1
            X                                                         k−1
                                                                      X
                              (t)                        (t+i)                      (t)             (t+m)
= η                ∇L(t+i) (w0 ) − ∇L(t+i) (wh                   ) +η     ∇L(t+m) (w0 ) − ∇L(t+m) (wh′    )
        i=0 h=0                                                           h′ =0
     m−1
     X K−1
         X                                                               k−1
                                                                         X
                             (t)                      (t+i)                                        (t)                 (t+m)
≤η                ∇L(t+i) (w0 ) − ∇L(t+i) (wh                  ) +η               ∇L(t+m) (w0 ) − ∇L(t+m) (wh′                 )
     i=0 h=0                                                            h′ =0



                                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 m−1
                                                                                                      !
                 X K−1
                     X            (t)  (t+i)
                                                                 k−1
                                                                 X         (t)   (t+m)
≤ ηβmax                          w0 − wh                     +           w 0 − w h′                        .                                     (21)
                  i=0 h=0                                        h′ =0

                                                             P                                       pP
Moreover, using the fact ∀λs ∈ R :                                                                                  2
                                                                 s∈I λs xs 2 ≤ σmax                            s∈I λs ,

      (t+m)         (t)
 wk           − w0
                  m−1
                                                                                 !
                  X             (t+i)     (t)              (t)
≤ −η          K           ∇L            (w0 ) + k∇L(t+m) (w0 )
                  i=0
                                              m−1
                                                                                                                 !
         (t+m)    (t)
                                              X              (t+i)     (t)              (t)
  +     wk     − w0 + η                   K          ∇L              (w0 ) + k∇L(t+m) (w0 )
                                              i=0

           m−1
           X         X                                            X
                                ℓ′ (x⊤                                       ℓ′ (x⊤
                                           (t)                                             (t)
≤η K                                 s w0 )xs + k                                 s w0 )xs
              i=0 s∈I (t+i)                                   s∈I (t+m)
                                              m−1
                                                                                                                 !
         (t+m)    (t)
                                              X              (t+i)     (t)              (t)
  +     wk     − w0 + η                   K          ∇L              (w0 ) + k∇L(t+m) (w0 )
                                              i=0
        v
        um−1                                                  2                                     2
        uX                 X                           (t)
                                                                           X                   (t)
≤ ησmax t                                Kℓ′ (x⊤
                                               s w0 )              +                  kℓ′ (x⊤
                                                                                            s w0 )
                  i=0 s∈I (t+i)                                        s∈I (t+m)
                                              m−1
                                                                                                                 !
         (t+m)    (t)
                                              X              (t+i)     (t)              (t)
  +     wk     − w0 + η                   K          ∇L              (w0 ) + k∇L(t+m) (w0 )
                                              i=0
                s                                                                                    m−1
                                                                                                                                                   !
                 X                             2                                                     X
                                    (t)                    (t+m)    (t)                                             (t+i)     (t)              (t)
≤ ηKσmax                    ℓ′ (x⊤
                                 s w0 )            +      wk     − w0 + η                        K             ∇L           (w0 ) + k∇L(t+m) (w0 )      .
                   s∈I                                                                               i=0


Thus, by Equation (21) and Lemma E.1, we obtain
        (t+m)             (t)
      wk          − w0
                                                                     
                             m−1  K−1               k−1
    ηKσmax     (t)     2
                              X   X    (t+i)    (t)
                                                    X    (t+m)    (t)
  ≤        ∇L(w0 ) + ησmax β         wj     − w0 +     wj     − w0  .
      ϕ                       i=0 j=0               j=0
                                                                                                                                                (22)

Here, we use the following technical lemma.
                                                                                                                                            Pk−1
Lemma E.3 (Nacson et al., 2019). Let ϵ and θ be positive constants. Suppose δk ≤ θ + ϵ                                                        u=0 δu
holds for all non-negative integers k < 1ϵ . Then
                                                                                           k−1
                                                      θ                                    X                     kθ
                                           δk ≤                            and                   δu ≤                 .
                                                    1 − kϵ                                 u=0
                                                                                                               1 − kϵ

By applying the lemma to (22), we obtain
                                 (t+m)              (t)                   ηKσmax             (t)
                                wk         − w0              ≤                    2
                                                                                         ∇L(w0 )
                                                                  ϕ{1 − η(mK + k)σmax β}
and
                                                                     m−1
                                                                                                                                      !
                           (t+m)    (t)                                                      (t)              (t)
                                                                     X
                                                                                 (t+i)
                          wk     − w0 + η                     K            ∇L              (w0 ) + k∇L(t+m) (w0 )
                                                                     i=0
                                                                                                                                     
                                            m−1
                                            X K−1                                                k−1
                                                                     (t+i)           (t)                        (t+m)           (t)
                                                X                                                X
                         2
                     ≤ ησmax β                                  wj          − w0            +                 wj           − w0      
                                              i=0 j=0                                            j=0



                                                                              32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     η 2 (mK + k)Kσmax
                                   3
                                       β       (t)
               ≤                     2
                                           ∇L(w0 ) .
                   ϕ{1 − η(mK + k)σmax  β}

Finally, by smoothness,
                    (t+m)            (t)    2                           (t+m)            (t)
             ∇L(wk           ) − ∇L(w0 ) ≤ σmax β wk                             − w0
                                                             3
                                                          ηKσmax β            (t)
                                             ≤                     2
                                                                          ∇L(w0 ) ,
                                                   ϕ{1 − η(mK + k)σmax β}
which concludes the proof of the lemma.

E.2     D IRECTIONAL C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2)

In this section, we prove our implicit bias result: Theorem 3.2. Moreover, we further discuss the
                                     (t)
convergence of the residual vector ρk , beyond its boundedness, under some additional assumption
on the dataset (see Appendix E.2.3).
                       (t)
Theorem 3.2. Let {wk }k∈[0:K−1],t≥0 be the sequence of GD iterates (2) from any initial point
  (0)
w0 , where tasks are given cyclically. Suppose that Assumptions 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4 hold. Then,
                                                           (t)
under the same learning rate condition as in Theorem 3.1, wk will behave as
                                           (t)                           (t)
                                          wk = ln(t)ŵ + ρk ,
                                    (t)
for all sufficiently large t, where ∥ρk ∥ stays bounded as t → ∞.

Note that we use Assumption 3.2, the unique existence of SVM dual variables α that satisfies
                                           X
                                      ŵ =     αs xs ,
                                                   s∈S
                                 ∀s ∈ S : αs > 0, ∀s ∈
                                                     / S : αs = 0.
This assumption holds for almost all data (Soudry et al., 2018).
When the tasks are given in a cyclic order, the following lemma holds. Note that the lemma does not
depend on the algorithm.
Lemma E.4. When tasks are given cyclic, there exists w̌, mt,k ∈ Rd the following holds for all
t ∈ N, k ∈ [0 : K − 1].
                t−1
               X    1 X             k X            K       t        K
            K               αs xs +        αs xs =    ln       ŵ +    w̌ + mt,k ,
               u=1
                    u   (u)
                                    t  (t)
                                                   M      M         M
                     s∈S                  s∈S


                                           mt,K := mt+1,0 ,
such that ∥mt,k ∥ = o(t−0.5+ϵ ), and ∥mt,k+1 − mt,k ∥ = O(t−1 ) for all k ∈ [0 : K − 1], ϵ > 0,
and w̌ only depends on the order of tasks and constant with respect to t.

Proof. See Appendix E.2.1.

                                                                 (t)           (t)
We set mt,k and w̌ along Lemma E.4, and define ρk and rk as
                          (t)                (t)
                      wk = ln (t) ŵ + ρk
                                                                                               (23)

                                           K            M         (t)
                         = ln (t) ŵ + ln     ŵ + w̃ +   mt,k + rk ,
                                           M            K

                                    (t)         (t+1)             (t)      (t+1)
                                  ρK = ρ0               ,        rK = r0             ,


                                                            33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where w̃ is the solution of
                                                                                                                             (0)
                                   ∀i ∈ S : η exp (−x⊤
                                                     i w̃) = αi ,                                         P̄ (w̃ − w0 ) = 0,

which is unique under Assumption 3.2. Then by the definition,

          (t)    (t)   M K          K
        rk = wk −              ln     t ŵ + mt,k − w̃
                       K M          M
                                                                   
                              t−1
                 (t)   M     X    1  X             k  X
              = wk −        K               αs xs +           αs xs  − ln K ŵ − w̃ + w̌.
                       K      u=1
                                   u    (u)
                                                    t     (t)            s∈S                             s∈S

                                                                                                               (t)
Under these definitions, we can get the primary lemma of rk .
Lemma E.5. Under Assumption 3.1, 3.3, 3.4, and Assumption 3.2, if learning rate is η <
          1               ϕ2
min{ 2M Kβσ 2   , 4Kβσ3 (M
                 max         ϕ+σmax ) }, then
                                       max


          1. ∃t̃, C1 , C2 > 0 such that ∀t > t̃,
                                         (t)                 (t)         (t)
                                   (rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk ≤ C1 t−θ + C2 t−1−0.5µ̃ , ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1].

                                                                                                                      (t)
          2. Moreover, for all ϵ1 > 0, ∃t̃∗ , C3 > 0 such that if P rk                                                       ≥ ϵ1 and S (t) ̸= ∅,
                                                 (t)               (t)         (t)
                                            (rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk ≤ −C3 t−1 , ∀t > t̃∗ , k ∈ [0 : K − 1].

Proof. See Appendix E.2.2. The proof sketch is provided in Appendix D.2.1.

                                  (t)                                                       (t)
By the definition of ρk , it is enough to prove rk                                                 is bounded above in t. We use the fact
                                             2                      2                                                                          2
                                  (t)                        (t)                     (t)           (t)         (t)           (t)         (t)
                                 rk+1            − rk                    = 2(rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk + rk+1 − rk
                                                       (t)                                                             (t)
to show the boundedness of rk . For all k ∈ [0 : K − 2], let ak := MK (mt,k+1 − mt,k ). And let
 (t)                                                     (t)                               (t)
aK−1 := ln(1 + 1t )ŵ + M                                         K             M

                        K (mt+1,0 − mt,K−1 ). Since wk = ln M t ŵ + w̃ + K mt,k + rk ,
                       2                                                        2
    (t)        (t)                     (t)               (t)             (t)                                                       (t)
 rk+1 − rk                  = wk+1 − wk − ak                                        . Also, by Lemma E.4, ak                              = O(t−1 ). Thus, ∃t1
                                                                          (t)
such that ∀t ≥ t1 , ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1] : ak                                            ≤ t−1 .

Now we can get the following for all T ≥ t1 .
T K−1                                   2         T K−1                                                          2
                 (t)             (t)                                       (t)               (t)          (t)
X X                                               X X
               rk+1 − rk                     =                           wk+1 − wk − ak
t=t1 k=0                                          t=t1 k=0
    T K−1                                         2          T K−1                                                           T K−1                   2
                           (t)           (t)                                          (t)           (t)              (t)                       (t)
    X X                                                      X X                                                             X X
=                    wk+1 − wk                         +                       2(wk − wk+1 )⊤ ak +                                         ak
    t=t1 k=0                                                 t=t1 k=0                                                        t=t1 k=0
                                      v
    T K−1                        2
                                      u T K−1             T K−1
                                                        2 X          2   T K−1      2
                      (t)    (t)               (t)  (t)          (t)            (t)
    X X                               uX X                  X            X X
≤                    wk+1 − wk     +2 t       wk − wk+1         ak     +       ak
    t=t1 k=0                                                        t=t1 k=0                                           t=t1 k=0                      t=t1 k=0
                         v
  T K−1             2
                         u T K−1             T K−1
                                           2 X         T K−1
         (t)    (t)               (t)  (t)
  X X                    uX X                  X       X X
≤       wk+1 − wk     +2 t       wk − wk+1          −2
                                                   t +       t−2
    t=t1 k=0                                                        t=t1 k=0                                           t=t1 k=0                t=t1 k=0

< ∞.                                                                                                                                                            (24)
                                                                                                                                               PT        −2
We use Cauchy-Schwarz inequality for the first inequality and the factor that                                                                      t=t1 t   < ∞ and
                           2
PT PK−1        (t)    (t)
 t=t1   k=0   wk − wk+1 < ∞ by Theorem 3.1.


                                                                                           34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                         P∞    −c
Combined with Lemma E.5 and the fact that ∀c > 1 :                        t=1 t   < ∞, we get

                 2                  2       t−1 K−1
                                                X                2              2

          (t)              (t )                           (u)             (u)
                                            X
         r0          −    r0 1          =                rk+1        −   rk
                                            u=t1 k=0
                                            t−1 K−1
                                                X                                                     2

                                                           (u)    (u)   (u)              (u)    (u)
                                            X
                                        =               2(rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk +             rk+1 − rk             < ∞,
                                            u=t1 k=0

         (t)
hence rk        is bounded.

E.2.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA E.4

                t−1
                X   1 X                        k X
           K                        αs xs +           αs xs
                u=1
                      u                        t
                          s∈S (u)                 (t)
                                                 s∈S
                     ⌊ t−1
                        M ⌋M                            t−1
                         X     1 X                      X        1 X               k X
           =K                            αs xs + K                         αs xs +           αs xs
                         u=1
                               u                                 u                 t
                                 s∈S (u)           u=⌊ t−1
                                                        M  ⌋M +1   s∈S (u)           s∈S (t)

                                                 |                      {z                       }
                                                                                =:m′t,k

                     ⌊ t−1
                        M ⌋M
                         1 X
                         X
           =K                      αs xs + m′t,k
                 u=1
                         u     (u)
                           s∈S
              ⌊ t−1
                                                           
                 M  ⌋    M
               X        X           1            X
           =K                                        αs xs  + m′t,k
               u=1      v=1
                             v +  M (u  − 1)       (v)
                                               s∈S
                    t−1                                    
               M      ⌊ M  ⌋
              X        X            1            X
           =K                                        αs xs  + m′t,k .
              v=1      u=1
                             v +  M (u  − 1)       (v)     s∈S

Note that m′t,k and m′t,k+1 − m′t,k are both O(t−1 ) for all k ∈ [0 : K − 1]. For every v,

  ⌊ t−1
                                             
     M ⌋
   X             1               X
                                       αs xs 
   u=1
         v +  M   (u − 1)           (v)
                                s∈S

            ⌊ t−1
                                                                   
               M  ⌋                          v
                                        1− M

             X          1                               X
         =                   +       2 + (v − M )u
                                                             αs xs 
             u=1
                      M   u      M u                      (v)
                                                      s∈S
                                                           t−1
                                                                                                 
                                                       ⌊X   M ⌋             v
                                                                         −

                1             t − 1                                    1                 X
         =           ln ⌊          ⌋ + γ + O(t−1 ) +                       M
                                                                     2 + (v − M )u
                                                                                            αs xs 
               M                M                          u=1
                                                                 M  u
                                                                                      s∈S (v)
                                                         t−1
                                                                                               
                                                     ⌊X   M ⌋             v
                                                                       −

                1           t −  1                                   1               X
         =           ln              + γ + O(t−1 ) +                    M
                                                                   2 + (v − M )u
                                                                                          αs xs 
               M              M                         u=1
                                                              M  u
                                                                                    s∈S (v)
                                                      t−1
                                                                                            
                                                  ⌊X   M ⌋             v
                                                                    −

                1            t                                    1                X
         =           ln           + γ + O(t−1 ) +                     M
                                                                2 + (v − M )u
                                                                                       αs xs  ,
               M            M                         u=1
                                                           M   u                     (v)        s∈S

where, in the last three equalities, we use the fact
                                                t
                                                X 1
                                                        = ln t + γ + O(t−1 ),
                                                u=1
                                                    u


                                                             35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               ln (t) − ln (⌊t⌋) = O(t−1 ),
                                             ln (t) − ln (t − 1) = O(t−1 ),
                                                                                            1− v           v
                                                                                                        1− M
where γ is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. Since 1 ≤ v ≤ M , the inequality M u2 +(v−M
                                                                                  M
                                                                                      )u ≤               vu2
                                       v
                            P      1− M                               −1
holds. Therefore, the series u M u2 +(v−M )u converges with a rate O(t ).
          ⌊ t−1
             M ⌋         v       ∞            v                               ∞                v
           X        1− M         X       1− M                                 X           1− M
                               =                     −
           u=1
               M u2 + (v − M )u u=1 M u2 + (v − M )u                                 M u2 + (v − M )u
                                                                        u=⌊ t−1
                                                                             M ⌋+1
                                             ∞             v
                                             X        1− M
                                         =                        + O(t−1 ).
                                             u=1
                                                 M u2 + (v − M )u
Hence,
                 t−1                            
          M      ⌊ M ⌋
          X       X         1          X
      K                                   αs xs 
          v=1      u=1
                       v + M (u − 1)    (v)   s∈S
                                                                                
                                          ∞
                               !      M X                v
                                                    1− M
                     X
        K     t                      X                               X
      =    ln   +γ        αs xs + K               2 + (v − M )u
                                                                          αs xs  + m′′t
        M     M                      v=1 u=1
                                              M u
                      s∈S                                          s∈S (v)
                                                                    
                             M  ∞             v
                                         1− M

        K     t            XX                             X
      =    ln   + γ ŵ + K             2 + (v − M )u
                                                              αs xs  + m′′t
        M     M            v=1 u=1
                                   M u                     (v)           s∈S
       K       t     K
    =     ln( )ŵ +    w̌ + m′′t ,
       M      M      M
                                      v
                    PM P∞          1− M    P                      ′′       −1
where w̌ := γ ŵ + M v=1 u=1 M u2 +(v−M )u  s∈S (v) αs xs , and ∥mt ∥ = O(t   ).
Finally, for all k ∈ [0 : K − 1], let
                               t−1
                               X   1 X                       k X            K    t      K
                   mt,k := K                       αs xs +          αs xs −   ln( )ŵ −   w̌
                               u=1
                                     u                       t              M    M      M
                                         s∈S (u)                (t)
                                                              s∈S

and
                                                    mt,K := mt+1,0 .

Then ∥mt,k ∥ = m′t,k + m′′t = O(t−1 ), and

                                                   1 X
                    ∥mt,k+1 − mt,k ∥ =                    αs xs = O(t−1 ),     (k = 0, ..., K − 2)
                                                   t  (t)
                                                    s∈S

                                                   1 X            K
                   ∥mt+1,0 − mt,K−1 ∥ =                   αs xs −   ln(1 + t−1 )ŵ = O(t−1 ).
                                                   t  (t)
                                                                  M
                                                     s∈S


E.2.2      P ROOF OF L EMMA E.5
We use Assumption 3.4 here. That is, there exist positive constants µ+ , µ− , and ū such that ∀u > ū :
                         (1 − exp(−µ− u))e−u ≤ −ℓ′ (u) ≤ (1 + exp(−µ+ u))e−u .
By definition,
                                                                 
                                  t−1
                    (t)  (t) M    X   1 X            k X
∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1] : rk = wk −   K            αs xs +        αs xs  − ln K ŵ − w̃ + w̌,
                             K    u=1
                                      u  (u)
                                                     t  (t)   s∈S             s∈S



                                                             36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     (t)         (t+1)
                                                                    rK = r0              .
Then for all k ∈ [0 : K − 1], we get
            (t)               (t)         (t)            (t)       M X
          rk+1 − rk = wk+1 − wk −                                         αs xs
                                                                   Kt (t)
                                                                      s∈S
                                                X               (t)     M                X
                                    = −η                ℓ′ (x⊤
                                                             s wk )xs −                         αs xs
                                                                                 Kt
                                              s∈I (t)                                 s∈S (t)

                                                                      (t)
                                                                                         X                  M

                                                                                                   ⊤ (t)
                                                  X
                                    = −η                       ℓ (x⊤
                                                               ′
                                                                   s wk )xs −
                                                                                                ′
                                                                                              ηℓ (xs wk ) +    αs xs .
                                                                                                            Kt
                                              s∈I (t) \S (t)                          s∈S (t)


Hence,

                                      ⊤
                 (t)           (t)         (t)
              rk+1 − rk                   rk
                                                  X
                                                 (t)                         M

                                                     ⊤ (t)         ⊤ (t)                  (t)
                              X
           = −η                           ℓ (x⊤
                                          ′
                                              s wk )xs rk −
                                                             ′
                                                           ηℓ (xs wk ) +        αs x⊤ s rk
                                                                             Kt
                s∈I (t) \S (t)                   s∈S (t)

                   X                  K            M ⊤                         ⊤ (t)          (t)
           = −η                ℓ′ ln    t x⊤
                                           s ŵ +      x s m   t,k + x ⊤
                                                                       s w̃ + x  r
                                                                               s k     x⊤s rk                            (25)
                                      M            K
                s∈I (t) \S (t)
               X      K   M
                                                                                M

                           ′                  ⊤             ⊤        ⊤ (t)                      (t)
            −           ηℓ ln        t +    xs mt,k + xs w̃ + xs rk           +     αs x⊤  s rk .                        (26)
                 (t)
                                   M      K                                     Kt
                    s∈S

The behavior of each term can be analyzed when stage t is large. To achieve this, we first characterize
five stages.
                                                                                                    (t)
              t5 := min{t′ | ∀t ≥ t′ , ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1], ∀s ∈ I : x⊤
                                                                   s wk ≥ ū}
                                                                                                    (t)
              t6 := min{t′ | ∀t ≥ t′ , ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1], ∀s ∈ I : x⊤
                                                                   s wk ≥ 0}

                         ′         ′                                    M ⊤
              t7 := min{t | ∀t ≥ t , ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1], ∀s ∈ I : exp − xs mt,k ≤ 2}
                                                                        K

                         ′         ′                                    M  ⊤           1
              t8 := min{t | ∀t ≥ t , ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1], ∀s ∈ I : exp − xs mt,k ≥ }
                                                                        K              2
                                                                                    1
                                                                              (t)
              t9 := min{t′ | ∀t ≥ t′ , ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1], ∀s ∈ I : exp −µ− x⊤
                                                                           s wk     ≤ }
                                                                                     2
                                                                                                        (t)
Such t5 ∼ t9 exist since ∀s ∈ I, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1] : limt→∞ x⊤
                                                            s wk = ∞ by Theorem 3.1, and
∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1] : limt→∞ ∥mt,k ∥ = 0 by Lemma E.4.
Then for all t ≥ max{t5 , t6 , t7 , t8 , t9 }, the first term (25) can be upper bounded as below:
                           (t)     ⊤ (t)                               (t)  ⊤ (t)
           X                                            X
   −η             ℓ′ (x⊤
                       s wk )xs rk ≤ −η                        ℓ′ (x⊤
                                                                    s wk )xs rk
         s∈I (t) \S (t)                                              s∈I (t) \S (t)
                                                                           (t)
                                                                      x⊤
                                                                       s rk >0

                                                  (t)       ⊤ (t)  ⊤ (t)
              X
   ≤η                             1 + exp(−µ+ x⊤
                                               s wk ) exp(−xs wk )xs rk                                              t ≥ t5
              (t)       (t)
         s∈I \S
              (t)
          x⊤
           s rk >0

              X                                       K    ⊤      M ⊤                ⊤ (t)      (t)
   ≤η                         2 exp − ln                t xs ŵ −  x mt,k − xs w̃ − xs rk x⊤
                                                                             ⊤
                                                                                             s rk                    t ≥ t6
                                                      M           K s
         s∈I (t) \S (t)
               (t)
          x⊤
           s rk >0

           X                              K           M ⊤           ⊤ (t)       (t)
   ≤                       2αs exp − ln     t x⊤
                                               s ŵ −   xs mt,k − x  r
                                                                    s k     x⊤
                                                                             s rk                                        (27)
           (t)         (t)
                                          M           K
       s∈I \S
            (t)
        x⊤
         s rk >0


                                                                            37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          X                            K    ⊤      M ⊤
   ≤                    2αs exp − ln     t xs ŵ −  x mt,k                                           (28)
                                       M           K s
       s∈I (t) \S   (t)
             (t)
        x⊤
         s rk >0

          X                            K
   ≤                    4αs exp − ln     t x⊤
                                            s ŵ                                              t ≥ t7
          (t)       (t)
                                       M
       s∈I \S
            (t)
        x⊤
         s rk >0

                                                                                                     (29)
                                     −θ
                               Kt
   ≤ 4N (max αs )                         ,                                                          (30)
                s              M
where in (27) we use the definition of w̃, in (28) we use the fact ∀x ≥ 0 : x exp(−x) ≤ 1, and in
(30) we use ∀s ∈ I (t) \ S (t) : x⊤
                                  s ŵ ≥ θ. Now we examine the second term (26). Given t ≥ t5 , it can
be divided into two cases.
                              
                               1 + exp(−µ+ x⊤       (t)              (t) ⊤ (t)          (t)
              (t)   ⊤ (t)                        s w k   )   exp(−x⊤
                                                                   s wk )xs rk    if x⊤
                                                                                      s rk > 0
   −ℓ′ (x⊤s w k   )x r
                    s k   ≤
                                                     (t)

                               1 − exp(−µ− x⊤                     ⊤ (t)  ⊤ (t)          (t)
                                                 s wk ) exp(−xs wk )xs rk         if x⊤
                                                                                      s rk ≤ 0

                                    (t)
For each s ∈ S, define As,k as
                                              (
                                                               (t)     ⊤ (t)
                                 (t)           1 + exp(−µ+ x⊤
                                                            s wk ) if xs rk > 0
                                As,k :=                        (t)     ⊤ (t)
                                               1 − exp(−µ− x⊤
                                                            s wk ) if xs rk ≤ 0

Then, we can use
                                              (t)    (t)   (t)           (t)   (t)
                                −ℓ′ (x⊤      ⊤                 ⊤      ⊤
                                      s wk )xs rk ≤ As,k exp(−xs wk )xs rk

in any s ∈ S, k ∈ [0 : K − 1]. Therefore the second term (26) is bounded
         X      K   M
                                                                         M

                  ′                   ⊤            ⊤        ⊤ (t)                     (t)
     −          ηℓ ln       t +      xs mt,k + xs w̃ + xs rk         +       αs x⊤ s rk
                         M        K                                      Kt
        s∈S (t)
         X   (t)
                                   K

                                            M ⊤

                                                                                   M

                                                             ⊤          ⊤ (t)                  (t)
     ≤          ηAs,k exp − ln       t −        xs mt,k − xs w̃ − xs rk          −     αs x⊤s rk
                                   M         K                                     Kt
        s∈S (t)
         X   (t) M αs
                                   M

                                                               M

                                                    ⊤ (t)                     (t)
     =          As,k       exp − x⊤    s m  t,k − x   r
                                                    s k     −      α s   x⊤s rk
                      Kt           K                          Kt
        s∈S (t)
         X M
                        (t)        M                 ⊤ (t)               (t)
     =             αs As,k exp − x⊤     s m  t,k − x   r
                                                     s k     − 1   x⊤s rk .
            (t)
                Kt                 K
         s∈S

                                                                    ⊤           −0.5+ϵ
Now we analyze each s ∈ S (t) by dividing into cases. Note that M
                                                                K xs mt,k = o(t        ) for all
                                                          M ⊤            −µ̃
ϵ > 0. Therefore if we set µ̃ = min{µ+ , µ− , 0.25}, then K xs mt,k = o(t ).
                     (t)
1. if 0 ≤ x⊤
           s rk ≤ C7 t
                       −0.5µ̃
                              :

              M      (t)           M ⊤             ⊤ (t)           (t)
                αs As,k exp − xs mt,k − xs rk              − 1 x⊤
                                                                s rk
             Kt                    K

                M                  M ⊤             ⊤ (t)           (t)
              ≤    αs 2 exp − xs mt,k − xs rk              − 1 x⊤
                                                                s rk                 t ≥ t6
                Kt                 K
                M    h
                                       (t)
                                                i
                                                     (t)
              ≤    αs 4 exp −x⊤     s rk     − 1 x⊤
                                                  s rk                               t ≥ t7
                Kt
                           4M C
                                  7 −1−0.5µ̃
              ≤ max αs             t         .
                  s             K
                                                                   (t)
   The last inequality holds by the case condition 0 ≤ x⊤
                                                        s rk ≤ C7 t
                                                                   −0.5µ̃
                                                                          .


                                                           38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         (t)
2. if −C7 t−0.5µ̃ ≤ x⊤
                     s rk ≤ 0:

                 M       (t)        M ⊤               ⊤ (t)            (t)
                    αs As,k exp − xs mt,k − xs rk             − 1 x⊤s rk
                 Kt                 K

                         M             (t)         M ⊤             ⊤ (t)        (t)
                       =     αs 1 − As,k exp − xs mt,k − xs rk              x⊤
                                                                             s rk
                         Kt                        K
                         M          (t)      M
                       ≤     αs x⊤
                                 s rk     ≤     αs · C7 t−0.5µ̃
                         Kt                  Kt
                                   MC
                                         7 −1−0.5µ̃
                       ≤ max αs            t        .
                             s       K
                       (t)
3. if C7 t−0.5µ̃ < x⊤
                    s rk :
                               (t)
   Here, we first examine As,k .
           (t)                          (t)
          As,k = 1 + exp(−µ+ x⊤
                              s wk )

                                K     M ⊤                    ⊤ (t)
          = 1 + exp −µ+ ln        t +    xs mt,k + x⊤
                                                    s w̃ + x  r
                                                             s k
                                M      K

                                K     M ⊤
          ≤ 1 + exp −µ+ ln        t +    x mt,k + x⊤s w̃
                                M      K s

                                   K
          ≤ 1 + 2µ+ exp −µ+ ln       t + x⊤s w̃                                       t ≥ t7
                                   M
          ≤ 1 + C8 t−µ+ .
   Therefore,

        M      (t)       M ⊤            ⊤ (t)           (t)
           αs As,k exp − xs mt,k − xs rk        − 1 x⊤
                                                     s rk
        Kt               K

               M               −µ+         M ⊤            ⊤ (t)             (t)
                                                                   − 1 x⊤

             ≤     αs 1 + C8 t       exp − xs mt,k − xs rk               s rk
               Kt                          K

               M               −µ+         M ⊤              −0.5µ̃             (t)
                                                                     − 1 x⊤

             ≤     αs 1 + C8 t       exp − xs mt,k − C7 t                  s rk .              (31)
               Kt                          K
                       ⊤
   Since t ≥ t7 , − M
                    K xs mt,k ≤ 1. Now by the fact ∀x ≤ 1 : exp x ≤ 1 + x + x ,
                                                                               2

                                                                             2
                           M                    M ⊤             M ⊤
                    exp − x⊤     m  t,k   ≤ 1 −    x  m t,k +     x   m t,k    ,
                            K s                 K s             K s

                               exp −C7 t−0.5µ̃ ≤ 1 − C7 t−0.5µ̃ + C72 t−µ̃ .


   Then we get

                                     M
                 1 + C8 t−µ+ exp − x⊤                  −0.5µ̃

                                          m  t,k − C7 t
                                     K s
                                                    2 !
                         M ⊤            M ⊤
                                                         1 − C7 t−0.5µ̃ + o(t−µ+ )

                 ≤ 1−      xs mt,k +      xs mt,k
                         K              K
                                                  2
                      M ⊤             M ⊤
                 ≤1−      xs mt,k +     xs mt,k − C7 t−0.5µ̃ + o(t−µ+ )
                      K               K
                 ≤ 1 − C7 t−0.5µ̃ + o(t−µ̃ )
                                               ⊤           −µ̃
   where in the last two inequality, we use M
                                            K xs mt,k = o(t    ).
   Finally, Equation (31) is bounded

                M                 −µ+         M ⊤              −0.5µ̃           (t)
                                                                        − 1 x⊤

                    αs 1 + C8 t         exp − xs mt,k − C7 t                 s rk
                Kt                             K

                                                  39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        M                                (t)
                           αs −C7 t−0.5µ̃ + o(t−µ̃ ) x⊤

                   ≤                                  s rk .
                        Kt
    Since −C7 t−0.5µ̃ decrease to zero slower than the other term, ∃t+ ≥ max{t5 , t6 , t7 , t8 , t9 } such
    that for all t ≥ t+ , the last term is negative.
           (t)
4. if x⊤
       s rk < −C7 t
                    −0.5µ̃
                           :

                 (t)                                   (t)                    ⊤ (t)
    Since x⊤
           s rk        < 0, it is enough to show that As,k exp − M  ⊤
                                                                 K xs mt,k − xs rk    > 1 for
                                             (t)                         (t)
   sufficiently large t. Note that As,k = 1 − exp(−µ− x⊤          s wk ) > 0 since t ≥ t6 . If

              ⊤ (t)
   exp −xs rk ≥ 4,

                       (t)        M                ⊤ (t)
                      As,k exp − x⊤    m  t,k −  x   r
                                  K s              s k

                                                   (t)            M ⊤
                           ≥ 4(1 − exp(−µ− x⊤  s w     )) exp   −   x    m   t,k   ≥ 1.
                                                   k
                                                                  K s

                                                                          (t)
   The last inequality holds by t ≥ max{t8 , t9 }. Now, if exp −x⊤   s kr       < 4,

           (t)                         K         M ⊤                          ⊤ (t)
         As,k = 1 − exp −µ− ln           t +         xs mt,k + x⊤ s w̃  +   x   r
                                                                              s k
                                      M          K
                              −µ−
                        4Kt                      M ⊤
               ≥1−                 exp −µ−           x mt,k + x⊤  s w̃
                         M                       K s
                              −µ−
                        8Kt
                                   exp −µ− x⊤                    −µ−

               ≥1−                             s w̃ ≥ 1 − C9 t        .                 t ≥ t7
                         M
   Also, by the fact ∀x : exp x ≥ 1 + x,

                        M ⊤            ⊤ (t)       M ⊤                   (t)

               exp − xs mt,k − xs rk          ≥ 1−   xs mt,k    1 − x⊤ r
                                                                     s k       .
                        K                          K
    Combined with the former inequality,

                       (t)        M ⊤            ⊤ (t)
                     As,k exp − xs mt,k − xs rk
                                  K

                                      −µ−        M ⊤                   (t)

                                                              1 − x⊤

                           ≥ 1 − C9 t         1−   xs mt,k         s rk
                                                 K
                           ≥ 1 − C9 t−µ− 1 + o(t−µ̃ ) 1 + C7 t−0.5µ̃


                                = 1 + C7 t−0.5µ̃ − o(t−µ̃ ).
    Since C7 t−0.5µ̃ decrease to zero slower than the other term, ∃t− ≥ max{t5 , t6 , t7 , t8 , t9 } such
    that for all t ≥ t− , the last equation is larger than 1.

To sum up, there exist C1 , C2 > 0, t̃ ≥ max{t+ , t− } such that for all t ≥ t̃,
                         (t)    (t)    (t)
                       (rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk ≤ C1 t−θ + C2 t−1−0.5µ̃ , ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1].
Now we consider special cases to finish the lemma. For any ϵ2 > 0, the following analysis holds.
           (t)
1. If x⊤
       s rk ≥ ϵ2 > 0:
   Since limt→∞ mt,k = 0, there exist t∗1 ≥ max{t+ , t− } such that ∀t ≥ t∗1 , ∀s ∈ S, ∀k ∈ [0 :
                ⊤                                    ⊤ (t)                      ∗    ∗
   K − 1] : M                                 t→∞ xs wk  → ∞, there exist t+ ≥ t1 such that
             K xs mt,k < 0.5ϵ2 . Also since lim
                                                               (t)
    ∀t ≥ t∗+ , ∀s ∈ S, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1] : exp −µ+ x⊤ s wk   ≤ exp(0.25ϵ2 ) − 1. Therefore for
         ∗
    t ≥ t+ ,

           M        (t)        M ⊤           ⊤ (t)           (t)
               αs As,k exp − xs mt,k − xs rk         − 1 x⊤
                                                          s rk
           Kt                  K

                                                     40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               M     h
                                                          (t)
                                                                             i
                                                                               ⊤ (t)
                             ≤    αs 1 + exp(−µ+ x⊤   s wk ) exp(−0.5ϵ2 ) − 1 xs rk                                 t ≥ t∗1
                               Kt
                               M                              (t)
                             ≤    αs (exp(−0.25ϵ2 ) − 1) x⊤
                                                          s rk                                                      t ≥ t∗+
                               Kt
                                      M                         1   ′′ −1
                             ≤ min αs   (exp(−0.25ϵ2 ) − 1) ϵ2 = −C+  t .
                                s     K                          t
                  (t)
 2. If x⊤
        s rk ≤ −ϵ2 < 0:
                             ⊤                (t)        ∗      ∗                ∗
                         xs wk →  ∞, there exist t− ≥ t1 such that ∀t ≥ t− , ∀s ∈ S, ∀k ∈ [0 :
      Again, since limt→∞
                                   (t)
      K − 1] : 1 − exp −µ− x⊤   s wk   ≥ exp(−0.25ϵ2 ). Therefore for t ≥ t∗− ,

             M        (t)         M ⊤            ⊤ (t)                (t)
                αs As,k exp − xs mt,k − xs rk                − 1 x⊤
                                                                  s rk
            Kt                    K
                      M      h
                                                   (t)
                                                                          i
                                                                            ⊤ (t)
                    ≤     αs 1 − exp(−µ− x⊤    s wk ) exp(0.5ϵ2 ) − 1 xs rk        t ≥ t∗1
                      Kt
                      M                              (t)
                    ≤     αs (exp(0.25ϵ2 ) − 1) x⊤
                                                 s rk                              t ≥ t∗−
                      Kt
                                M                         1        ′′ −1
                    ≤ − min αs     (exp(0.25ϵ2 ) − 1) ϵ2 = −C−       t .
                          s     K                          t
                                                         (t)
In conclusion, for any ϵ1 > 0, if P rk                           ≥ ϵ1 and S (t) ̸= ∅, then
                         2                           ⊤             2         1                             2
                   (t)                                     (t)                                       (t)
                                                                                          X
 max x⊤
      s rk                   = max         P ⊤ xs        rk            ≥                       x⊤
                                                                                                s P rk
 s∈S (t)                         s∈S (t)                                    S (t)
                                                                                     s∈S (t)
                                   1                           2            1                          2    1
                                                      (t)                                          (t)
                             =             XS⊤(t) P rk             ≥              2
                                                                                 σmin (XS (t) ) P rk            2
                                                                                                         ≥ (t) σmin (XS (t) )ϵ21
                                  S (t)                                    S (t)                           S

where XS (t) ∈ Rd×|S | is a matrix which has {xs | s ∈ S (t) } as its columns. By Assumption 3.2,
                    (t)


                                                                                                                   (t)
σmin (XS (t) ) is non-zero. Therefore, for all ϵ1 > 0, ∃t̃∗ , C3 > 0 such that if P rk                                         ≥ ϵ1 and
    (t)
S         ̸= ∅,
                                   (t)      (t)      (t)
                                 (rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk ≤ −C3 t−1 ,                        ∀t > t̃∗ , k ∈ [0 : K − 1].

                                             (t)
 E.2.3        C ONVERGENCE OF ρk
                                                                   (t)
 Theorem 3.2 only shows boundedness of ρk . Yet, if an additional mild assumption on data is given,
                            (t)
 it can be guaranteed that ρk converges to the particular vector.
 Assumption E.1. Support vectors span dataset. That is, rank{xi : i ∈ S} = rank{xi : i ∈ I}.
 Proposition E.6. Under the same setting as Theorem 3.2 with an additional Assumption E.1, the
                                  (t)
“residual” converges to limt→∞ ρk = w̃, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1]. Here, w̃ is the unique solution of the
 following system of equations
                                                                                                           (0)
                                 ∀i ∈ S : η exp (−x⊤
                                                   i w̃) = αi ,                      (I − P )(w̃ − w0 ) = 0,
where P ∈ Rd×d is the orthogonal projection matrix to the space spanned by the joint support
vectors indexed by S.

We set P̄ = I − P for the convenience of proof.

                                            (t)                                     (t)                                  (t)
Proof. By the definition of ρk = w̃ + M    K mt,k + rk , it is enough to prove limt→∞ rk = 0.
                     (t)         K                        (t)
                                   t ŵ + w̃ + M

First of all, since wk = ln M                  K mt,k + rk ,

                             (t)      (t)       K                   M
                         P̄ rk = P̄ wk − ln       t P̄ ŵ − P̄ w̃ −    P̄ mt,k
                                                M                   K

                                                                            41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            (0)                         K                   M
                                      = P̄ w0 − ln                        t P̄ ŵ − P̄ w̃ −   P̄ mt,k
                                                                        M                   K
                                                 (0)
                                      = P̄ w0 − P̄ w̃ = 0.
The first line holds under the Assumption E.1 since ∇L(w) is a linear combination of the columns of
X. that is, ∀l < t : P̄ ∇L(l) (w) = 0. The remaining lines are true by the definition.
                                                                                                                                         2
                                  (t)                                                                PT        PK−1     (t)       (t)
Second, we get to show P rk → 0. By Equation (24), limT →∞                                              t=t1    k=0   rk+1 − rk              =
                                                                         (T )           (T )
C4 . That means ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1] : limT →∞ rk+1 − rk                                            = 0. Therefore, for any ϵ0 , there exists
                      (t)    (t)
t2 > 0 such that     rk+1 − rk              < ϵK0 for all t ≥ t2 , k ∈ [0 : K − 1]. As a result,

                                      (t)         k         (t)    (t) k
                                P r0          +     ϵ0 ≥ P rk ≥ P r0 − ϵ0 .
                                                  K                    K

                                        (t)                                                                                   (t)
For t ≥ max{t1 , t2 , t̃∗ }, if P r0              ≥ ϵ1 + ϵ0 and S (t) ̸= ∅, then ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1] : P rk                                ≥ ϵ1 .
By Lemma E.5 (2),
                             t+m
                             X K−1        (u)
                                 X
                                        (rv+1 − rv(u) )⊤ rv(u) ≤ −KC3 t−1 + Km C1 t−θ + C2 t−1−0.5µ̃ .

 ∀m ∈ [0 : M − 1] :
                             u=t v=0


Since t−1 decrease to zero slower than t−θ and t−1−0.5µ̃ , there exists t3 > max{t1 , t2 , t̃∗ }, C4 > 0
                −1              −θ       −1−0.5µ̃
                                                    ≤ −C5 t−1 . To sum up, for any ϵ0 , ϵ2 > 0, there

such that −KC3 t + Km C1 t + C2 t
                                                                   (t)
exists t3 > max{t1 , t2 , t̃∗ } such that if P r0                         ≥ ϵ0 + ϵ1 and S ((t)) ̸= ∅, then

                                                       t+m
                                                       X K−1                  (u)
                                                           X
                     ∀m ∈ [0 : M − 1] :                                  (rv+1 − rv(u) )⊤ rv(u) ≤ −C5 t−1 ,
                                                        u=t v=0


Now, define two sets for each k ∈ [0 : K − 1]
                                                                                  (t)
                                        Tk := {t > t3 : P rk                             < ϵ0 + ϵ1 }
                                                            (t)
                                        T¯k := {t > t3 : P rk ≥ ϵ0 + ϵ1 }

We will finish our proof by showing T¯k is finite.
First, every Tk is neither empty nor finite. If there exists some k ′ that Tk′ is empty or finite, then
∃tmax ∈ T¯k′ . Then
                     2                       2                      2                       2
               (t)               (t     )                    (t)                  (t    )
           P r0          − P r0 max      − r0 max= r0
                           t−1 K−1
                               X   (u) 2       2

                                           (u)
                           X
                         =         rk+1 − rk
                             u=tmax k=0
                              t−1 K−1
                                  X                                           2
                                                                                               t−1 K−1
                                                       (u)              (u)
                              X                                                                X   X (u)       (u)   (u)
                         =                        rk+1 − rk                            +2             (rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk
                             u=tmax k=0                                                     u=tmax k=0
                                                                                                                             
                                        t−1
                                                                     (u)    (u)   (u)   (u)      (u)    (u)
                                        X               X
                         ≤ C4 + 2                                 (rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk + (rk′ +1 − rk′ )⊤ rk′ 
                                      u=tmax            k̸=k′
                                                                              (u)              (u)   (u)
                                                         X
                         ≤ C4 + C6 + 2                                   (rk′ +1 − rk′ )⊤ rk′
                                                  tmax ≤u≤t−1
                                                     S (u) ̸=∅


                                                                          42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                 X
                        ≤ C4 + C6 − 2C3                                      u−1 .
                                                     tmax ≤u≤t−1
                                                        S (u) ̸=∅

The first inequality is true because of Equation (24), while the other inequalities hold due to
Lemma E.5. As t goes to infinity, the upper bound goes to negative infinity. However, it con-
                        (t)
tradicts the fact that r0 is bounded.
                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                  PT           PK−1            (t)   (t)
Before we move on to the final step, note that limT →∞                                 t=t1      k=0       rk+1 − rk           = C4 implies

                                     t K−1                                        2
                                                              (u)          (u)
                                     X X
                                                             rk+1 − rk                = C4 − h(t)
                                    u=t1 k=0

where h(t) is a positive function monotonic decreasing to zero.
Now, assume that there exists some k ′ that T¯k is infinite. WLOG, we set k ′ = 0. Since T0 is infinite,
for any t ∈ T¯0 there exists t′ , t′′ ∈ T0 such that t ∈ [t′ + 1 : t′′ − 1] ⊂ T¯0 . We divide it into two
cases: For all t ∈ [t′ + 1 : t′′ − 1],

                                                     2                        2
                                           (t)                       (t′ )
1. if |[t′ + 1 : t]| < M , then P r0                     ≤ P r0                   + M ϵ0 ≤ (M + 1)ϵ0 + ϵ1 .

2. if |[t′ + 1 : t]| ≥ M , let t∗ = min{u ∈ [t′ + 1 : t] : S (u) ̸= ∅}. Then

                        2                  2         t−1 K−1
                                                         X                             2               2

                  (t)              (t∗ )                                      (u)               (u)
                                                     X
               P r0         =   P r0           +                             rk+1          −   rk
                                                     u=t∗ k=0

                                           2         t−1 K−1
                                                         X                                       2

                                   (t∗ )                                      (u)    (u)                  (u)    (u)   (u)
                                                     X
                            =   P r0           +                             rk+1 − rk               + 2(rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk
                                                     u=t∗ k=0

                                           2                      t−1 K−1
                                   (t∗ )
                                                                  X   X h (u)      (u)   (u)
                                                                                             i
                                                                       ∗
                            =   P r0           + h(t) − h(t ) + 2         (rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk
                                                                                      u=t∗ k=0
                                                                                                 ∗
                                                                                       ⌊ t−1−t
                                                                                           M   ⌋
                                                             2
                                                                                           X             1
                            ≤ (M ϵ0 + ϵ0 + ϵ1 ) + h(t) − 2C5
                                                                                           u=0
                                                                                                      M u + t∗
                                                             2
                            ≤ (M ϵ0 + ϵ0 + ϵ1 ) + h(t).
      Since h(t) is monotonic decreasing function, for any ϵ2 > 0, there exists t4 such that ∀t ≥ t4 :
      h(t) < ϵ2 .

                                                         2
                                               (t)
Therefore, ∀t ≥ max{t3 , t4 } : P r0                         ≤ (M ϵ0 + ϵ0 + ϵ1 )2 + ϵ2 . Since it holds for any ϵ0 , ϵ1 , ϵ2 ,
it contradicts with the assumption that T¯0 is infinite.

E.3     A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE R ATE A FTER M ANY C YCLES

Here we discuss and prove an asymptotic convergence rate of sequential GD, in terms of the joint
training loss, after a large enough number of cycles J. This convergence rate is derived from the
implicit bias result in Theorem 3.2, so it relies on a different set of assumptions from those used in
the proof of Theorem 3.3. Namely, in this section, we rely on the the shape of the loss function ℓ(·)
described in Assumptions 3.3 and 3.4, thereby having O(1/J) rate without any logarithmic factor
in J in it, while the convexity of ℓ is not a necessity. On the other hand, in Theorem 3.3 having
O(ln2 (J)/J) convergence rate, the loss function ℓ is (non-strongly) convex (Assumption 3.5) and
has a shape described in Assumption 3.3, but it does not have to satisfy the tight exponential tail
assumption (Assumption 3.4).


                                                                      43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We start the proof of the asymptotic rate by obtaining an upper bound of ℓ(u) based on Assump-
tions 3.3 and 3.4. Recall that, for any v > ū,
                                          −ℓ′ (v) ≤ (1 + exp(−µ+ v))e−v .
Taking the integration over v ∈ [u, ∞) for u > ū, we have

                                     1
                    ℓ(u) ≤ 1 +           exp(−µ+ u) e−u
                                  1 + µ+                                                                                     (32)
                                          −u
                              ≤ Cµ+ e          ,               (where               1
                                                                        Cµ+ = 1 + 1+µ +
                                                                                        e−µ+ ū < 2)

since ℓ(u) → 0 as u → ∞.
We move our attention to Equation (23), appeared in the proof of Theorem 3.2:

                            (t)        Kt               M           (t)
                          wk = ln           ŵ + w̃ +      mt,k + rk
                                       M          |     K  {z         }
                                                                                     (t)
                                                                                  =:ρ
                                                                                    ek                                       (33)

                                                       Kt                  (t)
                                          = ln                      ŵ + ρek .
                                                       M
Recall that Theorem 3.2 proves the equation above for all sufficiently large t, as well as the bounded-
          (t)
ness of ρek as t tends to infinity.
                                                                                                        (t)
In addition, from Theorem 3.1.2, we can deduce that the inner products x⊤   i wk > ū for all sufficiently
                                                               ⊤ (t)
large t. Now, let T⋆ ∈ M

                          K , ∞   be  a time step such  that x i w  k > ū and Equation (33) hold for all
t ≥ T⋆ . By definition of the joint training loss, for all t ≥ T⋆ ,
                     X
               (t)                 (t)
         L wk =           ℓ x⊤ i wk
                        i∈I
        (32)
                                 (t)
                  X
         ≤ Cµ+          exp −x⊤
                              i wk
                  i∈I

        (33)      X
                                 (t)
                                                   Kt
         = Cµ+          exp −x⊤ ρ
                              i k      exp  − ln        x ⊤
                                                          i ŵ
                                                   M
                  i∈I
                                        M  x⊤
                                            i ŵ
                                (t)
                X
        = Cµ+          exp −x⊤ ρ
                             i k
                                        Kt
                 i∈I
                                                 M  x⊤
                                                     i ŵ                                                         M  x⊤
                                                                                                                      i ŵ
                                       (t)                                                              (t)
                X                                                                X
        = Cµ+          exp        −x⊤
                                    i ρ
                                      ek                                + Cµ+            exp       −x⊤
                                                                                                     i ρ
                                                                                                       ek
                                                       Kt                                                         Kt
                 i∈S                                                             i∈I\S
                                                       !                                                     
                                                                                                      θ
                   X
                                           (t)
                                                               M         X
                                                                                        (t)      M
        ≤ Cµ+            exp          −x⊤
                                        i ρ
                                          ek               ·      +Cµ+       exp −x⊤ ρ
                                                                                    i k
                                                                                      e       ·         .
                                                               Kt                                 Kt
                   i∈S                                                  i∈I\S
           |                       {z                           }
                   This is the leading term in t.

The last inequality above holds because x⊤ i ŵ = 1 if xi is a support vector (i.e., i ∈ S) but
  ⊤                                               (t)
xi ŵ ≥ θ > 1 otherwise. Since the magnitude of ρk is bounded above by a constant independent
                                              (t)
to t, we can summarize the bound above as L(wk ) = O(1/t); if we plug in t = M J where J is the
                               (M J)
number of cycles, we yield L(w0      ) = O(1/J).
A noteworthy implication of the asymptotic loss convergence bound above is about the vanishing rate
of cycle-averaged forgetting (Definition 3.8) under the same setting of cyclic task occurrence. That
is, we can obtain an asymptotic vanishing rate of the (absolute value of) cycle-averaged forgetting
in terms of the cycle count J as O(1/J 2 ) without any logarithmic factor in its leading term. The
proof is effectively identical to that of our Theorem 3.4. In essence, we use the loss convergence
upper bound L(J) in the middle of the proof: see Equation (45). Thus, letting L(J) = O(1/J) and


                                                                      44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


following the same logic as the rest of the proof leads to the desired result: |Fcyc (J)| = O(1/J 2 ).
Although this bound seems better than that in Theorem 3.4 in terms of the vanishing speed, it inherits
the same problem that the asymptotic O(1/J) loss convergence bound has: it holds only when J is
sufficiently large, thereby may fail to capture the dynamics in early (observable) cycles.

E.4       N ON -A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.3)

In this section, we show non-asymptotic loss convergence, as stated below:
Theorem 3.3. Suppose that Assumptions 3.1, 3.3, and 3.5 hold under the cyclic task ordering
                                                                       ϕ2
setup. Then, if we choose a learning rate satisfying η < 4Kβσ3 (M         ϕ+σmax ) , we have for any
                                                                   max
m ∈ [0 : M − 1] and k ∈ [0 : K − 1] that
                            Pm−1                    !
                                          k                             (0)
        (M J+m)               i=0 |Si | + K |Sm |                   ∥w0 − ŵ ln M J∥2        D1
    L(wk        ) ≤ |S| +                             ℓ(ln M J) +                          +
                                      J                                     2ηKJ               J
                                     Pm−1                                       !
                                                              k
                                            (|Ii | − |Si |) + K (|Im | − |Sm |)
                     + |I| − |S| + i=0                                            ℓ(θ ln M J),
                                                          J

where θ > 1 is the second margin defined in Section 3.1, and D1 is a constant independent to J.

We first present three main lemmas to prove Theorem 3.3. The first one is an extension of Lemma E.2.
When M tasks are given in a cyclic order, the following lemma holds.
Lemma E.7. Let any t ∈ N, l ∈ [0 : K − 1], m ∈ [0 : M − 1] and k ∈ [0 : K − 1] such that l ≥ k
if m = 0 but l ≤ k if m = M . Then, for any (t, l, m, k) satisfying these conditions,
                                                       m−1
                                                                                               !
     (t+m)      (t)                             (t)                     (t)                (t)
                                                       X
                                         (t)                    (t+i)              (t+m)
    wl     − wk + η (K − k + 1)∇L (wk )K                    ∇L        (wk ) + l∇L        (wk )
                                                         i=1
                                                     η 2 (mK + l − k)Kσmax
                                                                       3
                                                                           β       (t)
                                                 ≤                       2
                                                                               ∇L(wk ) ,
                                                   ϕ{1 − η(mK + l − k)σmax β}
                                   (t+m)     (t)             ηKσmax                (t)
                                wl       − wk ≤                          2
                                                                               ∇L(wk ) ,
                                                   ϕ{1 − η(mK + l − k)σmax  β}
                                                                 3
                            (t+m)           (t)             ηKσmax   β             (l)
                        ∇L(wl     ) − ∇L(wk ) ≤                          2
                                                                               ∇L(wk ) .
                                                   ϕ{1 − η(mK + l − k)σmax  β}

Proof. We omitted the proof since there are only a few changes from the proof of Appendix E.1.2.

The second and third lemmas represent two similar versions with respect to the common Gradient
Descent setting, and the Continual Learning setting.
Lemma E.8. Let L be a convex function. Suppose that there exists a β ≥ 0 satisfying that, if

η ∈ 0, β1 , the iterates (w0 , . . . , wt ) defined with an update rule wj+1 := wj − η∇L(wj ) satisfy
                                                                         2
                              L(wj+1 ) ≤ L(wj ) − η (1 − ηβ) ∥∇L(wj )∥

for all j ∈ [0 : t − 1]. Then, for any z ∈ Rd ,
          t−1                         t−1
          X                           X      η                                  2          2
      2         η (L(wj ) − L(z)) −               (L(wj ) − L(wj+1 )) ≤ ∥w0 − z∥ − ∥wt − z∥ .
          j=0                         j=0
                                          1 −  ηβ

Proof. See Appendix E.4.1.

Lemma E.9. Consider the jointly separable continual linear classification problem with cyclic
task ordering. Assume that ℓ(·) is convex and β-smooth, there by the total training loss L
                2
is a convex & σmax β-smooth function. Assume that there exists β ′ ≥ 0 satisfying that: if


                                                    45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             1                 1                        (0)             (0)     (1)             (M J+M )
η ≤ min{ 2M Kσ 2             ,
                            β 2Kβ ′ }, the iterates   w 0   , . . . , w K−1 , w 0   , . . . , w K−1        defined with
                      max
                       (p)            (p)                         (p)                  (p+1)       (p)
the update rules wq+1 := wq − η∇L(p) (wq ) and w0                                              := wK satisfy
                                                                                                                          2
                      (M j+M +m)                     (M j+m)                                                (M j+m)
               L(wk                      ) ≤ L(wk                     ) − ηK (1 − ηKβ ′ ) ∇L(wk                       )

for each j ∈ [0 : J − 1], m ∈ [0 : M − 1], and k ∈ [0 : K − 1]. Then, for any z ∈ Rd ,
              J−1
                          (M j+M +m)
              X
        2           ηK L(wk          ) − L(z)
              j=0

                             4        J−1
                      2ηM Kσmax  β    X     ηK
                                                        (M j+m)        (M j+M +m)

              −    2           2    2            ′
                                                     L(wk       ) − L(wk          )
                  ϕ (1 − ηM Kσmax β) j=0 1 − ηKβ
                                 2                                    2
                    (m)                     (M J+m)
          ≤ wk            −z         − wk                 −z              .

Proof. See Appendix E.4.2.

Note that Lemma E.9 holds only when jointly separable tasks are given cyclic, while Lemma E.8
always holds.
We follow the process of Appendix E.1 to show that it satisfies the condition in Lemma E.9. Since L
      2
is a σmax β-smooth function, For all j ∈ [0 : J − 1], m ∈ [0 : M − 1], k ∈ [0 : K − 1], we get
                              2                              2
    (M j+M +m)               σmax β
                                 (M j+m)
                                       (M j+M +m)    (M j+m)
L(wk                 ) − L(wk        wk      )−   − wk
                                2
      (M j+m) ⊤  (M j+M +m)     (M j+m)
≤ ∇L(wk      ) (wk          − wk        )
            (M j+m) ⊤           (M j+M +m)             (M j+m)                                 (M j+m)                    (M j+m)
= ∇L(wk               ) (wk                      − wk                         − ηK∇L(wk                  ) + ηK∇L(wk                ))
                                     2
                      (M j+m)                         (M j+m)                      (M j+M +m)            (M j+m)                    (M j+m)
≤ −ηK ∇L(wk                      )       + ∇L(wk                          )       wk               − wk            + ηK∇L(wk                    ) .

By Lemma E.7,
                                  2
          (M j+M +m)             σmax β        (ησmax K)2
                                         (M j+m)                      (M j+m)
                                                                                2
    L(wk                    ) − L(wk    · 2          )−2
                                                                 ∇L(w k       )
                                    2     ϕ (1 − ηM Kσmax  β)2
                        2      2      2 3                        2
               (M j+m)       η M K σmax β              (M j+m)
     ≤ −ηK ∇L(wk       ) +                2
                                                  ∇L(w k       )   .
                           ϕ(1 − ηM Kσmax    β)

                                ϕ2                     1
Given that η ≤ 4Kβσ3                             < 2M Kσ 2                    ,
                            max (M ϕ+σmax )                       max β

        (M j+M +m)                    (M j+m)
   L(wk       ) − L(wk      )
                          3                    4

                       M σmax β               σmax β                         2
                                                                   (M j+m)
   ≤ −ηK{1 − ηK                2
                                      +  2             2  2
                                                             } ∇L(wk       )
                  ϕ(1 − ηM Kσmax β) 2ϕ (1 − ηM Kσmax β)
                                 3

                 2(M ϕ + σmax )σmax β                   2
                                             (M j+m)
   ≤ −ηK 1 − ηK                         ∇L(wk        )
                         ϕ2
                                                              2
                                            (M j+m)
   = −ηK (1 − ηKβ ′ ) ∇L(wk                               )       ,                                                                      (34)

                          2(M ϕ+σ         )σ 3   β
where we set β ′ :=         max
                            ϕ2
                                   max
                                       .
Since Equation (34) holds for all j ∈ [0 : J − 1], m ∈ [0 : M − 1], k ∈ [0 : K − 1] and η < 1/2Kβ ′
is given, by Lemma E.9, we get
              J−1
                          (M j+M +m)
              X
          2         ηK L(wk          ) − L(z)
              j=0


                                                                          46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       4         J−1
                2ηM Kσmax  β     X      ηK
                                                     (M j+m)         (M j+M +m)

           − 2                                   L(wk        ) − L(w k          )
                         2
            ϕ (1 − ηM Kσmax  β)2 j=0 1 − ηKβ ′
                                   2                                       2
                     (m)                          (M J+m)
              ≤ wk         −z          − wk                      −z            .                                     (35)
                1          1                                          (M j+m)
Given that η < 2Kβ ′ < 2M Kβσ 2                     and L(wk                       ) is decreasing,
                                              max

                          4
                   2ηM Kσmax  β        ηK
                                                    (M j+m)          (M j+M +m)

                                   ·            L(w k       ) −  L(w k          )
              ϕ2 (1 − ηM Kσmax
                            2   β)2 1 − ηKβ ′
                                         2
                                      8σ
                                                      (M j+m)          (M j+M +m)

                                   ≤ max   ηK    L(w  k       ) − L(w  k          )  .                               (36)
                                       ϕ2
Also,
        2                                                2
      8σmax        (M J+m)               (M J+m)     8σmax         (m)
             ηKL(wk        ) + 2ηKJL(w   k       ) −        ηKL(wk )
       ϕ2                                              ϕ2
                                       J
         8σ 2         (M J+m)
                                      X        (M j+m)
                                                              2
                                                           8σmax       (m)
      ≤ max    ηKL(w  k       ) + 2ηK      L(w k       ) −       ηKL(wk )
          ϕ2                          j=1
                                                             ϕ 2

               J−1                                       2      J−1
               X               (M j+M +m)              8σmax    X       (M j+m)         (M j+M +m)

      = 2ηK          L(wk                      )−            ηK     L(wk        ) − L(w k          )  .              (37)
               j=0
                                                        ϕ2      j=0


Combining Equations (35), (36), and (37), we obtain
                               8σ 2
            (M J+m)                                  (M J+m)         (m)
2ηKJ L(wk           ) − L(z) + max        ηK    L(w k        ) − L(w k   )
                                     ϕ2
    J−1                                   8σ 2          J−1
                                                        X
                  (M j+M +m)                                      (M j+m)          (M j+M +m)
    X
 ≤2     ηK L(wk               ) − L(z) − max        ηK        L(w k        ) − L(w k          )
    j=0
                                               ϕ2       j=0
                     2                                  2
        (m)                      (M J+m)
 ≤ wk         −z         − wk                     −z        .                                                        (38)

Now we examine the loss change in a cycle. For any j ∈ [0 : M − 1], l ∈ [0 : K − 1],
                                                                                     2                 2
                                  (j)                   (j)                        ησmax β         (j)
                          Lj (wl+1 ) ≤ Lj (wl ) − η(1 −                                    ) ∇Lj (wl ) .
                                                                                      2
              1                         (j)
Since η < 2M Kβσ 2             , Lj (wl ) decreases. Therefore for any p ∈ [0 : M − 1], q ∈ [0 : K − 1],
                         max

                                                                q
                           (p)                                           (p)
                                                                X
           2ηq(Lp (wq+1 ) − Lp (z)) ≤ 2                           η Lp (wl ) − Lp (z)
                                                                l=1
                    q−1                        q−1
                              (p)                        (p)          (p)
                    X                          X
                 =2    η Lp (wl ) − Lp (z) + 2    η Lp (wl+1 ) − Lp (wl )
                          l=0                                                      l=0
                    q−1                      t−1
                    X         (p)
                                            X                                           η        (p)        (p)

                 ≤2    η Lp (wl ) − Lp (z) −                                                Lp (wl ) − Lp (wl+1 )
                                                                                     1 − ηβ
                          l=0                                                  l=0
                                         2                             2
                          (p)
                 ≤       w0 − z               −     wq(p) − z              ,
                                  1
where in the third line, we use 1−ηβ < 2, and in the last line, we use Lemma E.8.
By summing up, we obtain
m−1                                                         2        2
               (p)                     (m)             (0)      (m)
X
      2ηK Lp (wK ) − Lp (z) + 2ηk Lm (wk ) − Lm (z) ≤ w0 − z − wk − z .
p=0
                                                                                                                     (39)

                                                                           47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                (m)                        (0)
At last, L(wk ) is bounded by L(w0 ) as follows:
                                                         σ2 β                   2
          (m)       (0)         (0)      (m)       (0)              (m)     (0)
     L(wk ) − L(w0 ) ≤ ∇L(w0 )⊤ wk − w0                  + max     wk − w0
                                                             2
                                              2

                                    (0)     σ max β      (m)   (0)      (m)     (0)
                        ≤    ∇L(w0 ) +                wk − w0          wk − w0
                                                2
                                          3

                                      ηKσmax  β               ηKσmax                    2
                                                                                    (0)
                        ≤ 1+                   2                     2
                                                                             ∇L(w0 )
                                ϕ(1 − ηM Kσmax β) ϕ(1 − ηM Kσmax β)
                                                        2
                                                 (0)
                                = D0 ∇L(w0 )                 ,                                            (40)
where we use the smoothness in the first inequality, we use Cauchy-Schwarz in the second inequal-
                                             (m)     (0)        ηKσmax              (0)
ity, and in the last line, we use the fact wk − w0        ≤ ϕ(1−ηM    2
                                                                    Kσmax β) ∇L(w0 ) held by
                                           3

                                       ηKσmax β          ηKσmax
Lemma E.7. We set D0 := 1 + ϕ(1−ηM Kσ        2   β) ϕ(1−ηM Kσ 2 β) .
                                                       max            max

Combining Equations (38), (39), and (40), we obtain
                                                 m−1
                      (M J+m)                  1 X           1 q
                L(wk            ) ≤ L(z) +           Lp (z) + · Lm (z)
                                               J p=0         J K
                                                                            2                     2
                                                       (0)            (0)               (0)
                                    4σ 2 L(w0 ) + D0 ∇L(w0 )                        w0 − z
                                   + max                                        +                     .
                                     ϕ2             J                                   2ηKJ

Now let us choose z := ŵ ln M J. Using the fact Lj (ŵ ln M J) ≤ |Sj | ℓ(ln M J) +
(|Ij | − |Sj |) ℓ(θ ln M J) (since ℓ is monotonically decreasing), we can finish the proof with
          4σ 2                                   3

                                            ηKσmax   β              ηKσmax                         2
                          (0)                                                                (0)
  D1 := max          L(w  0   ) +   1 +                                               ∇L(w   0   )     .
             ϕ2                         ϕ(1 − ηM Kσmax2  β) ϕ(1 − ηM Kσmax    2   β)

E.4.1     P ROOF OF L EMMA E.8
Here is the restatement of the lemma.
Lemma E.8. Let L be a convex function. Suppose that there exists a β ≥ 0 satisfying that, if

η ∈ 0, β1 , the iterates (w0 , . . . , wt ) defined with an update rule wj+1 := wj − η∇L(wj ) satisfy
                                                                                2
                                L(wj+1 ) ≤ L(wj ) − η (1 − ηβ) ∥∇L(wj )∥
for all j ∈ [0 : t − 1]. Then, for any z ∈ Rd ,
        t−1                          t−1
        X                            X      η                                  2          2
    2         η (L(wj ) − L(z)) −                (L(wj ) − L(wj+1 )) ≤ ∥w0 − z∥ − ∥wt − z∥ .
        j=0                          j=0
                                         1 −  ηβ

This is a well-known property of gradient descent iterates applied to a smooth convex objective
function. However, we contain the proof for completeness.
For any j ≥ 0 and z ∈ Rd ,
                          2                2                                                  2
              ∥wj+1 − z∥ = ∥wj − z∥ + 2η⟨∇L(wj ), z − wj ⟩ + η 2 ∥∇L(wj )∥
                                     2                                              2
                              ≤ ∥wj ∥ + 2η(L(z) − L(wj )) + η 2 ∥∇L(wj )∥
                                     2                          η
                              ≤ ∥wj ∥ + 2η(L(z) − L(wj )) +        (L(wj ) − L(wj+1 )) ,
                                                            1 − ηβ
where the first line comes from convexity and the second line comes from the condition of our lemma.
Summing up the inequality over all j ∈ [0 : t − 1], we eventually get the desired result:
        t−1                          t−1
        X                            X      η                                  2          2
    2         η (L(wj ) − L(z)) −                (L(wj ) − L(wj+1 )) ≤ ∥w0 − z∥ − ∥wt − z∥ .
        j=0                          j=0
                                         1 −  ηβ


                                                                 48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.4.2     P ROOF OF L EMMA E.9
Here is the restatement of the lemma.
Lemma E.9. Consider the jointly separable continual linear classification problem with cyclic
task ordering. Assume that ℓ(·) is convex and β-smooth, there by the total training loss L
is a convex & σmax 2
                     β-smooth function.  Assume that there exists β ′ ≥ 0 satisfying        that: if
                 1        1                 (0)         (0)    (1)          (M J+M )
η ≤ min{ 2M Kσ2 β , 2Kβ ′ }, the iterates w0 , . . . , wK−1 , w0 , . . . , wK−1        defined with
                      max
                         (p)            (p)                  (p)            (p+1)           (p)
the update rules wq+1 := wq − η∇L(p) (wq ) and w0                                    := wK satisfy
                                                                                                                       2
                       (M j+M +m)                     (M j+m)                                            (M j+m)
               L(wk                      ) ≤ L(wk               ) − ηK (1 − ηKβ ′ ) ∇L(wk                          )

for each j ∈ [0 : J − 1], m ∈ [0 : M − 1], and k ∈ [0 : K − 1]. Then, for any z ∈ Rd ,
              J−1
                          (M j+M +m)
              X
          2         ηK L(wk          ) − L(z)
              j=0

                             4        J−1
                      2ηM Kσmax  β    X     ηK
                                                        (M j+m)        (M j+M +m)

              −    2           2    2            ′
                                                     L(wk       ) − L(wk          )
                  ϕ (1 − ηM Kσmax β) j=0 1 − ηKβ
                                   2                            2
                    (m)                         (M J+m)
           ≤ wk           −z           − wk               −z        .

Without loss of generality, let us assume m = 0, k = 0.
For any j and z ∈ Rd ,
                                                     M −1 K−1                                  2
                          2
      (M j+M )                         (M j)
                                                     X    X
   w0               −z           = w0           −η              ∇Lp (wq(M j+p) ) − z
                                                     p=0 q=0

                                    M −1 K−1                                                             M −1 K−1                         2
                         2               XD                                                E
         (M j)                                                              (M j)
                                    X                                                                    X    X
  =     w0     −z            + 2η                    ∇Lp (wq(M j+p) ), z − w0                  +η   2
                                                                                                                       ∇Lp (wq(M j+p) )
                                       p=0 q=0                                                            p=0 q=0

                         2          M −1 K−1
                                         XD                                                    E
          (M j)
                                    X
  = w0            −z         + 2η                    ∇Lp (wq(M j+p) ), z − wq(M j+p)
                                       p=0 q=0

         M −1 K−1                                                                        M −1 K−1                            2
         X    XD                                        (M j)
                                                                            E            X    X
 + 2η                    ∇Lp (wq(M j+p) ), wq(M j+p) − w0                       +η   2
                                                                                                        ∇Lp (wq(M j+p) )         . (41)
         p=0 q=0                                                                          p=0 q=0

By convexity,
      M
      X −1 K−1
           XD                                                    E                        M
                                                                                          X −1 K−1
                                                                                               X
                     ∇Lp (wq(M j+p) ), z − wq(M j+p)                    ≤ M KL(z) −                       Lp (wq(M j+p) ).         (42)
      p=0 q=0                                                                              p=0 q=0

Combined with Equations (41) and (42), we get
                             2                        2                         M −1 K−1
        (M j+M )                        (M j)
                                                                                X    X
   w0               −z           − w0           −z        ≤ 2ηKL(z) − 2η                       Lp (wq(M j+p) )
                                                                                 p=0 q=0

          M −1 K−1                                                                       M −1 K−1                            2
                                                       (M j)
          X    X                                                                         X    X
  + 2η                 ⟨∇Lp (wq(M j+p) ), wq(M j+p) − w0     ⟩ + η2                                     ∇Lp (wq(M j+p) )         . (43)
          p=0 q=0                                                                        p=0 q=0

    2
By σmax β-smoothness,
          M
          X −1 K−1
               X
                       ⟨∇Lp (wq(M j+p) ), z − wq(M j+p) ⟩
          p=0 q=0


                                                                    49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      M −1 K−1       2     M −1 K−1                                                                      2
                                      X    X
                                         (M j+p)    σmax β X X
                  ≥ KL(z) −         Lp (wq       )−                                                           z − wq(M j+p)                  .
                            p=0 q=0
                                                       2   p=0 q=0
                                                                              (M j+M )
Apply smoothness on Equation (41), and let z := w0                                           then we get
                                          2
              (M j)          (M j+M )                              (M j+M )
  0 ≥ w0              − w0                    + 2ηKL(w0                          )
             M −1 K−1                                               M −1 K−1                                                 2
                                                                                           (M j+M )
             X    X                                                 X    X
      − 2η                   Lp (wq(M j+p) ) − ησmax
                                                 2
                                                     β                                 w0             − wq(M j+p)
             p=0 q=0                                                p=0 q=0

             M −1 K−1                                                                                M −1 K−1                                        2
             X    XD                                                             (M j)
                                                                                         E           X    X
      + 2η                    ∇Lp (wq(M j+p) ), wq(M j+p) − w0                               + η2                 ∇Lp (wq(M j+p) )                       .
             p=0 q=0                                                                                  p=0 q=0
                                                                                                                                                     (44)
Combined with Equations (43) and (44),
                                 2                           2
             (M j+M )                         (M j)                                                       (M j+M )
         w0              −z          − w0             −z         ≤ 2ηKL(z) − 2ηKL(w0                                 )
                                              2                    M −1 K−1                                              2
                 (M j)         (M j+M )                                                  (M j+M )
                                                                   X    X
                                                      2
        − w0             − w0                     + ησmax β                           w0             − wq(M j+p)
                                                                   p=0 q=0
                                                                                                      2
                          (M j+M )                                       (M j)          (M j+M )
        ≤ 2ηKL(z) − 2ηKL(w0        )−                               w0           − w0
                                                                     2                       M −1 K−1                                            2
                                      (M j)           (M j+M )                                                 (M j)
                                                                                             X    X
                2                                                             2
        + 2ηM Kσmax β w0                      − w0                       + 2ησmax β                         w0           − wq(M j+p)
                                                                                             p=0 q=0
                                                                                     M −1 K−1                                    2
                                              (M j+M )                                                (M j)
                                                                                     X    X
                                                                  2
        ≤ 2ηKL(z) − 2ηKL(w0                                ) + 2ησmax β                             w0        − wq(M j+p)            ,
                                                                                     p=0 q=0
                                      1
where in the last line we use η ≤ 2M Kσ 2                          . Finally, by Lemma E.7,
                                                           max β

                         2                            2
      (M j+M )                       (M j)
 w0              −z     −z   − w0

                (M j+M )
                                2η 3 M K 3 σmax
                                             4
                                                 β          (M j)
                                                                    2
≤ 2ηK L(z) − L(w0        ) +                           ∇L(w 0     )
                            ϕ2 (1 − ηM Kσmax   2  β)2
                                           4

                (M j+M )
                                 2ηM Kσmax β             ηK
                                                                      (M j)         (M j+M )

≤ 2ηK L(z) − L(w0        ) − 2                                    L(w 0     ) − L(w 0        )   .
                            ϕ (1 − ηM Kσmax    2  β)2 1 − ηKβ ′
By adding all j ∈ {0, · · · , J − 1}, we can finish the proof.

E.5     F ORGETTING A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.4)

We prove Theorem 3.4 here, which is restated below for readability.
Theorem 3.4. Suppose Assumption 3.1 and let ℓ(u) = ln(1 + e−u ) be the logistic loss, which
                                                                                     ϕ2
satisfies Assumptions 3.3, 3.4, and 3.5. If the learning rate satisfies η < 4Kβσ3 (M    ϕ+σmax ) , then
                                                                                 max
the cycle-averaged forgetting Fcyc (J) for cycle J satisfies the following upper and lower bounds:
                                         +                                           −
                                P                                           P
                                   p̸=q Ap,q                                  p̸=q Ap,q
              −ηK · {L(J)}2 ·                 ≤ Fcyc (J) ≤ ηK · {L(J)}2 ·               ,
                                     M                                          M
                    2
where L(J) = O lnJ J and A+                         x⊤        −
                                                                                x⊤
                                             P                            P
                                 p,q :=               i xj , Ap,q :=              i xj .
                                                          (i,j)∈Ip ×Iq                              (i,j)∈Ip ×Iq
                                                            x⊤i xj >0                                 x⊤i xj <0


By Theorem 3.3, the joint training loss at cycle J is bounded as
                                                              (M J+m)
                                                          L(wk                ) ≤ L(J)                                                               (45)


                                                                         50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where                                                                   !
                                                    (0)                        2
                                                  ∥w0 − ŵ ln M J∥2

         1              |I| − |S|       1                                     ln J
 L(J) :=         |S| +        θ−1
                                    1+        +                     + D1 = O       ,
         J             (M J)           MJ               2ηK                     J
              2

           4σmax                            2
                         (0)           (0)
   D1 :=            L(w0 ) + D0 ∇L(w0 )         .
             ϕ2
Therefore, the following holds:
                                                                            (M J+m)
         ∀s ∈ I, ∀m ∈ [0 : M − 1], ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1] : x⊤    s wk        ≥ ℓ−1 (L(t)) .
Now, we analyze the change of each task in one cycle. For the upper bound,
                   (M J+M )                (M J+m)
            Lm (w0            ) − Lm (wK             )
                         M −1 K−1
                                                (M J+M ) ⊤
                         X    X
                ≤ −η                    ∇Lm (w0               ) ∇Lp (wq(M J+p) )                      (46)
                        p=m+1 q=0
                         M −1 K−1
                                                                (M J+M )
                         X    X            X
                ≤ −η                               ℓ′ (x⊤
                                                        i w0               )ℓ′ (x⊤  (M J+p)
                                                                                 j wq       )x⊤
                                                                                              i xj
                        p=m+1 q=0 (i,j)∈Im ×Ip
                                     x⊤
                                      i xj <0

                         M −1 K−1
                         X    X           ′ −1       2             X
                ≤ −η                     ℓ ℓ (L(J))                            x⊤
                                                                                i xj                  (47)
                        p=m+1 q=0                              (i,j)∈Im ×Ip
                                                                  x⊤
                                                                   i xj <0

                                        M
                                        X −1       X
                ≤ −ηK{L(J)}2                                  x⊤
                                                               i xj ,                                 (48)
                                       p=m+1 (i,j)∈Im ×Ip
                                                x⊤
                                                 i xj <0

where in (46) we use convexity, in (47) we use the condition that ℓ′ is a negative function monoton-
ically increasing to zero. Equation (48) holds by the fact ∀x : ℓ′ (x) = ℓlog ′ (x) ≥ − exp(−x) and
∀x : ℓ−1 (x) = ℓlog −1 (x) ≥ − log(x). Likewise, we can get a lower bound as follows:
                   (M J+M )                (M J+m)
             Lm (w0           ) − Lm (wK             )
                         M −1 K−1
                                                (M J+m) ⊤
                         X    X
                ≥ −η                    ∇Lm (wk               ) ∇Lp (wq(M J+p) )
                        p=m+1 q=0
                         M −1 K−1
                                                                (M J+m)
                         X    X            X
                ≥ −η                                 ℓ′ (x⊤
                                                          i wk            )ℓ′ (x⊤  (M J+p)
                                                                                j wq       )x⊤
                                                                                             i xj
                        p=m+1 q=0 (i,j)∈Im ×Ip
                                     x⊤
                                      i xj >0

                         M −1 K−1
                         X    X           ′ −1        2             X
                ≥ −η                     ℓ ℓ (L(J))                            x⊤
                                                                                i xj
                        p=m+1 q=0                               (i,j)∈Im ×Ip
                                                                   x⊤
                                                                    i xj >0

                                        M
                                        X −1       X
                ≥ −ηK{L(J)}2                                  x⊤
                                                               i xj .
                                       p=m+1 (i,j)∈Im ×Ip
                                                x⊤
                                                 i xj >0

Define                      X                                               X
              A+
               p,q :=                  x⊤
                                        i xj ≥ 0     and      A−
                                                               p,q :=                    x⊤
                                                                                          i xj ≥ 0.
                        (i,j)∈Ip ×Iq                                    (i,j)∈Ip ×Iq
                          x⊤i xj >0                                       x⊤i xj <0

Since
                               M
                               X −1 M
                                    X −1           X                     X
                                                               x⊤
                                                                i xj =          A+
                                                                                 p,q ,
                                m=0 p=m+1 (i,j)∈Im ×Ip                   p̸=q
                                             x⊤
                                              i xj >0


                                                         51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               M
                               X −1 M
                                    X −1      X                   X
                           −                            x⊤
                                                         i xj =          A−
                                                                          p,q ,
                               m=0 p=m+1 (i,j)∈Im ×Ip             p̸=q
                                            x⊤
                                             i xj <0


we can conclude
                   P       +           M −1                                       P     −
               2     p̸=q Ap,q     1 X (M J+m)                                    p̸=q Ap,q
  −ηK{L(J)} ·                    ≤       F     (M J + M ) ≤ ηK{L(J)}2 ·                       .
                       M           M m=0                                              M


                                                52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4: R ANDOM TASK O RDERING , J OINTLY S EPARABLE
F.1   A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1)

Let us restate the theorem here for the sake of readability.
                          (t)
Theorem 4.1. Let {wk }k∈[0:K−1],t≥0 be the sequence of GD iterates (2) from any starting point
  (0)
w0 , where tasks are given randomly. Under Assumptions 3.1 and 3.3, if the learning rate satisfies
         2
η < βσ2ϕ4 , then the following statements hold with probability 1:
        max


                                           (t)
1. Loss converges to zero: lim L(wk ) = 0, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1].
                                t→∞
                                                                             (t)
2. All data points are eventually classified correctly: lim yi x⊤
                                                                i wk = 0, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1], i ∈ I.
                                                        t→∞
                                                  P∞ PK−1          (t)    (t)
3. Square sum of the change of weight is finite: t=0 k=0 ∥wk+1 − wk ∥2 < ∞.
               2
Since L is a σmax   β-smooth function, we get
      h            i       h           i
             (t)                   (t)
    E L(wk+1 ) − E L(wk )
          h                                  i σ2 β                                2

                    (t)        (t)       (t)                       (t)        (t)
     ≤ E ∇L(wk )⊤ (wk+1 − wk ) + max E wk+1 − wk
                                                     2
          h h                                            ii σ 2 β                                 2

                        (t) ⊤      (t)       (t)     (t)         max             (t)         (t)
     = E E ∇L(wk ) (wk+1 − wk ) | wk                        +            E wk+1 − wk
                                                                   2
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                           2
          h h                                            ii σ 2 β
                        (t)        (t)       (t)     (t)                                              (t)
                                                                                  X
     = E E ∇L(wk )⊤ (wk+1 − wk ) | wk                       + max η 2 E               zs(t) ℓ′ (x⊤
                                                                                                  s wk )xs
                                                                                                             
                                                                   2
                                                                                  s∈I
                                                                                         
                                                                                        2
                                           2

           η                       2     σ      β
                             (t)                                              (t)
                                                          X
     = − E ∇L(wk )                     + max η 2 E            zs(t) ℓ′ (x⊤
                                                                          s wk )xs
                                                                                          
          M                                  2
                                                           s∈I
                                                      "                              #
                                           4

           η                       2     σmax   β 2 X h (t) ′ ⊤ (t) i2
                             (t)
     ≤ − E ∇L(wk )                     +          η E          zs ℓ (xs wk )
          M                                  2
                                                         s∈I
                                         σ 4 β X h (t) 2 i h ′ ⊤ (t) 2 i

           η                       2
                             (t)
     = − E ∇L(wk )                     + max η 2          E (zs ) E ℓ (xs wk )
          M                                  2
                                                    s∈I
                                                      "                      #
                                           4

           η                       2     σmax   β 2 X ′ ⊤ (t) 2
                             (t)
     = − E ∇L(wk )                     +          η E        ℓ (xs wk ) ,
          M                                2M
                                                        s∈I

         (t)
where zs is a variable which is 1 when xPs is in the task on stage
                                                                 pPt, or 0 otherwise. The second
inequality comes from the fact ∀λs ∈ R :        λ   x    ≤ σ                2
                                            s∈I   s  s 2     max      s∈I λs .

By applying Lemma E.1, which only depends on the total dataset (but not on the task ordering), we
obtain
                                                          4

             h        i     h         i    η           σmax   β                    2
                 (t)              (t)                                         (t)
           E L(wk+1 ) − E L(wk ) ≤ −             1−η             E ∇L(wk )
                                           M              2ϕ2

                                           η                               2
                                                       ′′             (t)
                                        = − (1 − ηβ )E ∇L(wk )                 ,             (49)
                                           M
                  4
                 σmax β
where β ′′ :=                           1
                  2ϕ2 . Given that η < β ′′ ,
                                                  h         i
        ∞ K−1
           X                L(w(0) ) − lim     E   L(w
                                                       (t)
                                                           )           (0)
       X            (t)
                        2      0          t→∞          0        M L(w0 )
              E ∇L(wk )    ≤          η        ′′
                                                              ≤               < ∞.
       t=0                            M (1 − ηβ )               η(1 − ηβ ′′ )
               k=0



                                                        53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                            P∞ PK−1                                      2
                                                                                                         (t)
Thus, by Fubini-Tonelli’s theorem, we have E                                        t=0     k=0      ∇L(wk )                     < ∞. Since a non-
negative random variable with a finite mean is finite almost surely (because of Markov inequality),
            P∞ PK−1                     2
                                   (t)
we have that t=0 k=0 ∇L(wk ) is bounded with probability 1. The boundedness of infinite
                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                             (t)
sum of nonzero elements implies ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1] : limt→0 ∇L(wk )                                                            = 0. Combined with
                                    (t)
Lemma E.1, we obtain limt→0 ℓ′ (x⊤                                           ′
                                 i wk ) = 0, ∀i ∈ I, k ∈ [0 : K − 1]. Since ℓ (u) → 0 only when
         ⊤ (t)                                                       (t)
u → ∞, xi wk → ∞, ∀i ∈ I, k ∈ [0 : K − 1]. And limt→∞ L(wk ) = 0, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1].
Finally, followed by
                                               s                                              v
                                                     Xh                               i2      uX h             i2
                         (t)                                         (t)                                   (t)
                     ∇L(wk )            ≥ϕ                   ℓ′ (x⊤
                                                                  i wk )                   ≥ ϕt    ℓ′ (x⊤
                                                                                                        i wk )
                                                                                              u
                                                     i∈I                                            i∈I(t)


                           ϕ          X                     (t)                       ϕ              (t)           (t)
                    ≥                         ℓ′ (x⊤
                                                   i wk )xi =                              η −1 wk+1 − wk                    .
                        σmax                                                        σmax
                                     i∈I(t)

                 P∞ PK−1                                               2
                                              (t)            (t)
We obtain that       t=0        k=0      wk+1 − wk                         < ∞ with probability 1.

F.2     D IRECTIONAL C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2)
                                                                                                                                 (t)
In this section, we prove Theorem 4.2 and further discuss the convergence of ρk beyond bounded-
ness.
                               (t)
Theorem 4.2. Let {wk }k∈[0:K−1],t≥0 be the sequence of GD iterates (2) from any starting point
  (0)
w0 , where tasks are given randomly. Suppose that Assumptions 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4 hold. Then,
                                                           (t)
under the same learning rate condition as in Theorem 4.1, wk will behave as:
                                                           (t)                              (t)
                                                          wk = ln (t) ŵ + ρk ,
          (t)
where ∥ρk ∥ stays bounded as t grows.

We only need to prove that the two following lemmas still hold in random order.
Lemma F.1. When tasks are given randomly, there exists w̌, mt,k ∈ Rd the following almost surely
holds for all t ∈ N, k ∈ [0 : K − 1]:
                    t−1
                    X   1 X                           k X            K     t      K
                K                       αs xs +              αs xs =   log( )ŵ +   w̌ + mt,k ,                                               (50)
                    u=1
                          u                           t              M     M      M
                              s∈S (u)                    (t)
                                                           s∈S
                                                            mt,K := mt+1,0 ,
such that ∥mt,k ∥ = o(t−0.5+ϵ ), and ∥mt,k+1 − mt,k ∥ = O(t−1 ) for all k ∈ [0 : K − 1], ϵ > 0,
and w̌ only depends on the order of tasks and constant with respect to t.

Proof. See Appendix F.2.1.

                                                                                    (t)       (t)
Using Lemma F.1, we set mt,k and w̌ and define ρk and rk as we did in cyclic order. That is,
                                (t)                              (t)
                              wk = ln (t) ŵ + ρk

                                                   K            M         (t)
                                 = ln (t) ŵ + ln     ŵ + w̃ +   mt,k + rk ,
                                                   M            K
and
                                                    (t)          (t+1)               (t)     (t+1)
                                               ρK = ρ0                     ,        rK = r0           ,


                                                                               54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where w̃ is the solution of
                                                                                                                    (0)
                                       ∀i ∈ S : η exp (−x⊤
                                                         i w̃) = αi ,                               P̄ (w̃ − w0 ) = 0.

which is unique under Assumption 3.2. Then by the definition,

         (t)     (t)  M K           K
        rk = wk −             log      t ŵ + mt,k − w̃
                      K M           M
                                                                  
                             t−1
                 (t)  M     X    1  X              k  X
             = wk −        K                αs xs +          αs xs  − log K ŵ − w̃ + w̌.
                      K      u=1
                                  u     (u)
                                                    t    (t)     s∈S                           s∈S

                                                                                    (t)
Then we can get the second primary lemma of rk .
                                                                                                                                    2
Lemma F.2. Under Assumption 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4, if learning rate is η < βσ2ϕ4                                                       , then
                                                                                                                                 max


          1. ∃t̃, C1 , C2 > 0 such that ∀t > t̃,
                                         (t)             (t)         (t)
                                   (rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk ≤ C1 t−θ + C2 t−1−0.5µ̃ , ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1].

                                                                                                              (t)
          2. Moreover, for all ϵ1 > 0, ∃t̃∗ , C3 > 0 such that if P rk                                               ≥ ϵ1 and S (t) ̸= ∅,
                                               (t)             (t)          (t)
                                             (rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk ≤ −C3 t−1 , ∀t > t̃∗ , k ∈ [0 : K − 1].

Proof. Only the learning rate is different from the cyclic case. Therefore see Appendix E.2.2.

                                                                                                                                                   (t)
The remaining step is the same as the proof of Theorem 3.2. To sum up, we can set ak as
                       2                                                    2
    (t)        (t)                     (t)           (t)             (t)
 rk+1 − rk                 = wk+1 − wk − ak                                     . Then by Lemma F.1, ∃t1 such that ∀t ≥ t1 , ∀k ∈ [0 :
                (t)
K − 1] : ak                 ≤ t−1 .

For all T ≥ t1 .
T K−1                                   2        T K−1                                                    2
                 (t)             (t)                                       (t)          (t)         (t)
X X                                              X X
               rk+1 − rk                     =                       wk+1 − wk − ak
t=t1 k=0                                         t=t1 k=0
    T K−1                                        2       T K−1                                                      T K−1               2
                           (t)           (t)                                      (t)         (t)         (t)                    (t)
    X X                                                  X X                                                        X X
=                    wk+1 − wk                       +                     2(wk − wk+1 )⊤ ak +                                 ak
    t=t1 k=0                                             t=t1 k=0                                                   t=t1 k=0
                         v
  T K−1             2
                         u T K−1             T K−1
                                           2 X          2   T K−1      2
         (t)    (t)               (t)  (t)          (t)            (t)
  X X                    uX X                  X            X X
≤       wk+1 − wk     + 2t       wk − wk+1         ak     +       ak
    t=t1 k=0                                                    t=t1 k=0                                      t=t1 k=0                  t=t1 k=0
                         v
  T K−1             2
                         u T K−1             T K−1
                                           2 X           T K−1
         (t)    (t)               (t)  (t)
  X X                    uX X                  X         X X
≤       wk+1 − wk     + 2t       wk − wk+1         t−2 +       t−2
    t=t1 k=0                                                    t=t1 k=0                                      t=t1 k=0           t=t1 k=0

< ∞.                                                                                                                                                 (51)
                                                                                                                               PT           −2
We use Cauchy-Schwarz inequality for the first inequality and the fact that t=t1 t < ∞ and
                               2
PT PK−1         (t)       (t)
  t=t1  k=0    wk − wk+1 < ∞ by Theorem 4.1.
                                                   P∞
Combined with Lemma F.2 and the fact that ∀c > 1 : t=1 t−c < ∞, we almost surely get
             2            2    t−1 K−1
                                   X   (u) 2               2

         (t)        (t1 )                             (u)
                               X
        r0     − r0          =          rk+1 − rk
                                                     u=t1 k=0
                                                     t−1 K−1
                                                         X                                                                          2

                                                                              (u)    (u)   (u)                        (u)    (u)
                                                     X
                                               =                           2(rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk +                       rk+1 − rk              < ∞.
                                                     u=t1 k=0


                                                                                    55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2.1   P ROOF OF L EMMA F.1
Here we restate the lemma for the sake of readability.
Lemma F.1. When tasks are given randomly, there exists w̌, mt,k ∈ Rd the following almost surely
holds for all t ∈ N, k ∈ [0 : K − 1]:
                 t−1
                 X   1 X                        k X            K     t      K
             K                        αs xs +          αs xs =   log( )ŵ +   w̌ + mt,k ,        (50)
                 u=1
                       u                        t              M     M      M
                            s∈S (u)                (t)
                                                  s∈S
                                                      mt,K := mt+1,0 ,
such that ∥mt,k ∥ = o(t−0.5+ϵ ), and ∥mt,k+1 − mt,k ∥ = O(t−1 ) for all k ∈ [0 : K − 1], ϵ > 0,
and w̌ only depends on the order of tasks and constant with respect to t.

We define an (i.i.d.) random variable(s) zi := 1{xi ∈ I (t) }. Note that E[zi ] = M
                                                           (t)                        1    (t)
                                                                                         and
     (t)     M −1
Var(zi ) = M 2 due to uniform sampling of the task index in [0 : M − 1]. Then, we can write a
sum on the right-hand side of Equation (50) as follows:


                t−1                             t−1 (u)
                                                                          !
                X   1 X                       X X   zs
            K                       αs xs = K                                 αs xs
                u=1
                      u                         u=1
                                                     u
                          s∈S   (u)               s∈S
                                                    t−1             t−1 (u)
                                                                                    !
                                                             (u)                (u)
                                                X X      E[zs ] X zs − E[zs ]
                                             =K                  +                     αs xs
                                                            u                u
                                                s∈S u=1             u=1
                                                        t−1        t−1 (u)
                                                                                    !
                                                                               (u)
                                                X 1 X        1     X   zs − E[zs ]
                                             =K                 +.                    α s xs .
                                                    M u=1 u        u=1
                                                                            u
                                                  s∈S


Since
                                                t−1
                                                X   1
                                                          = log t + γ + q(t)
                                                u=1
                                                      u

where γ is the Euler-Mascheroni constant and q(t) = O(t−1 ), we have
                                 t−1
                                        !
                        X 1 X         1            K
                      K                   αs xs =    (log t + γ + q(t)) ŵ.
                             M u=1 u               M
                                s∈S


Now we are going to deal with the sum
                                                  t−1 (u)    (u)
                                                  X  zs − E[zs ]
                                                  u=1
                                                                      u

in two aspects: (1) it converges with probability 1 as t → ∞ and (2) the almost-sure vanishing rate of
the “residual” (a sum from u = t to ∞) is o(t−0.5+ϵ ) for any ϵ > 0. Let us look at its almost-sure
convergence. To this end, we utilize the following useful proposition.
Proposition F.3 (Theorem                           P∞ X1 , X2 , . . . are zero-mean independent
                      P∞5.2.6 of Durrett (2019)). Suppose
random variables. If n=1 Var(Xn ) < ∞, then n=1 Xn converges almost surely (i.e., with
probability 1).
                          z (u) −E[z (u) ]
Observe that Xu := s u s is a zero-mean random variables. Not only are they independent for
all u, but also the sum of their variances is convergent:
                                        ∞                              ∞
                                        X                        M −1 X 1
                                             Var(Xu ) =                      < ∞.
                                       u=1
                                                                  M 2 u=1 u2


                                                                 56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                          P∞
Thus, by Proposition F.3, the sum           u=1 Xu converges with probability 1. Next, we want to show
the vanishing rate
                                             ∞
                                             X
                                                   Xu = o(t−0.5+ϵ )
                                             u=t

with probability 1, where we choose any ϵ > 0. Observe that it is equivalent to show, for any δ > 0,
                                   ∞
                                                                     !
                                   X
                           0.5−ϵ
                       P t       ·    Xu > δ for infinitely many t = 0.
                                          u=t

Here we bring a renowned Borel-Cantelli Lemma.
Proposition F.4 (Borel-Cantelli
                           P∞      lemma; Theorem 2.3.1 of Durrett (2019)). Consider a sequence of
events A1 , A2 , · · · . If n=1 P(An ) < ∞, then
                     P(lim sup An ) := P(An happens for infinitely many n) = 0.
                        n→∞

By Proposition F.4, it suffices to show
                                          ∞                     ∞
                                                                                 !
                                          X                     X
                                                    0.5−ϵ
                          ∀δ > 0,               P t         ·         Xu > δ         < ∞.
                                          t=1                   u=t

Let us recall Hoeffding inequality here:
Proposition F.5 (Hoeffding inequality). Consider a collection of independent random variables
X1 , · · · , Xn satisfying ai ≤ Xi ≤ bi for each i = 1, · · · , n (ai < bi ). Then,
                                 n
                                           !
                                                                     2r2
                               X
                           P        Xi ≥ r ≤ 2 exp − Pn                        2
                                                                                   .
                                i=1                              i=1 (bi − ai )

                P∞
Since the sum    u=t Xu converges almost surely, it is a well-defined random variable with probability
1, and

          ∞
                                      !            T
                                                                                                               !
          X                                        X
                             −0.5+ϵ                                     −0.5+ϵ
      P         Xu > δ · t                =P             Xu > δ · t              for all but finitely many T
          u=t                                      u=t
                                                           (    T
                                                                                              )!
                                                                X
                                                                                     −0.5+ϵ
                                          =: P lim inf                Xu > δ · t
                                                   T →∞
                                                                u=t
                                                            T
                                                                                          !
                                                            X
                                                                                 −0.5+ϵ
                                          ≤ lim inf P             Xu > δ · t                                       (52)
                                             T →∞
                                                            u=t
                                                                                 !
                                                           2δ 2 t−1+2ϵ
                                          ≤ lim inf 2 exp − PT 1                                                   (53)
                                             T →∞
                                                                        u=t u2
                                                   2δ 2 t−1+2ϵ

                                          = 2 exp − P∞ 1                                                           (54)
                                                             u=t u2
                                                          2 2ϵ

                                          ≤ 2 exp −δ t            .                                                (55)
We use the fact “P(lim inf n An ) ≤ lim inf n P(An )” in Equation (52); we apply Hoeffding inequality
(Proposition F.5) and the fact − M1u ≤ Xu ≤ MM−1       u in Equation (53); and we utilize the fact
P∞ 1
   u=t  2 ≤  2
               in Equation  (55). Since exp(−δ  2 2ϵ
                                                 t   ) = o(t−2 ) for any ϵ > 0 and large enough t, the
     Pu      t
                 2 2ϵ
sum t exp(−δ t ) converges. Therefore, we have desired almost-sure convergence guarantees.
From now on, let us proceed with the proof. Using the almost-sure convergence results, let
                                                      ∞
                                                            !
                                               X X
                    w̌ := (log M + γ)ŵ + M              Xu αs xs ,
                                                          s∈S     u=1


                                                          57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           ∞
                                                                               !
                           K            X X                                                  k X
                   mt,k :=   q(t)ŵ + K       Xu                                   αs xs +          α s xs .
                           M              u=t
                                                                                             t
                                                         s∈S                                    (t)
                                                                                               s∈S

Then with probability 1, the statement of the lemma holds: Equation (50) holds, where w̌ is a constant
vector in terms of t, ∥mt,k ∥ ≤ o(t−0.5+ϵ ) for any ϵ > 0, and

                                ∥mt,k+1 − mt,k ∥ = O(t−1 ),                        (k = 0, ..., K − 2)
                                                                     −1
                              ∥mt+1,0 − mt,K−1 ∥ = O(t                    ).
This concludes the proof of the lemma.

                                       (t)
F.2.2      C ONVERGENCE OF ρk
                                                                      (t)
We can also prove a characterization of the limit of ρk , as done in Appendix E.2.3. However, when
                                                                                              (t)
tasks are given randomly, we need an additional assumption to guarantee the convergence of ρk to
the particular point.
Assumption F.1. Every task has at least one support vector. That is, ∀m ∈ [0 : M − 1] : Sm ̸= ∅.
Proposition F.6. Under the same setting of Theorem 4.2 with additional Assumptions E.1 and F.1,
                                     (t)
the “residual” converges to limt→∞ ρk = w̃, ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1]. Here, w̃ is the vector defined in
Proposition E.6.

                  (t)            (0)
Proof. First, P̄ rk = P̄ w0 − P̄ w̃ = 0 holds as in cyclic case. See Appendix E.2.3.
                                                                                                                               2
                                   (t)                                                    PT         PK−1       (t)     (t)
Second, we get to show P rk → 0. By Equation (51), limT →∞                                    t=t1    k=0      rk+1 − rk           =
                                                                (T )   (T )
C4 . That means ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1] : limT →∞                     rk+1 − rk             = 0. Therefore, for any ϵ0 , there exists
                        (t)       (t)
t2 > 0 such that rk+1 − rk                   < ϵK0 for all t ≥ t2 , k ∈ [0 : K − 1]. As a result,

                                       (t)         k         (t)    (t) k
                                 P r0          +     ϵ0 ≥ P rk ≥ P r0 − ϵ0 .
                                                   K                    K

                                         (t)                                                                          (t)
For t ≥ max{t1 , t2 , t̃∗ }, if P r0               ≥ ϵ1 + ϵ0 and S (t) ̸= ∅, then ∀k ∈ [0 : K − 1] : P rk                     ≥ ϵ1 .
By Lemma F.2 (2),
              t
              X K−1
                X (u)
                   (rv+1 − rv(u) )⊤ rv(u) ≤ −KC3 t−1 + K C1 t−θ + C2 t−1−0.5µ̃ ,

             u=t−1 v=0


Since t−1 decrease to zero slower than t−θ and t−1−0.5µ̃ , there exists t3 > max{t1 , t2 , t̃∗ }, C4 > 0
                  −1            −θ       −1−0.5µ̃
                                                    ≤ −C5 t−1 . Also S (t) ̸= ∅ is given by As-

such that −KC3 t + K C1 t + C2 t
sumption F.1. To sum up, for any ϵ0 , ϵ2 > 0, there exists t3 > max{t1 , t2 , t̃∗ } such that if
     (t)
 P r0      ≥ ϵ0 + ϵ1 , then

                                       t
                                       X K−1
                                         X (u)
                                            (rv+1 − rv(u) )⊤ rv(u) ≤ −C5 t−1 ,
                                  u=t−1 v=0


Now, define two sets for each k ∈ [0 : K − 1]
                                                                     (t)
                                         Tk := {t > t3 : P rk                  < ϵ0 + ϵ1 }
                                                             (t)
                                         T¯k := {t > t3 : P rk ≥ ϵ0 + ϵ1 }


                                                                58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We will finish our proof by showing that T¯k is finite. Here, we use the fact that every Tk is infinite.
                                                            PT PK−1 (t)                   2
                                                                                      (t)
The proof is the same as in the cyclic case. Since limT →∞ t=t1 k=0 rk+1 − rk               = C4 , we
get
                                     t K−1                                   2
                                                           (u)         (u)
                                     X X
                                                         rk+1 − rk               = C4 − h(t),
                                     u=t1 k=0

where h(t) is a positive function monotonic decreasing to zero.
Now, assume that there exists some k ′ that T¯k is infinite. WLOG, we set k ′ = 0. Since T0 is infinite,
for any t ∈ T¯0 there exists t′ , t′′ ∈ T0 such that t ∈ [t′ + 1, t′′ − 1] ⊂ T¯0 . We divide it into two cases:
For all t ∈ [t′ + 1, t′′ − 1],

                                      2                         2
                               (t)                      (t′ )
1. if t = t′ + 1, then P r0               ≤ P r0                    + ϵ0 ≤ 2ϵ0 + ϵ1 .

2. if t ≥ t′ + 1, then
                       2                     2       t−1 K−1
                                                         X                        2              2

                 (t)              (t′ )                                  (u)               (u)
                                                     X
              P r0         =   P r0              +                      rk+1          −   rk
                                                     u=t′ k=0

                                             2       t−1 K−1
                                                         X                                  2

                                     (t′ )                                 (u)        (u)                (u)   (u)   (u)
                                                     X
                           = P r0                +                      rk+1 − rk               + 2(rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk
                                                     u=t′ k=0

                                             2                                   t−1 K−1
                                     (t′ )
                                                                                 X   X h (u)      (u)   (u)
                                                                                                            i
                           = P r0                + h(t) − h(t′ ) + 2                     (rk+1 − rk )⊤ rk
                                                                                 u=t′ k=0
                                                                t−1
                                                        1       X   1
                           ≤ (ϵ0 + ϵ1 )2 + h(t) − 2C5 ′   − 2C3
                                                     t +1         ′
                                                                    u
                                                                                            u=t +2

                           ≤ (ϵ0 + ϵ1 )2 + h(t).
    Since h(t) is monotonic decreasing function, for any ϵ2 > 0, there exists t4 such that ∀t ≥ t4 :
    h(t) < ϵ2 .

                                                          2
                                                  (t)
Therefore, ∀t ≥ max{t3 , t4 } : P r0          ≤ (ϵ0 + ϵ1 )2 + ϵ2 . Since it holds for any ϵ0 , ϵ1 , ϵ2 , it
contradicts with the assumption that T¯0 is infinite.


                                                                      59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 5: C YCLIC TASK O RDERING , J OINTLY
     N ON -S EPARABLE
Review on Bregman Divergence. Before we start the proofs, we briefly overview some basic
properties of Bregman divergence.
Given a differentiable convex function f : S → R defined on a closed convex set S ⊂ Rd , the
Bregman divergence between two points (x, y) ∈ S × int S with respect to f is defined as
                           Df (x, y) := f (x) − f (y) − ⟨∇f (y), x − y⟩ .
Note that Df (x, y) ≥ 0 for any x, y ∈ S because of the definition of convexity; when f is strictly
                                                                                              2
convex, Df (x, y) = 0 if and only if x = y. Also, if f is β-smooth, Df (x, y) ≤ β2 ∥x − y∥ holds.
We often use the following useful identity that links three different points x, y ∈ S and z ∈ int S:
                   ⟨∇f (z), x − y⟩ = [f (x) − f (y)] − [Df (x, z) − Df (y, z)] .                   (56)

Here is another useful fact: for a convex β-smooth function f on Rd , the Bregman divergence is
bound below by the squared distance between gradients.
Proposition G.1. Let f : Rd → R be a convex, β-smooth function. For any x, y ∈ Rd ,
                                                     2
                                ∥∇f (x) − ∇f (y)∥ ≤ 2βDf (x, y).

Proof. Observe that Df (·, y) is also a β-smooth function for any y. Let z = x − β1 ∇x Df (x, y) =
x − β1 [∇f (x) − ∇(y)] ∈ Rd . Then by β-smoothness and the non-negativity of Df (·, y), we have
         0 ≤ Df (z, y)
                                                         β         2
           ≤ Df (x, y) + ⟨∇x Df (x, y), z − x⟩ +           ∥z − x∥
                                                         2
                           1                                    1                 2
           = Df (x, y) −      ⟨∇f (x) − ∇(y), ∇f (x) − ∇(y)⟩ +    ∥∇f (x) − ∇(y)∥
                           β                                   2β
                            1                   2
           = Df (x, y) −       ∥∇f (x) − ∇f (y)∥ .
                           2β
This proves the proposition.

Useful Inequalities. There are two other crucial inequalities for the proofs in this appendix. One is
a variant of Jensen’s inequality applied to a squared norm.
Proposition G.2. For any positive numbers λ1 , · · · , λn > 0, any vectors u1 , · · · , un ∈ Rd , and an
integer m ∈ [0 : n],
                                m      2       n
                                                     ! n              !
                               X              X         X 1         2
                                   ui ≤           λi           ∥ui ∥ .
                               i=1            i=1
                                                            λ
                                                        i=1 i

                   Pm
Proof. Let Λm =       i=1 λi . Then by convexity of the squared norm,
                                   m      2      m                    2
                                  X             X     λi Λm
                                      ui =                       ui
                                  i=1           i=1
                                                     Λm λi
                                               m                    2
                                              X     λi Λm
                                            ≤                  ui
                                              i=1
                                                   Λm λi
                                                    m
                                                  X     1         2
                                            = Λm            ∥ui ∥
                                                   i=1
                                                        λ i
                                                    n
                                                  X     1        2
                                            ≤ Λn            ∥ui ∥ .
                                                  i=1 i
                                                       λ



                                                  60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Another is about solving a recurrent inequality.
Proposition G.3. Consider 0 < µ ≤ β, V > 0, T > 1, 0 < c = Θ(1), 0 < m = Θ(1), and ∆0 ≥ 0.
Suppose the following inequality holds for any positive α ≤ βc and t ∈ [0 : T − 1]:
                                                   1
                                       ∆t+1 ≤          ∆t + αm+1 V.
                                                1 + αµ
If we take
                                                          ∆0 µm+1

                                      c c+1     m
                        α = min        ,    ln T · max 1,             ,
                                      β µT                   V
we have
                                                                 V · lnm (T )

                                               cµ
                         ∆T = O exp −                T       ∆0 + m+1 m             .
                                            (c + 1)β              µ     T

Proof. Since αµ ≤ cµ               1         αµ
                  β ≤ c, we have 1+αµ ≤ 1 − c+1 . By unrolling the recurrent inequality, we
have
                                   T               T −1             t
                              αµ             m+1
                                                   X          αµ
                  ∆T ≤ 1 −            ∆0 + α     V        1−
                             c+1                   t=0
                                                             c+1
                                                m

                                αµ           2α V
                     ≤ exp −         T ∆0 +         .
                               c+1              µ
With the choice of α, the first exponential term is bounded as

                        αµ                                 cµ             V
              exp −           T ∆0 ≤ max exp −                   T ∆0 , m+1 m
                       c+1                              (c + 1)β        µ   T

                                                     cµ               V
                                     ≤ exp −              T ∆0 + m+1 m .
                                                 (c + 1)β           µ   T
Also, the second term is bounded as
                    2αm V   2(c + 1)m V m              ∆0 µm+1

                                             m
                          ≤            ln   T · max 1,            .
                      µ      µm+1 T m                     V
Combining these two and ignoring some constant factors and polylogarithmic terms, we have the
desired bound.

G.1    L OCAL S TRONG C ONVEXITY A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF L EMMA 5.1)

Recall that we consider cyclic continual learning on M jointly strictly non-separable classification
tasks. Let us restate the lemma here for the sake of readability.
Lemma 5.1. Consider learning M linear classification tasks cyclically. Suppose that Assumptions 5.1
                            PM −1                  PM −1                   2
and 5.2 hold. Let B := m=0 βm and V⋆ := m=0 β1m ∥∇Lm (w⋆ )∥ . Take a step size η ≤
                                                                         (jM )
 √1   . Then, there exists a compact set W ⊂ Rd containing w⋆ and every w0     (j = 0, 1, 2, . . .),
2 2KB
whose radius is independent of J (the number of cycles) but depends on other parameters like b, G,
B, and V⋆ . Also, the offline training loss L is µ-strongly convex on W, where
                    µ := mini∈[0:N −1],w∈W ℓ′′ yi x⊤           · λmin XX ⊤ > 0.

                                                        i w                                    (6)

To prove the boundedness of end-of-cycle iterates and the local strong convexity, we first establish a
per-cycle recurrent inequality in terms of squared distance to an arbitrary comparator u ∈ Rd and the
risk values. We put u = w⋆ later.
Lemma G.4 (Backward recurrent inequality). Consider learning M linear classification tasks
                                                                 PM −1
cyclically. Suppose that Assumption 5.2 holds. Let B =             m=0 βm . If we take any step size
                   1
satisfying η ≤ 2√2KB   , the iterates of sequential GD satisfies
                        2
       ((j+1)M )
      w0           −u


                                                    61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                      −1
                                                                                    M
                                                                                                          !
          (jM )
                         2        h
                                      (jM )
                                                    i   √                           X   1           2
   ≤     w0     −u           − 2ηK L w0       − L(u) + 2 2η 2 K 2 B                       ∥∇Lm (u)∥           ,
                                                                                       β
                                                                                    m=0 m

for any vector u ∈ Rd and for all j = 0, 1, · · · .

Proof. We defer the proof to Appendix G.1.1. We remark that this lemma holds even without
assuming the non-separability.

Observe that the following holds as a special case:
        ((j+1)M )
                                 2
                                           (jM )
                                                          2        h
                                                                       (jM )
                                                                                       i   √
    w0              − w⋆             ≤ w0          − w⋆       − 2ηK L w0       − L(w⋆ ) + 2 2η 2 K 2 BV⋆ ,
                                                                                                              (57)
              PM −1 1             2
where V⋆ =      m=0 βm ∥∇Lm (w⋆ )∥ .

The next step is to construct a compact ball W centered at w⋆ , containing every end-of-cycle iterate
of sequential GD. The crucial step is to apply the non-separability coefficient b > 0 (Assumption 5.1).

Lemma G.5 (Boundedness of the end-of-cycle iterates). Consider learning M linear classification
                                                                             PM −1
tasks cyclically. Suppose that Assumptions 5.1 and 5.2 holds. Let B =          m=0 βm and V⋆ =
PM −1 1                   2                                          1
   m=0 βm ∥∇Lm (w⋆ )∥ . If we take any step size satisfying η ≤ 2 2KB , the end-of-cycle iterates
                                                                   √

of sequential GD are contained in a compact set which is fixed in terms of the number of the cycle:
for all j = 0, 1, · · · ,
                   (                                                              2                 )
                                                           √                          √ 2 2

  (jM )                    d           2     1
w0       ∈ W := w ∈ R : ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≤              L(w⋆ ) + 2ηKBV⋆ +∥w⋆ ∥ + 2 2η K BV⋆
                                            Gb
                  (                                                      2          )
                          d           2     1              V⋆                   V⋆
              ⊆ w ∈ R : ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≤             L(w⋆ ) +        +∥w⋆ ∥ + √            .
                                           Gb               2                2 2B

Proof. The proof is done by induction based on Equation (57). We defer the proof to Appendix G.1.2.


The last part of the proof is to compute the strong convexity coefficient of L on W. Since L is
twice differentiable, it can be directly done by computing a lower bound of the minimum Hessian
eigenvalue on W: for any w ∈ W,
                                                                    
                           N
                           X −1
             ∇2 L(w) =          ℓ′′ (x⊤       ⊤
                                      i w)xi xi ⪰
                                                   min ℓ′′ (x⊤              ⊤
                                                                 i w) XX ⪰ µI.
                                                                     
                                                                     i∈[0:N −1]
                                     i=0                               w∈W

This concludes the proof of Lemma 5.1.

G.1.1     P ROOF OF L EMMA G.4
For the sake of readability, we restate the lemma.
Lemma G.4 (Backward recurrent inequality). Consider learning M linear classification tasks
                                                                 PM −1
cyclically. Suppose that Assumption 5.2 holds. Let B =            m=0 βm . If we take any step size
                   1
satisfying η ≤ 2√2KB   , the iterates of sequential GD satisfies
                             2
        ((j+1)M )
     w0             −u
                                                                                      −1
                                                                                    M
                                                                                                          !
          (jM )
                         2        h
                                      (jM )
                                                    i   √                           X    1            2
   ≤     w0     −u           − 2ηK L w0       − L(u) + 2 2η 2 K 2 B                         ∥∇Lm (u)∥         ,
                                                                                    m=0
                                                                                        β m

for any vector u ∈ Rd and for all j = 0, 1, · · · .


                                                                62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We start the proof by bounding the squared distance between two iterates in the same cycle of
continual learning. For k ∈ [0 : K] and m ∈ [0 : M − 1],
                                                   2
                    (jM )          (jM +m)
              w0             − wk
                        m−1                                                                            2
                        X K−1
                            X               (jM +l)
                                                                    k−1
                                                                    X            (jM +m)
                    2
             =η                       ∇Ll (wh       )+                     ∇Lm (wh       )
                         l=0 h=0                                    h=0
                           −1 K−1                        −1 K−1
                         M
                                               !       M
                                                                                                   !
                                                                  1                  2
                                                                           (jM +l)
                         X    X                        X    X
                    2
             ≤η                           βl                         ∇Ll (wh       )
                                                                  βl
                            l=0 h=0                    l=0 h=0
                                   M −1 K−1
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                          !
                                   X    X          1              (jM +l)                                            2
             ≤ 2η 2 KB                                      ∇Ll (wh       ) − ∇Ll (u)                  + ∥∇Ll (u)∥
                                                   βl
                                    l=0 h=0
                                  M −1 K−1                                                 M −1
                                  X    X                        (jM +l)
                                                                                           X       1           2
             ≤ 4η 2 KB                          DLl (u, wh                ) + 2η 2 K 2 B              ∥∇Ll (u)∥ .                   (58)
                                                                                                   βl
                                  l=0 h=0                                                  l=0
We use (modified) Jensen’s inequality (e.g., Proposition G.2) in the first two inequalities above; the
last inequality is due to Proposition G.1.
Next, we decompose the (j + 1)-th squared distance into j-th squared distance and more:
                             2
     ((j+1)M )
   w0               −u
                         2           M −1 K−1
                                          XD                                                  E                      2
          (jM )                                                   (jM +m)          (jM )          (jM )    ((j+1)M )
                                     X
  = w0            −u         − 2η                       ∇Ll (wk              ), w0         − u + w0     − w0           .
                                     m=0 k=0
Using Equation (56) and βm -smoothnesses,
                             2                              2
        ((j+1)M )                         (jM )
    w0              −u           − w0              −u
            M −1 K−1
                 Xh                                                                                                                  i
                                      (jM )                                     (jM )      (jM +m)                        (jM +m)
            X
   = −2η                         Lm (w0         ) − Lm (u) − DLm (w0                    , wk               ) + DLm (u, wk           )
            m=0 k=0
                                            2
            (jM )            ((j+1)M )
     + w0            − w0
         h                 i    M −1 K−1                       2
             (jM )                            (jM )    (jM +m)
                                X    X
   ≤ −2ηK L w0       − L(u) + η          β m w0     − wk
                                                            m=0 k=0
            M −1 K−1                                                                           2
                                               (jM +m)             (jM )         ((j+1)M )
            X    X
     − 2η                   DLm (u, wk                      ) + w0          − w0
            m=0 k=0
                                                  M −1
         h
             (jM )
                           i                      X     1           2
   ≤ −2ηK L w0       − L(u) + 2η 2 K 2 B(1 + ηKB)         ∥∇Lm (u)∥
                                                  m=0 m
                                                       β
                                                                                                                                    (59)
                                                       M −1 K−1
                                                                            (jM +m)
                                                       X    X
                                      2     2      2
     − 2η(1 − 2ηKB − 2η K B )                                      DLm (u, wk       )
                                                        m=0 k=0
                                           M −1
         h
             (jM )
                           i   √           X     1           2
   ≤ −2ηK L w0       − L(u) + 2 2η 2 K 2 B          ∥∇Lm (u)∥ .
                                           m=0
                                                β m

In Equation (59), we use the result from Equation (58) multiple times. The last inequality
                                                                                       h is√due ito
                                         √        √
our choice of step size: ηKB ≤ 2√2 < 2 < 2 − 1 (∵ 1 − 2q − 2q ≥ 0 if q ∈ 0, 3−1
                                    1      3−1                           2
                                                                                            2     ).
This is the end of the proof.

G.1.2     P ROOF OF L EMMA G.5
For the sake of readability, we restate the lemma.


                                                                     63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma G.5 (Boundedness of the end-of-cycle iterates). Consider learning M linear classification
                                                                                        PM −1
tasks cyclically. Suppose that Assumptions 5.1 and 5.2 holds. Let B =                      m=0 βm and V⋆ =
PM −1 1                        2                                                1
   m=0 βm   ∥∇L    m  (w  ⋆ )∥   . If we take any step  size satisfying η ≤   √
                                                                             2 2KB
                                                                                    , the end-of-cycle iterates
of sequential GD are contained in a compact set which is fixed in terms of the number of the cycle:
for all j = 0, 1, · · · ,
                   (                                                                         2                  )
                                                                      √                           √ 2 2

  (jM )                         d               2      1
w0       ∈ W := w ∈ R : ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≤                         L(w⋆ ) + 2ηKBV⋆ +∥w⋆ ∥ + 2 2η K BV⋆
                                                      Gb
                  (                                                                 2          )
                              d                2      1               V⋆                   V⋆
              ⊆ w ∈ R : ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≤                        L(w⋆ ) +         +∥w⋆ ∥ + √            .
                                                     Gb                2                 2 2B

Also, recall the backward recurrent inequality, which we write here again:
       ((j+1)M )
                       2
                               (jM )
                                            2        h
                                                           (jM )
                                                                           i   √
    w0           − w⋆ ≤ w0           − w⋆ − 2ηK L w0               − L(w⋆ ) + 2 2η 2 K 2 BV⋆ .
                                                                                                                     (60)
                                                                                2
                 (0)                    (0)                       (0)                       2                  (0)
We choose w0 as we want: if w0 = 0, since w0 − w⋆                                   = ∥w⋆ ∥ , it is clear that w0 ∈ W.
                   (jM )                                                                          ((j+1)M )
Now assume w0              ∈ W and proceed with induction on j: we aim to show w0                             ∈ W.
The proof is divided into two parts:

1. If the current total risk is too high, then we can show that the squared distance to w⋆ will decrease.
2. The other case means that the current iterate is close enough to w⋆ (due to the strict non-
   separability of the full dataset). Thus, the squared distance to w⋆ at the next cycle will not grow
   that much.

                                                (jM )
                                                                      √
Part 1: High-Risk Case. Suppose L w0                    − L(w⋆ ) ≥ 2ηKBV⋆ . Then Equation (60)
                                  2                        2
            ((j+1)M )                     (jM )                               ((j+1)M )
implies w0                 − w⋆       ≤ w0        − w⋆         . Thus, w0                 ∈ W.


                                             (jM )
                                                               √
Part 2: Low-Risk Case. We first show that L w0       − L(w⋆ ) ≤ 2ηKBV⋆ implies an upper
bound on the current squared distance to w⋆ . Because of Assumptions 5.1 and 5.2, for any w ∈ Rd ,
                                                  N
                                                  X −1
                                                         ℓ x⊤

                                       L(w) =               i w
                                                  i=0
                                                  N −1
                                                  X              −
                                                         G x⊤

                                              ≥             i w
                                                  i=0
                                                               N −1                  −
                                                               X               w
                                              = G ∥w∥ ·                  x⊤
                                                                          i
                                                               i=0
                                                                              ∥w∥
                                              ≥ G ∥w∥ b,
by the definition of the non-separability b > 0. Thus, we have
                               (jM )                 (jM )
                             w0        − w⋆ ≤ w0        + ∥w⋆ ∥
                                                1
                                                       (jM )

                                              ≤    L w0        + ∥w⋆ ∥
                                                Gb
                                                1 h         √          i
                                              ≤     L(u) + 2ηKBV⋆ + ∥w⋆ ∥ .
                                                Gb
         (jM )
Thus, w0      lies in a strict subset of W. Also, Equation (60) implies
            ((j+1)M )
                                2
                                        (jM )
                                                   2    √
           w0          − w⋆ ≤ w0              − w⋆ + 2 2η 2 K 2 BV⋆


                                                             64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                           2
                                                           √                  √

                                                 1 h              i
                                         ≤           L(u) + 2ηKBV⋆ + ∥w⋆ ∥ + 2 2η 2 K 2 BV⋆ .
                                                 Gb
                                         ((j+1)M )
Thus, by the definition of W, w0                        ∈ W. This concludes the proof of the lemma.

G.2     N ON -A SYMPTOTIC L OSS C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2)
                            PM −1                 PM −1                     2
Recall that we write B = m=0 βm and V⋆ = m=0 β1m ∥∇Lm (w⋆ )∥ . Also, in the previous
sub-section, we discovered a local strong convexity (with coefficient µ > 0) of the total risk function
satisfied on a compact ball W containing w⋆ and every end-of-cycle iterate of the sequential GD.
Let us restate the theorem for the sake of readability.
Theorem 5.2. Suppose we learn M tasks cyclicallynfor J > o      1 cycles. We adopt the notation from
                                             1          1 ln(J)
Lemma 5.1. Then, with a step size η = O K · min B , J               , sequential GD satisfies

                                                                                B 2 V⋆ ln2 J

                         2                      µJ                         2
            (M J)                                               (0)
          w0      − w⋆ ≤ O exp −                 √        · w0 − w⋆ +                          .  (7)
                                           (1 + 2 2)B                              µ3 J 2
Remark G.1. In fact, the full expression of our step size choice is:
                   (                   √                  (
                                                                   (0)
                                                                              )!)
                          1      1+2 2            2            ∥w0 − w⋆ ∥2 µ3
         η = min       √        , √        ln J · max 1,                          ,
                      2 2KB 2 2KJ                                     B 2 V⋆
which is omitted in the theorem statement above.
The theorem states a fast Õ(J −2 ) rate of convergence. One could try to prove it with the backward
recurrent inequality (Equation (57)), but it is difficult due to the η 2 dependency of the so-called “noise”
term. We only succeeded in proving a slower Õ(J −1 ) rate with the backward recurrent inequality,
whose proof is pretty much similar to that in this sub-section. To take a step further towards a faster
rate, we should use a different way of writing the recurrent inequality, with a higher exponent for η in
the “noise” term. Here is how it goes:
Lemma G.6 (Forward recurrent inequality). Consider learning M linear classification tasks cycli-
                                                                                           1
cally. Suppose that Assumption 5.2 holds. If we take any step size satisfying η ≤ √2KB         , the iterates
of sequential GD satisfies
                              2
        ((j+1)M )
    w0              −u
                                                                                        −1
                                                                                      M
                                                                                                            !
                          2        h                     i                                 1
          (jM )                        ((j+1)M )
                                                                                      X                 2
   ≤     w0     −u            − 2ηK L w0           − L(u) + 2η 3 K 3 B 2                      ∥∇Lm (u)∥         ,
                                                                                      m=0
                                                                                          β m

for any vector u ∈ Rd and for all j = 0, 1, · · · .

Proof. We defer the proof to Appendix G.2.1. We remark that this lemma holds even without
assuming the non-separability.

In particular, we have
                              2                         2       h                       i
       ((j+1)M )                     (jM )                          ((j+1)M )
  w0               − w⋆           ≤ w0           − w⋆       −2ηK L w0           − L(w⋆ ) +2η 3 K 3 B 2 V⋆ . (61)

Applying µ-strong convexity, i.e.,
                                                     µ                     2
                            ((j+1)M )                      ((j+1)M )
                      L w0              − L(w⋆ ) ≥       w0          − w⋆ ,
                                                     2
we eventually have a recurrent inequality purely on the squared distance to w⋆ :
                                   2        1                      2
                  ((j+1)M )                            (jM )
                w0          − w⋆ ≤                  w0       − w⋆ + 2η 3 K 3 B 2 V⋆ .                       (62)
                                        1 + ηKµ
We now conclude the proof by applying Proposition G.3: plugging α ← ηK, β ← B, T ← J,
     1                                    (jM )
c ← 2√ 2
         , V ← 2B 2 V⋆ , m = 2, and ∆j ← w0      to the proposition, we have a desired result.


                                                                 65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.2.1      P ROOF OF L EMMA G.6
For the sake of readability, we restate the lemma, whose proof is very similar to that of Lemma G.4.
Lemma G.6 (Forward recurrent inequality). Consider learning M linear classification tasks cycli-
                                                                                     1
cally. Suppose that Assumption 5.2 holds. If we take any step size satisfying η ≤ √2KB    , the iterates
of sequential GD satisfies
                                  2
      ((j+1)M )
    w0              −u
                                                                                                                  −1
                                                                                                                M
                                                                                                                                         !
                              2         h                     i                                                     1
         (jM )                              ((j+1)M )
                                                                                                                X               2
  ≤     w0     −u                  − 2ηK L w0           − L(u) + 2η 3 K 3 B 2                                         ∥∇Lm (u)∥              ,
                                                                                                                   β
                                                                                                                m=0 m

for any vector u ∈ Rd and for all j = 0, 1, · · · .

We start the proof by bounding the squared distance between two iterates in the same cycle of
continual learning. For k ∈ [0 : K − 1] and m ∈ [0 : M − 1],
                                                                 2
                   ((j+1)M )                  (jM +m)
                 w0                       − wk
                              M −1 K−1                                          K−1                              2
                                                       (jM +l)                               (jM +m)
                              X    X                                            X
                      2
                 =η                              ∇Ll (wh       )+                      ∇Lm (wh       )
                              l=m+1 h=0                                         h=k
                                −1 K−1                     −1 K−1
                              M
                                                    !    M
                                                                                                           !
                                                                           1                  2
                                                                                    (jM +l)
                              X    X                     X    X
                      2
                 ≤η                           βl                              ∇Ll (wh       )
                                                                           βl
                                  l=0 h=0                l=0 h=0
                                           M −1 K−1
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                  !
                          2
                                           X    X       1                  (jM +l)                                           2
                 ≤ 2η KB                                             ∇Ll (wh       ) − ∇Ll (u)                 + ∥∇Ll (u)∥
                                                        βl
                                           l=0 h=0
                                      M −1 K−1                                                      M −1
                                      X    X                             (jM +l)
                                                                                                    X      1           2
                 ≤ 4η 2 KB                          DLl (u, wh                     ) + 2η 2 K 2 B             ∥∇Ll (u)∥                   (63)
                                                                                                           βl
                                          l=0 h=0                                                   l=0

We use (modified) Jensen’s inequality (e.g., Proposition G.2) in the first two inequalities above; the
last inequality is due to Proposition G.1.
Next, we decompose the j-th squared distance into (j + 1)-th squared distance and more:
                          2                                          2          M −1 K−1
                                                                                     XD                                                 E
         (jM )                             ((j+1)M )                                                   (jM +m)           ((j+1)M )
                                                                                X
      w0         −u               ≥ w0                  −u               + 2η                ∇Ll (wk                 ), w0            −u .
                                                                                m=0 k=0

Using Equation (56) and βm -smoothnesses,
                              2                              2
    ((j+1)M )                               (jM )
 w0               −u              − w0              −u
           M −1 K−1
                Xh                                                                                                                                 i
                                           ((j+1)M )                                       ((j+1)M )       (jM +m)                      (jM +m)
           X
≤ −2η                         Lm (w0                    ) − Lm (u) − DLm (w0                           , wk            ) + DLm (u, wk             )
           m=0 k=0
      h                     i    M −1 K−1                          2
          ((j+1)M )                           ((j+1)M )    (jM +m)
                                 X    X
≤ −2ηK L w0           − L(u) + η          βm w0         − wk
                                                                         m=0 k=0
         M −1 K−1
                                              (jM +m)
         X    X
  − 2η                    DLm (u, wk                      )
           m=0 k=0
                                            M −1
      h
          ((j+1)M )
                            i               X     1            2
≤ −2ηK L w0           − L(u) + 2η 3 K 3 B 2          ∥∇Lm (u)∥
                                            m=0
                                                 β m
                                                                                                                                          (64)
                                          M −1 K−1
                                                                 (jM +m)
                                          X    X
                    2         2       2
  − 2η(1 − 2η K B )                                     DLm (u, wk       )
                                          m=0 k=0


                                                                                66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       M −1
      h
          ((j+1)M )
                            i
                                 3 3 2
                                       X     1          2
≤ −2ηK L w0           − L(u) + 2η K B          ∥∇Lm (u)∥ .
                                       m=0 m
                                            β

In Equation (64), we use the result from Equation (63) multiple times. The last inequality is due to
our choice of step size: ηKB ≤ √12 . This is the end of the proof.


                                                67
