Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPO G RAPH : E NHANCING AI S OFTWARE E NGINEER -
ING WITH R EPOSITORY- LEVEL C ODE G RAPH
                     ∗
 Siru Ouyang1 , Wenhao Yu2 , Kaixin Ma2 , Zilin Xiao3 , Zhihan Zhang4 , Mengzhao Jia4 ,
 Jiawei Han1 , Hongming Zhang2 , Dong Yu2
 1
   University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2 Tencent AI Seattle Lab
 3
   Rice University, 4 University of Notre Dame
 siruo2@illinois.edu



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Large Language Models (LLMs) excel in code generation yet struggle with mod-
             ern AI software engineering tasks. Unlike traditional function-level or file-level
             coding tasks, AI software engineering requires not only basic coding proficiency
             but also advanced skills in managing and interacting with code repositories. How-
             ever, existing methods often overlook the need for repository-level code under-
             standing, which is crucial for accurately grasping the broader context and devel-
             oping effective solutions. On this basis, we present R EPO G RAPH, a plug-in mod-
             ule that manages a repository-level structure for modern AI software engineering
             solutions. R EPO G RAPH offers the desired guidance and serves as a repository-
             wide navigation for AI software engineers. We evaluate R EPO G RAPH on the
             SWE-bench by plugging it into four different methods of two lines of approaches,
             where R EPO G RAPH substantially boosts the performance of all systems, lead-
             ing to a new state-of-the-art among open-source frameworks. Our analyses also
             demonstrate the extensibility and flexibility of R EPO G RAPH by testing on an-
             other repo-level coding benchmark, CrossCodeEval. Our code is available at
             https://github.com/ozyyshr/RepoGraph


1       I NTRODUCTION

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have showcased their powerful capabilities
across various natural language processing tasks (OpenAI, 2023; Anil et al., 2023; Dubey et al.,
2024), and now, coding-specific LLMs are emerging to tackle complex software engineering chal-
lenges (Hou et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2023), such as Code-Llama (Rozière et al., 2023) and Star-
Coder (Li et al., 2023a). These coding-specific LLMs are capable of assisting users with various
software engineering tasks, even achieving human-level performance in many function-level coding
tasks, such as program synthesis (Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021), code annotation (Yao et al.,
2019), bug fixing (Tufano et al., 2019), and code translation (Rozière et al., 2020).
Real-world software engineering often extends beyond single function or self-contained code files.
Applications are typically built as repositories containing multiple interdependent files, modules,
and libraries (Bairi et al., 2024). These complex structures require a holistic understanding of the
entire codebase to perform tasks such as code completion (Shrivastava et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2023),
feature addition (Liang et al., 2024), or issue resolving (Jimenez et al., 2024). Recent benchmarks
like SWE-Bench (Jimenez et al., 2024) have been proposed to evaluate LLMs on real-world GitHub
issues. It requires LLMs to modify the repository to resolve the issue, either by fixing a bug or intro-
ducing a new feature. This task is particularly challenging because it requires navigating complex
code bases, understanding intricate dependencies between code files, and ensuring that changes in-
tegrate seamlessly without introducing new issues, which highlights the difficulties in scaling from
function-level to repository-level understanding, as expounded in Figure 1.
A key step in addressing repository-level tasks is to understand the structure of a repository and iden-
tify related code. To achieve this, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) and its variants (Xiao et al.,
    ∗
        Work done during internship at Tencent AI Seattle Lab.


                                                        1
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                       1. def rst_repeated_char(str1):
     (a) Function-level Coding Problem
                                                                                       2. for index,c in enumerate(str1):
      Input text: Write a python function to find the first repeated                   3.   if str1[:index+1].count(c) > 1:return c
      character in a given string.                                                     4. return "None"
      (b) Repository-level Coding Problem             (i) Understand intricate dependencies                       Unit test:
         Issue: modeling’s “separability_matrix”                           Generated patch:                     test_coord_matrix
      does not compute separability correctly for                                                                   test_cdot
                                                                       diff --git a/astropy/modeling/
      CompoundModels…                                                  separable.py                              test_arith_oper
           Code repository:                                            --- a/astropy/modeling/separable.py
                                                                       +++ b/astropy/modeling/separable.py       (iii) Resolve without
            astropy   core.py     fitting.py   (ii) Navigate complex   @@ -242,7 +242,7 @@ def _cstack(left,
                                                      codebases                                                introducing new issues
            coordinates    earth.py      …                             right):…


     Figure 1: The illustration of (a) a function-level coding problem from HumanEval (Chen et al.,
     2021) and (b) a repository-level coding problem from SWE-Bench (Jimenez et al., 2024).

     2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Phan et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024) have been leveraged, in a procedural
     manner, to retrieve relevant code files across the repository first, providing context for LLMs for fur-
     ther edition. However, indexing at file-level can only identify semantically similar but not genuinely
     related code snippets. Instead of using RAG, recent approaches like Agentless (Xia et al., 2024)
     construct a skeletal format for each file, and directly prompt LLMs to identify relevant files and
     code lines. However, this method still treats code repositories as flat documents (Zhang et al., 2024),
     which suffers from limitations of repository structure such as the intricate inter-dependencies across
     files. An alternative approach is to design agent frameworks (Yang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024),
     which enables LLMs to interact with repositories using actions. While LLM agents can freely deter-
     mine the next action based on current observations, without the grasp of global repository structures,
     they tend to focus narrowly on specific files, resulting in local optimums. Addressing these limita-
     tions requires going beyond semantic matching and developing techniques that enable a deeper un-
     derstanding of the codebase structure. This will allow LLMs to leverage fine-grained context across
     multiple files and function calls, facilitating more informed, repository-wide decision-making for
     coding tasks.
fi
     Motivated by this, we propose R EPO G RAPH, a plug-in module designed to help LLMs-based AI
     programmers leverage the code structure of an entire repository. R EPO G RAPH is a graph structure
     and operates at the line level, offering a more fine-grained approach compared to previous file-
     level browsing methods. Each node in the graph represents a line of code, and edges represent the
     dependencies of code definitions and references. R EPO G RAPH is constructed via code line parsing
     and encodes the structured representation of the entire repository. Sub-graph retrieval algorithms
     are then used to extract ego-graphs, which represent the relationships of a central node (in our case,
     specific keywords). These ego-graphs can be smoothly integrated with both procedural and agent
     frameworks, offering key clues that provide a more comprehensive context for LLMs to solve real-
     world software engineering problems.
     To assess R EPO G RAPH’s effectiveness and versatility as a plug-in module, we integrate it with four
     existing software engineering frameworks and evaluate its performance using SWE-bench, a recent
     benchmark for AI software engineering. Experiment results show that R EPO G RAPH boosts the suc-
     cess rate of existing methods for both agent and procedural frameworks by achieving an average
     relative improvement of 32.8%. We also test R EPO G RAPH on CrossCodeEval to verify its trans-
     ferability to general coding tasks that require repository-level code understanding. Additionally, we
     systematically analyze different sub-graph retrieval algorithms and integration methods. Together
     with error analyses, we hope to shed light on future works targeting modern AI software engineering.


     2     R ELATED W ORKS

     2.1     LLM- BASED METHODS FOR AI SOFTWARE ENGINEERING

     Recently, there has been a significant increase in research focused on AI-driven software engineer-
     ing, which can be broadly categorized into two primary approaches: (i) LLM agent-based frame-
     works and (ii) SWE-featured procedural frameworks. While this field has advanced rapidly, with
     most methods being released as proprietary solutions for industry applications (Cognition, 2024),
     our related work section will concentrate specifically on open-source frameworks.


                                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LLM agent-based framework equips large language models (LLMs) with a set of predefined tools,
allowing agents to iteratively and autonomously perform actions, observe feedback, and plan future
steps (Yang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Cognition, 2024; Ouyang et al., 2024;
Tang et al., 2025). While the exact set of tools may vary across different agent frameworks, they
typically include capabilities such as opening, writing, or creating files, searching for code lines,
running tests, and executing shell commands. To solve a problem, agent-based approaches involve
multiple actions, with each subsequent turn depending on the actions taken in previous ones and the
feedback received from the environment. For example, SWE-agent (Yang et al., 2024) facilitates
interactions with the execution environment by designing a special agent-computer interface (ACI).
There are various actions, including “search and navigation”, “file viewer and editor”, and “con-
text management”. Another work, AutoCodeRover (Zhang et al., 2024), further offers fine-grained
searching methods for LLM agents in better contexts without an execution process. Specifically,
it supports class and function-level code search. OpenDevin (Wang et al., 2024), initiated after
Devin (Cognition, 2024), is a community-driven platform that integrates widely used agent systems
and benchmarks. The action space design of OpenDevin is highly flexible, requiring LLM agents to
generate code on the fly.

SWE-featured procedural frameworks typically follow a two-step Localize/Search-Edit ap-
proach, as seen in existing literature (Zhang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024; Xia
et al., 2024). The localize step focuses on identifying relevant code snippets, while the edit step
involves completing or revising the code. Some works introduce additional steps to further enhance
performance, such as the Search-Expand-Edit approach (Phan et al., 2024). Retrieval (Lewis et al.,
2020) is a popular technique used for localization, allowing models to search for relevant code snip-
pets from large repositories by treating issue descriptions as queries and code snippets as indexed
data. Some approaches use a sliding window to ensure completeness (Zhang et al., 2023). Besides,
Agentless (Xia et al., 2024) is a recently developed method that uses LLMs to directly identify
relevant elements for editing within code repositories. It first recursively traverses the repository
structure to generate a format that aligns files and folders vertically, with indents for sub-directories.
This structure and the issue description are then input into the LLM, which performs a hierarchical
search to identify the top-ranked suspicious files requiring further inspection or modification.


2.2   R EPOSITORY- LEVEL C ODING C APABILITY

The evaluation of coding capabilities in AI sys-
                                                   Table 1: Comparison between our approach R E -
tems has traditionally focused on function-level
                                                   PO G RAPH and existing methods for representing
or line-level assessments (Lu et al., 2021; Chen
                                                   the repository on various aspects. *RepoUnder-
et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021), where indi-
                                                   stander (Ma et al., 2024) and CodexGraph (Liu
vidual code snippets or isolated functions are
                                                   et al., 2024) are concurrent works to ours.
the primary units of analysis. Unlike previ-
ous studies, SWE-bench (Jimenez et al., 2024) Model                    Line-level File-level Repo-level
highlights the trend of repository-level coding,
                                                    DraCo                  ✗          ✓          ✗
driven by recent advances of coding-specific Aider                         ✓          ✗          ✗
LLMs (Guo et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023b). It RepoUnderstander*            ✗          ✓         ✓
reflects the growing user demand to understand CodexGraph*                 ✗          ✓         ✓
and contribute to entire projects rather than iso-
lated functions (Ouyang et al., 2023), as well as R EPO G RAPH             ✓          ✓         ✓
solving real-world problems in an end-to-end and automatic manner.
Long before the LLM era, the software engineering community has been studying the navigation of
code repositories, including using eye-tracking data (Busjahn et al., 2015) and exploring intercon-
nections (Begel et al., 2010). Then pre-trained code LLMs incorporate repository-level information
such as file dependencies. But tasks at the repository level often involve more intricate call relation-
ships within their context. Recent works like RepoCoder (Zhang et al., 2023) and RepoFuse (Liang
et al., 2024) have started integrating RAG modules to harness additional information from reposito-
ries. Building on this, subsequent research has focused on embedding repository-level context into
their methodologies. For instance, DraCo (Cheng et al., 2024) introduces importing relationships
between files, CodePlan maintains the code changes by LLMs with incremental dependency anal-
ysis, while Aider (Gauthier, 2024) employs PageRank (Page, 1999) to identify the most significant
contextual elements. RepoUnderstander (Ma et al., 2024) and CodexGraph (Liu et al., 2024) model


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                     Issue Description
         Code Repo
                                                                                             Modeling's ``separability_matrix`` does not compute separability correctly for
        astropy                                                                              nested CompoundModels. Consider the following model:             …
            modeling         core.py        fitting.py                                                       (b) Integration with Procedural Frameworks
           coordinates           earth.py                                                               search term
                                                                                                                                                    localization
                                                 …                                                     identification        search_repograph                              core modules
           confest.py         logger.py                                                                                     (separability_matrix)                            “Model”

                                                                                                                    correct     edition
                                                                                                                                                      search_repograph
        Code snippet                                                                                            generated patch                            (Model)
                                                 * File and code line illustrated                                                  perform in each step of procedural framework
 Class Model:                                    in corresponding color.                        search_repograph(param)
     def __init__(self, …):                                                                                                        add to action space for agent decision-making
         self._default_input….                                                                                                                                     * Flattened node information
     def prepare_inputs(self, …):                            Node information                      initialization
                                                                                                                                         Agent                       from retrieved ego-graph.
         input = self._validate_input_units()
         inputs = len(input)                         name: Model                                                                                                     Observation
         ……                                          fname: /astropy/modeling/core.py            Planning
                                                                                                                                                             {name: Model, fname: /
 def hide_inverse(…): ……                             kind: def                              Use search_repograph to               Action                     astropy/modeling/core.py,
                                                     category: class                        find the dependencies for
                                                                                                                           search_repograph(param)           kind: def, category: class…
    reference node         invokes       class       line: 523                              ``separability_matrix’’ …
                                                     methods: prepare_inputs,…                                                        …
                                                                                                                                               …
    definition node        contains      function                                                                          search_dir(param)

                           (a) RepoGraph Construction                                                               (c) Integration with Agent Frameworks

Figure 2: An in-depth illustration of (a) the construction, (b) the integration with procedural frame-
works, and (c) the integration with agent frameworks of R EPO G RAPH. Given a code repository,
we first utilize AST to construct G = {V, E}, where G consists of “reference” and “definition”
node, E includes “invoke” and “contain” relations (files and code lines shown in corresponding
color). The constructed R EPO G RAPH are then used in procedural frameworks by adding sub-
retrieval results into each step, and agent frameworks by adding graph retrieval as an additional
action “search repograph”. A simplified version can be found in Figure 10.

code files as a knowledge graph. Despite similarities in representation, methods vary in how they re-
trieve information from these structures and utilize it for downstream tasks. Table 1 summarizes the
differences between these methods and R EPO G RAPH. R EPO G RAPH surpasses previous approaches
by effectively integrating context at the line, file, and repository levels.

3       R EPO G RAPH

This section introduces R EPO G RAPH, a novel plug-in module that can be seamlessly integrated into
existing research workflows for both agent-based and procedural frameworks. The primary goal
of R EPO G RAPH is to provide a structured way to analyze and interact with complex codebases,
enabling detailed tracing of code dependencies, execution flow, and structural relationships across
the repository. In the following sections, we will provide a detailed description of R EPO G RAPH’s
construction, its underlying representation, and its utility across various scenarios. The overall ar-
chitecture is depicted in Figure 2, highlighting its key components and operational flow.

3.1       C ONSTRUCTION

Given a repository-level coding task, the first step is to carefully examine the repository structure
so that the necessary information can be collected. The input for R EPO G RAPH construction is a
repository, i.e., a collection of its folders and files, while the output is a structured graph, where each
node is a code line, and each edge represents the dependencies in between. R EPO G RAPH enables
tracing back to the root cause of the current issue and gathering dependent code context to help solve
the problem. The construction process of R EPO G RAPH could be divided into three key steps.

Step 1: Code line parsing. We first traverse the entire repository using a top-down approach to
identify all code files as candidates for next-step parsing. This is accomplished by filtering based on
file extensions, retaining only those with relevant code file suffixes (e.g., .py) while excluding other
file types (e.g., .git or requirements.txt), which might be noisy and irrelevant for coding tasks. For
each code file, we utilize tree-sitter 1 to parse the code, leveraging its Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)
framework. The AST provides a tree-based representation of the abstract syntactic structure of the
source code, enabling the identification of key elements such as functions, classes, variables, types,
and other definitions. While recognizing these definitions is crucial, tracing their usage and refer-
ences throughout the code is equally important. Tree-sitter facilitates this by capturing the definitions
    1
        https://pypi.org/project/tree-sitter-languages/


                                                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and tracking where they are utilized or referenced within the codebase. For example, in figure 2,
we not only identify definitions like class Model and its inherent methods but also references like
self. validate input units(). After processing each line of code with a tree-sitter, we selectively retain
lines that involve function calls and dependency relations, discarding extraneous information. Our
focus is primarily on the functions and classes, as these represent the core structural components of
the code. By concentrating on these elements and their interrelationships, R EPO G RAPH optimizes
the analysis process by excluding less significant details, such as individual variables, which tend to
be redundant and less relevant for further processing.

Step 2: Project-dependent relation filtering. After the previous parsing step, we obtain code lines
with calling and dependency relations. However, not all relations are useful for fixing issues. Specif-
ically, many default and built-in function/class calls could distract from the project-related ones.
Therefore, we additionally introduce a filtering process that excludes the repository-independent re-
lations. Two types of such relations exist: (i) global relation refers to Python standard and built-in
functions and classes. (ii) local relation are introduced by third-party libraries, which are specific
to the current code file. For global relations, we maintain a comprehensive list of methods from
standard and built-in libraries, excluding any identified relations from this list. The list is empir-
ically constructed by gathering methods of the builtins library and default methods such as “list”
and “tuple”. For example, in figure 2, line inputs = len(input) is excluded since “len” is a default
method. For local relations, we parse import statements in the code to identify third-party methods
that are included, and exclude them accordingly. A detailed illustration of this step can be found in
Figure 11.

Step 3: Graph organization. At this stage, we construct R EPO G RAPH using code lines as the
fundamental building units. The graph can be represented as G = {V, E}, where V represents the
set of nodes, with each node corresponding to a line of code, and E represents the set of edges,
capturing the relationships between these code lines. Each node in V contains attributes to represent
its meta-information, such as line number, file name, directory, etc. Additionally, we
classify each code line as either a “definition” (def) or a “reference” (ref) to a particular module.
A “def” node corresponds to the line where a function, class, or variable is initially defined, while
a “ref” node indicates a code line where this entity is referenced or invoked elsewhere in the code.
Similar to soft links to “def” nodes, “ref” nodes also represent other variations of invoking methods.
For example, in Figure 2, the class definition “class Model” would be a “def” node, while any
subsequent usages of Model would be “ref” nodes. Each “def” node may have multiple “ref” nodes
associated with it, as a single function or class can be referenced in various places throughout the
code. We define two types of edges: Einvoke and Econtain . The triple (V1, Econtain , V2 ) denotes
that V1 (e.g., a function definition) contains another module V2 (e.g., an internal function or class).
The edge Econtain typically connects a “def” node to its internal components. In contrast, Einvoke
represents an invocation relationship, usually connecting a “def” node to a “ref” node, where the
reference node includes a dependency on the definition.


3.2   U TILITY

The constructed R EPO G RAPH serves as a structured representation of the current repository and
facilitates better-related information collection and aggregation. For information collection based on
R EPO G RAPH, specifically, we use one search term each time for subgraph retrieval. Search terms are
the key functions or classes that are determined by current states. For example, “separability matrix”
is the initial search term in Figure 2(c). We retrieve the k-hop ego-graphs (Hu et al., 2024) with the
search term in the centric. The ego-graph is crucial for solving the problem because it focuses
on the immediate relationships (Jin et al., 2024) around the search term, capturing the relevant
dependencies and interactions within the repository, which is key to understanding the functional
context. Additionally, the retrieved content explicitly contains information at both the method and
line levels and implicitly expresses the grouping at the file level.
This process is abstracted via search repograph() as illustrated in the middle of Figure 2. The
retrieved k-hop ego-graph will be flattened for further processing. We also tried other variants for
integration later in Section 5.2 and their performance in Table 4. We narrate how R EPO G RAPH
could be plugged in with existing representative research lines in the following.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Integration with procedural framework. In a procedural framework, LLMs are usually prompted
in “localization” and “editing” stages with the given repository context and issue description. In this
case, we use search repograph() before both stages, leveraging our R EPO G RAPH to assist in making
more informed decisions at each step. For example, in Figure 2, we first include the subgraph of
“separability matrix” for localization, and then use the localized result “Model” to search in the
edition stage. To implement the strategy, we flatten the context of retrieved ego-graphs and append
it as part of the prompt. As a result, the LLM generation is conditioned on both retrieved ego-graphs
and the context provided by baseline methods, helping the model preserve nuances.

Integration with agent framework. A significant difference in existing agent frameworks is the
action space design, as expounded in Section 2. To leverage the power of R EPO G RAPH, we put
search repograph() as an additional action in the action space. The agent decides when and where
to use this action. The search term is also determined by the agent accordingly. The returned
subgraph will be flattened and used as an observation for the next state.


4       E XPERIMENTS

4.1     S ETUP

We evaluated R EPO G RAPH as a plug-in component, i.e., integrated into existing baseline models of
the two aforementioned research lines to assess its performance. We use the same baseline settings
and configurations when incorporating R EPO G RAPH to ensure a fair comparison.
Dataset. We test R EPO G RAPH in SWE-bench-Lite2 . Each problem in the dataset requires submit-
ting a patch to solve the underlying issue described in the input issue description. The goal is to
generate a patch that accurately revises the relevant portions of the codebase within the repository,
ensuring that all test scripts included in the dataset are successfully executed.
Baselines. We integrate R EPO G RAPH with representative methods from both aforementioned re-
search lines. (i) For procedural frameworks, we evaluate the widely used traditional method,
RAG (Lewis et al., 2020), as well as Agentless (Xia et al., 2024), an open-source state-of-the-art ap-
proach in this direction. For RAG, we follow its initial setting and use BM25 for file-level retrieval.
After that, we append the context of R EPO G RAPH after the code files as part of the prompt. Agent-
less first performs a hierarchical localization in terms of “file-class/function-edits” and then conducts
repair based on localization. The context of R EPO G RAPH is inserted in every step of Agentless. (ii)
For agent frameworks, we consider SWE-agent (Yang et al., 2024) and AutoCodeRover (Zhang
et al., 2024). For both frameworks, we add an additional action “search repograph” for the LLM
agent as described in Section 3. All the choices in the two research lines incorporate GPT-4 and
GPT-4o-based methods to ensure generalization. Detailed implementations and prompts used can
be found in Appendix A.
Evaluation metrics. We evaluate all methods across two key dimensions: Accuracy and Average
Cost. (i) For accuracy, we report the resolve rate and patch application rate. The resolve rate rep-
resents the percentage of issues successfully resolved across all data points. An issue is considered
resolved if the submitted patch passes all test scripts. To assess the patch application rate, we attempt
to apply the generated patches to the repository using the patch program, counting only successful
applications toward this metric. (ii) To evaluate cost efficiency, we report two metrics: average cost
and average tokens, which refer to the inference cost and the number of input/output tokens used
when querying the LLMs, respectively.
Configurations. We use the same GPT version as in the baselines in the experiments. We used GPT-
4o (2024-05-13) and GPT-4-Turbo (gpt-4-1106-preview) from OpenAI for evaluation
and analyses in our experiments. All evaluation processes are performed in a containerized Docker
environment 3 , ensuring stability and reproducibility, made possible through contributions from the
open-source community. Plug-ins with procedural frameworks usually take around 2-3 hours to
finish. For agent frameworks, the inference time is larger, up to around 10 hours.
    2
      Current leaderboard could be found at https://www.swebench.com/
    3
      https://github.com/aorwall/SWE-bench-docker
    5
      https://github.com/swe-bench/experiments/tree/main/evaluation/lite


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Results of R EPO G RAPH with open-source baselines in two research lines, including pro-
cedural and agent frameworks. Numbers of accuracy-related metrics are directly taken from the
leaderboard, while the cost-related ones are computed from the corresponding trajectories5 .
                                                          Accuracy                    Avg. Cost
      Methods                    LLM
                                            resolve       # samples patch apply    $ cost # tokens
      Procedural frameworks
      RAG                       GPT-4          2.67           8        29.33       $0.13   11,736
         +R EPO G RAPH          GPT-4       5.33 ↑2.66      16 ↑8   47.67 ↑18.34   $0.17   15,439
      Agentless                 GPT-4o        27.33          82        97.33       $0.34   42,376
         +R EPO G RAPH          GPT-4o     29.67 ↑2.34      89 ↑7   98.00 ↑0.67    $0.39   47,323
      Agent frameworks
      AutoCodeRover             GPT-4        19.00           57        83.00       $0.45    38,663
         +R EPO G RAPH          GPT-4      21.33 ↑2.33      64 ↑7    86.67 ↑3.67   $0.58    45,112
      SWE-agent                 GPT-4o       18.33           55        87.00       $2.53   498,346
         +R EPO G RAPH          GPT-4o     20.33 ↑2.00      61 ↑6    90.33 ↑3.33   $2.69   518,792

4.2   E XPERIMENT RESULTS

Table 2 presents the main evaluation results of all baseline methods and the correspond-
ing performance with R EPO G RAPH ( +R EPO G RAPH ) as a plug-in in the SWE-bench-Lite test
set. We also report the number of correct samples for each method. The performance in-
crease is marked by ↑num . We also tested other (open-source) LLMs using Claude-3.5-Sonnet
(claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620) (Anthropic, 2024) from Anthropic in Appendix C. Based
on the results, we have the following key observations:
(i) R EPO G RAPH brings consistent performance gain for all combinations of frameworks and
LLM model bases. Specifically, R EPO G RAPH achieves an absolute improvement of +2.66 and
+2.34 in terms of the resolve rate for RAG and Agentless, respectively, which is 99.63% and 8.56%
of relative improvement. The notable improvement demonstrates the effectiveness of our R EPO -
G RAPH in adapting to various scenarios by inducing relevant code context and performing precise
code editings. Additionally, our best performance so far by plugging in Agentless, 29.67, achieves
the state-of-the-art performance on the benchmark6 among all open-source methods.
(ii) Performance gain brought by R EPO G RAPH is slightly larger on procedural frameworks
than agent ones. With procedural frameworks, R EPO G RAPH correctly fixes more issues than agent
ones. This could be due to two primary reasons. Firstly, we observed that mature procedural frame-
works tend to achieve better baseline performance than agent-based frameworks on SWE-bench.
The initial definitive nature of procedural frameworks, with their well-defined running flow and
structure, allows them to leverage plug-ins more effectively. Another reason is that this determinis-
tic behavior reduces the complexity that arises from dynamic decision-making, a key characteristic
of agent-based systems, thereby enabling a smoother integration of performance improvements.
(iii) Performance gain brought by R EPO G RAPH does not rely on more costs. We also compute
and report each method’s average cost and token consumption. By introducing R EPO G RAPH, we
manage to reduce the costs associated with managing the entire repository while achieving compa-
rable or even superior performance. As shown in Table 2, the additional token cost introduced by
RepoGraph is justified given the significant performance improvement it enables, particularly when
compared to the substantially higher costs incurred by previous methods like SWE-agent. This
indicates R EPO G RAPH ’s performance gains are not mainly due to increased token usage.
(iv) Average costs are generally larger on agent frameworks with R EPO G RAPH. This phe-
nomenon is especially obvious with SWE-agent, as it allows the agent to freely determine the next
action based on the current observation. We also found that the integration with agent frameworks
usually leads to larger cost increases, as exemplified by +0.13$ and +0.18$ with AutoCodeRover
and SWE-agent, respectively. The reason lies in the large exploration space in agent frameworks.
The agents might call the search repograph() action many times, which leads to the explosion of
    6
      https://www.swebench.com/. We kindly request that reviewers refrain from intentionally check-
ing submitter information on the leaderboard to maintain the integrity of the double-blind review process.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


prompt contexts. We encourage users to be mindful of cost and to adopt a more granular approach
to cost control when integrating R EPO G RAPH into the agent framework in the future.


5     A NALYSIS

This section presents a detailed analysis to demonstrate that the additional context provided by
R EPO G RAPH is beneficial for the task. We begin by analyzing localization accuracy in comparison
to the gold-standard patch. Next, we explore various R EPO G RAPH configurations, focusing on how
the additional context can be effectively integrated into the existing system. Finally, we perform
an in-depth error analysis, highlighting aspects where R EPO G RAPH can be further improved. For
more analyses including resolve rate in various aspects and action distributions of agent frameworks,
please refer to Appendices C.

5.1   L OCALIZATION C OVERAGE

A crucial step in issue resolution is Table 3: Percentage of problems for accurate edition localiza-
accurately identifying the correct tions with respect to file, function, and line levels. All the num-
locations within the code that re- bers are computed from the corresponding generated patches.
quire modification. Proper local-
ization is essential, as it forms the    Methods                LLM          file    function     line
foundation for generating an ef-         RAG                   GPT-4        47.3       23.3       12.7
fective and accurate patch. With-           +R EPO G RAPH      GPT-4      51.7 ↑4.4 25.3 ↑2.0 14.3 ↑1.6
out this step, the quality of the        Agentless             GPT-4o       68.7       51.0       34.3
fix may be compromised, lead-               +R EPO G RAPH      GPT-4o 74.3 ↑5.6 54.0 ↑3.0 36.7 ↑2.4
ing to incomplete or incorrect so-
                                         Agent frameworks
lutions. We compute the per-
centage of problems where the            AutoCodeRover         GPT-4        62.3       42.3       29.0
edit locations match the ground             +R EPO G RAPH      GPT-4      69.0 ↑4.7 45.7 ↑3.4 31.7 ↑2.7
truth patch in three granularity.        SWE-agent             GPT-4o       61.7       46.3       32.3
Namely, file-level, function-level,         +R EPO G RAPH      GPT-4o     67.3  ↑5.6 49.3 ↑3.0  35.0 ↑2.7

and line-level. We report that a
patch contains the correct location if it edits a superset of all locations in the ground truth patch.
Table 3 presents the results of our analysis. We observed that integrating R EPO G RAPH with all
baseline methods significantly improves file-level accuracy, whereas the enhancement of accuracy
in line-level is comparatively modest. This result aligns with our expectations, as file-level local-
ization is the most coarse-grained, making it inherently easier to improve. In contrast, line-level
localization, being the most fine-grained, poses a greater challenge due to its need for more precise
identification of code segments. Additionally, we found that although line-level accuracy improve-
ments are more pronounced for agent frameworks, their overall resolve rate is lower than that of
procedural frameworks, as shown in Table 2. This discrepancy can be attributed to the fact that
localization, while necessary for generating a final patch, is insufficient. The success of the final
revision still heavily relies on the underlying capabilities of LLMs. Agent frameworks, designed
to operate in a trial-and-error fashion, are particularly susceptible to error accumulation. As these
frameworks iteratively refine their patches, small inaccuracies in earlier localization steps can prop-
agate and magnify throughout the process, ultimately reducing the overall resolve rate. Procedural
frameworks, on the other hand, follow a more structured and deterministic approach to localization
and patch generation. They typically localize and fix issues in a single, more direct step, which can
help mitigate the compounding of errors.

5.2   I NVESTIGATION OF R EPO G RAPH VARIANTS

In this section, we investigate the efficacy of various combinations of sub-graph retrieval and inte-
gration techniques as outlined in Section 3. We explore two sub-graph retrieval variants and two
integration methods. Specifically, for sub-graph retrieval, we index k-hop ego-graphs where k is set
to 1 and 2. We limit our exploration to k values up to 2 due to the extensive context required for
integration and the potential introduction of noise or irrelevant nodes for k ≥ 3. For the integration
methods, we employ two distinct approaches: (i) directly flattening the textual sub-graph by explic-


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: The number of nodes, edges, and tokens of R EPO G RAPH and its variants. For different
retrieval and integration variants, we report the average number on the test set. “summ.” refers to
the summarized version by LLMs of the retrieved ego-graph.
      Metrics        R EPO G RAPH   1-hop + flatten   1-hop + summ.   2-hop + flatten   2-hop + summ.
      # Nodes           1419.3           11.6             11.6            54.5              54.5
      # Edges          26392.1           37.1             37.1            89.9              89.9
      # tokens            -             2310.7            717.5          10505.3           1229.2
      resolve rate        -             29.67             28.33           26.00             28.67


itly detailing the relationships between the search term and its neighboring nodes, and (ii) leveraging
an LLM first to summarize the sub-graph in terms of the core modules and salient dependencies, be-
fore proceeding with further processing. Detailed implementations of these variants and prompts
used can be found in Appendix B.1.
We begin by presenting some statistics for R EPO G RAPH and its various configurations. Perfor-
mance evaluations are conducted on Agentless with R EPO G RAPH integrated as a plug-in module.
Table 4 reports the number of nodes and edges within the (sub)-graphs. Notably, the average number
of nodes and edges for R EPO G RAPH across the SWE-bench dataset is quite substantial, featuring
over 1,000 nodes and 25,000 edges. This highlights the comprehensive nature of the constructed
structure. For the different variants, when k = 1, the information within R EPO G RAPH is concen-
trated around the search term, resulting in an average of 11.6 nodes and 37.1 edges. As k increases
to 2, the retrieved ego-graph expands exponentially, reaching an average of 54.5 nodes and 89.9
edges. Moreover, directly flattening the retrieved ego-graph often significantly increases the token
count, frequently reaching several thousand tokens. However, utilizing an LLM as an additional
summarizer greatly reduces the token count, typically around a thousand.
Table 4 presents the resolve rates for four variants of our method. Notably, while the 2-hop vari-
ant incorporates additional information, directly flattening this information results in the poorest
performance, with a resolve rate of 26.00%, even lower than the original baseline. In contrast,
incorporating summarization via the LLM significantly alleviates context length constraints and
enhances information organization, thereby improving performance. For the 1-hop variant, how-
ever, we observed that adding summarization actually degrades performance, reducing the resolving
rate to 28.33%. We hypothesize that this occurs because the flat 1-hop ego-graph already contains
comprehensive information that fits within the LLM’s context window; thus, summarization may
introduce inevitable information loss.

5.3    T RANSFERIBILITY T EST

To demonstrate the representational power of Table 5: Results on the subset of CrossCodeE-
R EPO G RAPH for repositories and its trans- val with GPT-4o and Deepseek-Coder-V2-Lite-
ferability to tasks requiring an understand- Instruct as the backbone LLMs.
ing of repository structures, we conducted
experiments using the CrossCodeEval bench-                            Code Match Identifier Match
                                                   Methods
mark (Ding et al., 2023). CrossCodeEval is a                          EM    ES     EM        F1
multilingual code completion benchmark that        Deepseek-Coder 10.2 57.3 16.6            49.1
is derived from real-world repositories. It           +R EPO G RAPH   19.7 67.8 29.3        58.9
is designed to emphasize numerous cross-file       GPT-4o             10.5 59.6 16.8        47.9
dependencies. We focus on problems using              +R EPO G RAPH   28.7 68.9 36.0        61.3
Python as the evaluation programming lan-
guage, leading to 2,665 samples. For evaluation metrics, we follow the settings in the original
paper and measure performance with code match and identifier match metrics, assessing accuracy
with exact match (EM), edit similarity (ES), and F1 scores. In our experiments, the search terms are
determined to be the function within which the current line is to be completed.
Table 5 demonstrates the results on CrossCodeEval using GPT-4o and Deepseek-Coder as the back-
bone language model. The original LLMs struggle with repository-level tasks, evidenced by an
EM score of only 10.8 for code matching and 16.7 for identifier matching. These results indicate
significant limitations in handling code structure and variable usage in a broader repository context.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Venn diagram of R EPO G RAPH and baselines on (a) procedural framework and (b) agent
framework on SWE-Bench-Lite. We also plot the error distribution of failing cases against counter-
parts, e.g., detailed error distribution of 12 cases R EPO G RAPH succeeds while Agentless fails.

However, with the integration of the R EPO G RAPH method, there is a substantial improvement across
all metrics with both LLMs. Particularly, we find that the improvement brought by R EPO G RAPH is
more pronounced when integrated with GPT-4o. A potential reason is that GPT-4o is better at inter-
preting the additional context information provided for better code reasoning. These improvements
suggest that incorporating repository-level knowledge, as facilitated by R EPO G RAPH, greatly en-
hances the model’s ability to understand and generate more contextually accurate and semantically
consistent code.

5.4   E RROR A NALYSIS

We want to compare R EPO G RAPH with the corresponding baselines to see the distribution of re-
solved cases and analyze the error reasons for unresolved cases. We plot a Venn diagram for repre-
sentative methods in both procedural and agent frameworks in Figure 3, respectively. We manually
examined all the unique error cases and defined three error categories. (i) Incorrect localization
refers to the failure in accurately identifying code snippets, (ii) contextual misalignment happens
when the generated patch fails to align with the broader context of the codebase, and (iii) regressive
fix introduces new issues in resolving the original issues. More examples are in Appendix D.
We found that the improvement in agent frameworks is more complementary than procedural frame-
works, with larger uniquely resolved cases of 22 compared with 12 in procedural frameworks. To-
gether, they make even larger performance of 31.33% and 22.33%. The reason could also be at-
tributed to the determinism of procedural frameworks. As a plug-in module, R EPO G RAPH tends
to make modifications on existing deterministic processes, resulting in larger overlaps in resolved
issues compared with baselines. Agent frameworks, on the other hand, have quite different action
distributions with R EPO G RAPH as a plug-in (please refer to Appendix A.2). Therefore, the uniquely
resolved cases are more compared with procedural frameworks. For error distributions, contextual
misalignment is the most prevalent error type, followed by incorrect localization and regressive fixes
for all methods, suggesting that while localization is often correct, the applied solutions may regress
or fail to integrate contextually. The phenomenon also echoes the conclusion obtained in Section 5.1.
This is intuitive as all the existing methods focus on providing a more comprehensive and desired
context for LLMs to solve the task, which fundamentally depends on the power of backbone LLMs.
We also found that when integrated with R EPO G RAPH, the proportion of all three error types de-
creases (specifically for “incorrect localization”), indicating that R EPO G RAPH is specifically useful
in aggregating the related contexts of the current to-be-fixed issue.

6     C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
This paper introduces R EPO G RAPH, a plug-in module for modern AI software engineering. R EPO -
G RAPH operates at the code-line level and offers desired navigation through code bases by incorpo-
rating and aggregating information at the line level, file level, and repository level through subgraph
retrieval of ego-graphs. Extensive experiments on real-world SWE tasks show that R EPO G RAPH
significantly boosts the performance of both procedural and agent frameworks. In addition, R EPO -
G RAPH is proved to be smoothly and effectively transferred to other tasks that require repository-
level understanding. Future work could further investigate the generalizability of R EPO G RAPH
across different programming languages, frameworks, and developer environments. Real-time ex-
ecution and feedback could also be explored to further enhance R EPO G RAPH towards a dynamic
version for better AI software engineering abilities.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Jo-
  han Schalkwyk, Andrew M. Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, David Silver, Slav Petrov, Melvin
  Johnson, Ioannis Antonoglou, Julian Schrittwieser, Amelia Glaese, Jilin Chen, Emily Pitler, Tim-
  othy P. Lillicrap, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, James Molloy, Michael Isard, Paul Ronald
  Barham, Tom Hennigan, Benjamin Lee, Fabio Viola, Malcolm Reynolds, Yuanzhong Xu, Ryan
  Doherty, Eli Collins, Clemens Meyer, Eliza Rutherford, Erica Moreira, Kareem Ayoub, Megha
  Goel, George Tucker, Enrique Piqueras, Maxim Krikun, Iain Barr, Nikolay Savinov, Ivo Dani-
  helka, Becca Roelofs, Anaı̈s White, Anders Andreassen, Tamara von Glehn, Lakshman Yagati,
  Mehran Kazemi, Lucas Gonzalez, Misha Khalman, Jakub Sygnowski, and et al. Gemini: A fam-
  ily of highly capable multimodal models. CoRR, abs/2312.11805, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.
  2312.11805. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2312.11805.

Anthropic. Introducing claude 3.5 sonnet. https://www.anthropic.com/news/
  claude-3-5-sonnet, 2024. Accessed: 2024-10-01.

Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.

Ramakrishna Bairi, Atharv Sonwane, Aditya Kanade, Arun Iyer, Suresh Parthasarathy, Sriram Raja-
  mani, B Ashok, and Shashank Shet. Codeplan: Repository-level coding using llms and planning.
  Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering, 1(FSE):675–698, 2024.

Andrew Begel, Yit Phang Khoo, and Thomas Zimmermann. Codebook: discovering and exploiting
  relationships in software repositories. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM/IEEE International Con-
  ference on Software Engineering - Volume 1, ICSE ’10, pp. 125–134, New York, NY, USA, 2010.
  Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781605587196. doi: 10.1145/1806799.1806821.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1806799.1806821.

Teresa Busjahn, Roman Bednarik, Andrew Begel, Martha E. Crosby, James H. Paterson, Carsten
  Schulte, Bonita Sharif, and Sascha Tamm. Eye movements in code reading: relaxing the linear
  order. In Andrea De Lucia, Christian Bird, and Rocco Oliveto (eds.), Proceedings of the 2015
  IEEE 23rd International Conference on Program Comprehension, ICPC 2015, Florence/Firenze,
  Italy, May 16-24, 2015, pp. 255–265. IEEE Computer Society, 2015. doi: 10.1109/ICPC.2015.36.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ICPC.2015.36.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
 Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
 Grew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. 2021.

Wei Cheng, Yuhan Wu, and Wei Hu. Dataflow-guided retrieval augmentation for repository-level
 code completion. In ACL, 2024.

Cognition.    Devin, 2024.                   URL     https://www.cognition.ai/blog/
  introducing-devin.

Yangruibo Ding, Zijian Wang, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Hantian Ding, Ming Tan, Nihal Jain, Murali Kr-
  ishna Ramanathan, Ramesh Nallapati, Parminder Bhatia, Dan Roth, and Bing Xiang. Crosscodee-
  val: A diverse and multilingual benchmark for cross-file code completion. In Thirty-seventh Con-
  ference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=wgDcbBMSfh.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
  Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
  Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurélien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Rozière,
  Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
  Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
  Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
  Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
  Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-
  son, Graeme Nail, Grégoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Ko-
  revaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel M. Kloumann, Ishan
  Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy
  Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak,
  Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Al-
  wala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, and et al. The
  llama 3 herd of models. CoRR, abs/2407.21783, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2407.21783. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.21783.
Angela Fan, Beliz Gokkaya, Mark Harman, Mitya Lyubarskiy, Shubho Sengupta, Shin Yoo, and
  Jie M Zhang. Large language models for software engineering: Survey and open problems. In
  2023 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering: Future of Software Engi-
  neering (ICSE-FoSE), pp. 31–53. IEEE, 2023.
Paul Gauthier. Aider is ai pair programming in your terminal. https://aider.chat/, 2024.
Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai Dong, Wentao Zhang, Guanting Chen, Xiao
  Bi, Y. Wu, Y.K. Li, Fuli Luo, Yingfei Xiong, and Wenfeng Liang. Deepseek-coder: When the
  large language model meets programming – the rise of code intelligence, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2401.14196.
Xinyi Hou, Yanjie Zhao, Yue Liu, Zhou Yang, Kailong Wang, Li Li, Xiapu Luo, David Lo, John
  Grundy, and Haoyu Wang. Large language models for software engineering: A systematic litera-
  ture review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10620, 2023.
Yuntong Hu, Zhihan Lei, Zheng Zhang, Bo Pan, Chen Ling, and Liang Zhao. GRAG: graph
  retrieval-augmented generation. CoRR, abs/2405.16506, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2405.
  16506. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.16506.
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R
  Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
Bowen Jin, Chulin Xie, Jiawei Zhang, Kashob Kumar Roy, Yu Zhang, Zheng Li, Ruirui Li, Xi-
  anfeng Tang, Suhang Wang, Yu Meng, and Jiawei Han. Graph chain-of-thought: Augmenting
  large language models by reasoning on graphs. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Sriku-
  mar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024, pp. 163–184,
  Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.11. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  findings-acl.11.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented genera-
  tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  9459–9474, 2020.
Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao
  Mou, Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, Qian Liu, Evgenii Zheltonozh-
  skii, Terry Yue Zhuo, Thomas Wang, Olivier Dehaene, Mishig Davaadorj, Joel Lamy-Poirier,
  João Monteiro, Oleh Shliazhko, Nicolas Gontier, Nicholas Meade, Armel Zebaze, Ming-Ho Yee,

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Logesh Kumar Umapathi, Jian Zhu, Benjamin Lipkin, Muhtasham Oblokulov, Zhiruo Wang,
  Rudra Murthy V, Jason T. Stillerman, Siva Sankalp Patel, Dmitry Abulkhanov, Marco Zocca,
  Manan Dey, Zhihan Zhang, Nour Fahmy, Urvashi Bhattacharyya, Wenhao Yu, Swayam Singh,
  Sasha Luccioni, Paulo Villegas, Maxim Kunakov, Fedor Zhdanov, Manuel Romero, Tony Lee,
  Nadav Timor, Jennifer Ding, Claire Schlesinger, Hailey Schoelkopf, Jan Ebert, Tri Dao, Mayank
  Mishra, Alex Gu, Jennifer Robinson, Carolyn Jane Anderson, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, Danish
  Contractor, Siva Reddy, Daniel Fried, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Yacine Jernite, Carlos Muñoz Fer-
  randis, Sean Hughes, Thomas Wolf, Arjun Guha, Leandro von Werra, and Harm de Vries.
  Starcoder: may the source be with you!       Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2023, 2023a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=KoFOg41haE.
Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou,
  Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. Starcoder: may the source be with
  you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161, 2023b.
Ming Liang, Xiaoheng Xie, Gehao Zhang, Xunjin Zheng, Peng Di, Hongwei Chen, Chengpeng
 Wang, Gang Fan, et al. Repofuse: Repository-level code completion with fused dual context.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14323, 2024.
Xiangyan Liu, Bo Lan, Zhiyuan Hu, Yang Liu, Zhicheng Zhang, Wenmeng Zhou, Fei Wang, and
  Michael Shieh. Codexgraph: Bridging large language models and code repositories via code
  graph databases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03910, 2024.
Shuai Lu, Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Junjie Huang, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Ambrosio Blanco, Colin B.
  Clement, Dawn Drain, Daxin Jiang, Duyu Tang, Ge Li, Lidong Zhou, Linjun Shou, Long
  Zhou, Michele Tufano, Ming Gong, Ming Zhou, Nan Duan, Neel Sundaresan, Shao Kun
  Deng, Shengyu Fu, and Shujie Liu. Codexglue: A machine learning benchmark dataset
  for code understanding and generation. In Joaquin Vanschoren and Sai-Kit Yeung (eds.),
  Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Bench-
  marks 1, NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks 2021, December 2021, virtual, 2021. URL
  https://datasets-benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/
  hash/c16a5320fa475530d9583c34fd356ef5-Abstract-round1.html.
Yingwei Ma, Qingping Yang, Rongyu Cao, Binhua Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. How to under-
  stand whole software repository? arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01422, 2024.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. CoRR, abs/2303.08774, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2303.08774.
  URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774.
Siru Ouyang, Shuohang Wang, Yang Liu, Ming Zhong, Yizhu Jiao, Dan Iter, Reid Pryzant, Chen-
  guang Zhu, Heng Ji, and Jiawei Han. The shifted and the overlooked: A task-oriented investiga-
  tion of user-GPT interactions. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2375–2393,
  Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.
  emnlp-main.146. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.146.
Siru Ouyang, Zhuosheng Zhang, Bing Yan, Xuan Liu, Yejin Choi, Jiawei Han, and Lianhui Qin.
  Structured chemistry reasoning with large language models. In Forty-first International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024. OpenReview.net,
  2024.
L Page. The page-rank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web, 1999.
Huy N Phan, Hoang N Phan, Tien N Nguyen, and Nghi DQ Bui. Repohyper: Better context retrieval
  is all you need for repository-level code completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.06095, 2024.
Baptiste Rozière, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Lowik Chanussot, and Guillaume Lample. Unsupervised
  translation of programming languages. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Had-
  sell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS
  2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2020/hash/ed23fbf18c2cd35f8c7f8de44f85c08d-Abstract.html.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, Artyom Kozhevnikov, Ivan Evtimov, Joanna Bitton,
  Manish Bhatt, Cristian Canton-Ferrer, Aaron Grattafiori, Wenhan Xiong, Alexandre Défossez,
  Jade Copet, Faisal Azhar, Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Nicolas Usunier, Thomas Scialom, and
  Gabriel Synnaeve. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. CoRR, abs/2308.12950, 2023.
  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2308.12950. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.
  12950.
Disha Shrivastava, Hugo Larochelle, and Daniel Tarlow. Repository-level prompt generation for
  large language models of code. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 31693–
  31715. PMLR, 2023.
Xiangru Tang, Tianyu Hu, Muyang Ye, Yanjun Shao, Xunjian Yin, Siru Ouyang, Wangchunshu
  Zhou, Pan Lu, Zhuosheng Zhang, Yilun Zhao, Arman Cohan, and Mark Gerstein. Chemagent:
  Self-updating library in large language models improves chemical reasoning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv: 2501.06590, 2025.
Michele Tufano, Cody Watson, Gabriele Bavota, Massimiliano Di Penta, Martin White, and Denys
 Poshyvanyk. An empirical study on learning bug-fixing patches in the wild via neural machine
 translation. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM), 28(4):1–29,
 2019.
Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan,
  Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, et al. Opendevin: An open platform for ai software
  developers as generalist agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16741, 2024.
Di Wu, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Dejiao Zhang, Murali Krishna Ramanathan, and Xiaofei Ma.
  Repoformer: Selective retrieval for repository-level code completion. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.10059, 2024.
Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. Agentless: Demystifying
  llm-based software engineering agents. arXiv preprint, 2024.
Zilin Xiao, Ming Gong, Jie Wu, Xingyao Zhang, Linjun Shou, and Daxin Jiang. Instructed language
  models with retrievers are powerful entity linkers. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
  ing, pp. 2267–2282, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan,
  and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15793, 2024.
Ziyu Yao, Jayavardhan Reddy Peddamail, and Huan Sun. Coacor: Code annotation for code retrieval
  with reinforcement learning. In The world wide web conference, pp. 2203–2214, 2019.
Fengji Zhang, Bei Chen, Yue Zhang, Jacky Keung, Jin Liu, Daoguang Zan, Yi Mao, Jian-Guang
  Lou, and Weizhu Chen. Repocoder: Repository-level code completion through iterative retrieval
  and generation. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=q09vTY1Cqh.
Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. Autocoderover: Autonomous
  program improvement, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Contents of Appendix

A Detailed implementations for each baseline method                                               16
   A.1 Procedural frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16
   A.2 Agent frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16

B Detailed implementations for R EPO G RAPH                                                       18
   B.1 R EPO G RAPH variant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
   B.2 R EPO G RAPH components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        18

C Additional Results                                                                              18
   C.1 Results on other LLMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
   C.2 Results on localization for both pass and fail cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
   C.3 Resolve rate by repository . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
   C.4 Resolve rate by time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20

D Examples for error analyses                                                                     21

E Limitations and Future Work                                                                     21

F Impact Statement                                                                                22


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     D ETAILED IMPLEMENTATIONS FOR EACH BASELINE METHOD

This section details the implementation of all four methods in procedural and agent research lines
mentioned in Section 4.1.


A.1   P ROCEDURAL FRAMEWORKS

Figure 4 and Figure 5 illustrate the instructions we used for procedural frameworks, including local-
ization and edition, respectively.


Figure 4: Instructions used in the procedural framework to localize to detailed files and code lines
of edition.

We flattened the context of the retrieved ego-graph from R EPO G RAPH into the template of the
instructions. Specifically, in both “localization” and “edition” stages, R EPO G RAPH is flattened in
the part of Function/Class Dependencies so that the LLMs could better understand its context.


A.2   AGENT FRAMEWORKS

We list all the instructions in every step of agent frameworks. The overall and system instruction is
shown in Figure 6.
The system instruction defines the task setting and the template for each response. We add
“search repograph” as a new action for the agent to use in the command docs, with its signature
listed in Figure 7.
We also plot the frequency for action invoked for both SWE-agent and SWE-agent with R EPO -
G RAPH in Figure 8. We can see that with R EPO G RAPH, the maximum turn of finishing the task is
reduced from 38 to 35. Also, we computed the average turn to finish the task, which demonstrates a
similar trend of 21.47 to 19.12, a significant improvement in efficiency while maintaining effective-
ness. We also observe that the action “search repograph” is invoked mostly in the first 15 rounds of
conversation with LLMs. It is more precise than the original action of “search dir”, “search file”,
and “find file”.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Figure 5: Instruction used for fixing an issue based on the identified locations in certain template.


       Figure 6: The signature of our new action “search repograph” for agent frameworks.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Figure 7: The signature of our new action “search repograph” for agent frameworks.


Figure 8: The frequency with which actions are invoked at each turn by (a) SWE-agent and (b)
SWE-agent w/ R EPO G RAPH.


B     D ETAILED IMPLEMENTATIONS FOR R EPO G RAPH

B.1   R EPO G RAPH VARIANT

In this section, we provide the implementations for variants of R EPO G RAPH mentioned in Sec-
tion 5.2.
In addition to directly flattening the retrieved ego-graph, we propose leveraging large language mod-
els (LLMs) to first summarize the context. The full prompt, along with sample input and output, is
provided in Figure 9.

B.2   R EPO G RAPH COMPONENTS

We first provide a simplified version of Figure 2 in Figure 10, which helps readers quickly catch the
overall pipeline of integration with R EPO G RAPH.
We also provide an illustration in Figure 11 to explain in detail how we exclude project-independent
dependencies mentioned in Section 3.1 Step 2.


C     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS



C.1   R ESULTS ON OTHER LLM S

We conduct additional experiments on SWE-Bench-Lite with Claude-3.5-Sonnet, and the results are
shown in Table 6. We found that with Claude-3.5-Sonnet, the results of baselines are improved a
little. This is intuitive as Claude-3.5-Sonnet is designed for better coding tasks. Additionally, inte-
grating R EPO G RAPH with the baseline methods can still boost the performance by a large margin,
which further prove the effectiveness and extendability of R EPO G RAPH on different foundational
models.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              You will be given a list of code lines and their meta data, please summarize them in terms of the most salient function/classes and the
              dependencies, including invocation and inheritance.

Instruction
              For each instance, please keep the following output format:
              ** Key Classes and Functions:**
              1. [Class/Function name]:
                       •    [Description of the class/function]
              **Core Dependencies:**
              1. [Class/Function name]:
                       •    [Description of the dependency]
              location: astropy/modeling/core.py lines 1765 - 1885 name: render
              contents: \nclass Model(metaclass=_ModelMeta):\n def render(self, out=None, coords=None):\n            \"\"\"\n     Evaluate a model
              at fixed positions, respecting the `bounding_box.\n\n   The key difference relative to evaluating the model directly is that\n   this
              method is limited to a bounding box if the Model.bounding_box\n       attribute is set.\n\n    Parameters\n out : numpy.ndarray,
              optional\n        …
              location: astropy/modeling/core.py lines 4537 - 4633 name: render_model
              contents: \ndef render_model(model, arr=None, coords=None):\n \"\"\"\n Evaluates a model on an input array. Evaluation is
              limited to\n a bounding box if the Model.bounding_box attribute is set.\n\n Parameters\n ----------\n model :
              Model\n        Model to be evaluated.\n arr : numpy.ndarray, optional\n    Array on which the model is evaluated.\n coords :
Input


              array-like, optional\n    Coordinate arrays mapping to arr, such that\n   arr[coords] == arr.\n\n Returns:…
              location: astropy/nddata/utils.py lines 546 - 654 name: __init__
              contents: \nclass Cutout2D:\n def __init__(\n        self, data, position, size, wcs=None, mode=\"trim\", fill_value=np.nan,
              copy=False\n ):\n       if wcs is None:\n        wcs = getattr(data, \"wcs\", None)\n\n        if isinstance(position,
              SkyCoord):\n        if wcs is None:\n           raise ValueError(\"wcs must be input if position is a SkyCoord\")\n       position =
              skycoord_to_pixel(position, wcs, mode=\"all\") # (x, y)\n\n       if np.isscalar(size):\n     size = np.repeat(size, 2) …
              location: astropy/modeling/core.py lines 3872 - 3986 name: render
              contents: \nclass CompoundModel(Model):\n def render(self, out=None, coords=None):\n              \"\"\"\n    Evaluate a model at
              fixed positions, respecting the bounding_box.\n\n     The key difference relative to evaluating the model directly is that\n  this
              method is limited to a bounding box if the Model.bounding_box\n       attribute is set. …

              Key Classes and Functions:
              1. Model (Class):
                      •    Location: astropy/modeling/core.py (line 1765-1865)
                      •    Function: This is the base class for models in the astropy library. It contains a render method, which evaluates the model
                           at fixed positions while respecting the bounding_box attribute. This method ensures that the evaluation occurs over a
                           defined region, with support for various inputs like coordinates and output arrays.
                      •    Invocation: The Model class uses a custom metaclass _ModelMeta. The render method works with numpy arrays and
                           uses helper methods like extract_array and add_array for array manipulation.
              2. Cutout2D (Class):
                      •    Location: astropy/nddata/utils.py (line 546-654)
                      •    Function: A utility class that creates a cutout from a larger 2D array (like an image) centered around a specific position.
Output


                           The __init__ method handles coordinate transformations, shape adjustments, and manages World Coordinate System
                           (WCS) integration for astronomical data.
                      •    Invocation: ……
              3. render_model (Function): ……

              Core Dependencies:
              1. extract_array:
                      •   Extracts a portion of a 2D or 3D array based on the provided coordinates and shape, allowing model evaluations to
                          occur within specific sub-regions, used by Model.render, CompoundModel.render, and render_model.
              2. skycoord_to_pixel
                      •   Astronomical utilities for converting between celestial coordinates and pixel positions, used in Cutout2D
              3. WCS:
                      •   ……


                              Figure 9: Instruction used for summarizing the flattened ego-graph.


                               Figure 10: A conceptual overview of our proposed R EPO G RAPH.



C.2             R ESULTS ON LOCALIZATION FOR BOTH PASS AND FAIL CASES

In order to highlight the improvement in error localization and correction capability of R EPO G RAPH,
we provide a thorough analysis of both pass and fail cases. Results are shown in Table 7. Interest-
ingly, we found that the localization accuracy for failure cases is largely lower than the overall
average results. This indicates that R EPO G RAPH fixes the issues by correctly identifying the editing
locations, without which the issue is unlikely to be resolved.


                                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: A detailed illustration of how we filter the project-dependent relations given a code
snippet. Code line colors are illustrated with respect to global and local relations.


Table 6: Results of R EPO G RAPH on SWE-Bench-Lite test set with Claude-3.5-Sonnet in two re-
search lines, including procedural and agent frameworks. We also report the corresponding cost of
each method.
                                                               Accuracy                    Avg. Cost
 Methods                    LLM
                                                  resolve      # samples patch apply    $ cost # tokens
 Procedural frameworks
 Agentless                  GPT-4o                 27.33          82        97.33       $0.34    42,376
      +R EPO G RAPH         GPT-4o               29.67 ↑2.34     89 ↑7    98.00 ↑0.67   $0.39    47,323
 Agentless                  Claude-3.5-Sonnet      27.67          83        94.33       $0.28    40,984
      +R EPO G RAPH         Claude-3.5-Sonnet    30.33 ↑2.66     91 ↑8    98.67 ↑4.34   $ 0.32   46,238
 Agent frameworks
 SWE-agent                  GPT-4o                 18.33          55        87.00       $2.53    498,346
      +R EPO G RAPH         GPT-4o               20.33 ↑2.00     61 ↑6    90.33 ↑3.33   $2.69    518,792
 SWE-agent                  Claude-3.5-Sonnet      23.00          69        86.67       $1.62    521,208
      +R EPO G RAPH         Claude-3.5-Sonnet    25.33 ↑2.33     76 ↑7    90.67 ↑4.00   $ 1.70   539,942


C.3     R ESOLVE RATE BY REPOSITORY

We plot the results of the resolve rate in terms of repository distribution in Figure 12. From the fig-
ure, it is clear that the resolution of issues varies significantly across different repositories. Notably,
the Django and Sympy repositories have the most unresolved issues, with 75 and 61 unresolved
issues, respectively. This may indicate a higher level of complexity in the issues or a larger backlog
compared to the other repositories. On the other hand, Django has the highest number of resolved
issues, with 39 cases. This highlights a strong effort to address issues, even though the unresolved
count is still high. Sympy follows closely with 16 resolved issues, suggesting a similar trend. Other
repositories like Scikit-learn, Sphinx, and Matplotlib have comparatively fewer issues overall, but
their resolve rates are more balanced. For instance, Sphinx shows a ratio of 13 resolved to 3 unre-
solved issues, reflecting a more consistent effort in issue resolution.

C.4     R ESOLVE RATE BY TIME

We plot the results of the resolve rate in terms of the distribution of releasing time for repositories in
Figure 13. Most of the issues were observed in recent years, starting from 2018, with a substantial
increase in the total number of issues identified after 2018. In the early years (2012-2016), the
number of issues remained relatively low, with both resolved and unresolved counts being minimal.
Starting from 2017, there is a noticeable increase in unresolved issues, with 13 unresolved and only
3 resolved issues. In 2019, the number of resolved and unresolved issues significantly increased,


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Percentage of problems for accurate edition localizations for Agentless+R EPO G RAPH with
respect to file, function, and line levels. All the numbers are computed from the corresponding
generated patches. We also report the accuracy for all pass and failure cases, respectively.
                      Methods                   LLM      file   function   line
                      Agentless +R EPO G RAPH   GPT-4o   74.3    54.0      36.7
                      Pass cases                GPT-4o   91.0    79.8      65.2
                      Failure cases             GPT-4o   67.3    43.1      24.6


Figure 12: Distribution of issues resolved by Agentless +R EPO G RAPH plotted in terms of different
repositories.


with 19 resolved out of 59 issues. This trend continued to rise until 2020, where 47 issues remained
unresolved, and only 17 were resolved, marking the year with the highest number of unresolved
issues in the dataset. By 2021 and 2022, the number of unresolved issues slightly decreased, while
the resolve rate increased compared to 2020. This suggests an improvement in the system’s ability
to address issues in these years. In 2023, although the total number of issues dropped to 30, the
proportion of resolved issues remained strong, with 8 resolved out of 22 issues.


D    E XAMPLES FOR ERROR ANALYSES

 To help better understand the error category listed in Section 5.4, we provide one example for each
category in Figure 14, Figure 15, and Figure 16.


E    L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

(i) We only explored proprietary LLMs, i.e., GPT-4 series. Due to the poor performance of open-
source models on this challenging task, we opted for proprietary models that have demonstrated
superior results in code-related tasks. However, a comprehensive evaluation of open-source models
such as Llama (Dubey et al., 2024) could be a valuable direction for future work, particularly as
these models continue to improve.
(ii) Experiments were only conducted on the Lite set due to the high cost of running large-scale
experiments with proprietary models. Exploring more efficient model deployment strategies and
alternative cost-effective options for running experiments on larger datasets will be essential for
broader applicability.
(iii) Although R EPO G RAPH could be adapted to support other programming languages by adjusting
the parsing schemes in the implementation, we only explored Python in our main experiments.
Future work could extend this approach to other widely used programming languages, such as
JavaScript, Java, or C++, to evaluate the generalizability of our methodology across different pro-
gramming paradigms.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Distribution of issues resolved by Agentless +R EPO G RAPH plotted in terms of release
time for repositories.

                Correct expected format in invalid DurationField error message

                Description
                If you enter a duration “14:00” into a duration field, it translates to “00:14:00” which is 14 minutes. The current error message
                for invalid DurationField says that this should be the format of durations: “[DD] [HH:[MM:]]ss[.uuuuuu]”. But according to the
                actual behaviour, it should be: “[DD] [[HH:]MM:]ss[.uuuuuu]”, because seconds are mandatory, minutes are optional, and
    Issue       hours are optional if minutes are provided. This seems to be a mistake in all Django versions that support the DurationField.
                Also the duration fields could have a default help_text with the requested format, because the syntax is not self-explanatory.


 diff --git a/django/forms/fields.py b/django/forms/fields.py                 diff --git a/django/db/models/fields/__init__.py
 index 935044e..bfb3d28 100644                                                b/django/db/models/fields/__init__.py
 --- a/django/forms/fields.py                                                 index 77ba99e..de7d841 100644
 +++ b/django/forms/fields.py                                                 --- a/django/db/models/fields/__init__.py
 @@ -468,9 +468,10 @@ class DateTimeField(BaseTemporalField):                 +++ b/django/db/models/fields/__init__.py
                                                                              @@ -1587,7 +1587,7 @@ class DurationField(Field):
  class DurationField(Field):                                                     empty_strings_allowed = False
     default_error_messages = {                                                   default_error_messages = {
 -      'invalid': _('Enter a valid duration.'),                                     'invalid': _("'%(value)s' value has an invalid format.
 +       'invalid': _('Enter a valid duration in the format [DD]              It must be in "
 [[HH:]MM:]ss[.uuuuuu].'),                                                    -                "[DD] [HH:[MM:]]ss[.uuuuuu] format.")
       'overflow': _('The number of days must be between                      +                 "[DD] [[HH:]MM:]ss[.uuuuuu] format.")
 {min_days} and {max_days}.')                                                     }
     }                                                                            description = _("Duration")
 + default_help_text = _('Enter a duration in the format [DD]
 [[HH:]MM:]ss[.uuuuuu].')

     def prepare_value(self, value):
       if isinstance(value, datetime.timedelta):

                          (a) RepoGraph                                                             (b) Groundtruth


              Tests


Figure 14: An example of incorrect localization. The correct patch modifies the “DurationField”
in django/db/models/fields/ init .py. This is the correct place to handle the error message
formatting for the “DurationField” used in Django models. R EPO G RAPH, however, modifies
django/forms/fields.py. This file handles Django form fields, not the model fields. While both model
and form fields have overlapping behavior, in this case, the correction is required for the model field
(DurationField in init .py), not the form field.


F      I MPACT S TATEMENT

The impact of this paper lies in its substantial contribution to enhancing the capability of AI-driven
software engineering, particularly with respect to repository-level code understanding. The introduc-


                                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Trailing whitespace in DatasetGroupBy text representation
             When displaying a DatasetGroupBy in an interactive Python session, the first line of output contains a trailing whitespace. The
             first example in the documentation demonstrate this:

             >>> import xarray as xr, numpy as np
             >>> ds = xr.Dataset(
             ... {"foo": (("x", "y"), np.random.rand(4, 3))},
             ... coords={"x": [10, 20, 30, 40], "letters": ("x", list("abba"))}
             >>> ds.groupby("letters")
             DatasetGroupBy, grouped over 'letters'
             2 groups with labels 'a', 'b'.

             There is a trailing whitespace in the first line of output which is "DatasetGroupBy, grouped over 'letters' ". This can be seen more
             clearly by converting the object to a string (note the whitespace before `\n`):

             >>> str(ds.groupby("letters"))
  Issue      "DatasetGroupBy, grouped over 'letters' \n2 groups with labels 'a', 'b'."

             While this isn't a problem in itself, it causes an issue for us because we use flake8 in continuous integration to verify that our code
             is correctly formatted and we also have doctests that rely on DatasetGroupBy textual representation. Flake8 reports a violation
             on the trailing whitespaces in our docstrings. If we remove the trailing whitespaces, our doctests fail because the expected
             output doesn't match the actual output. So we have conflicting constraints coming from our tools which both seem reasonable.
             Trailing whitespaces are forbidden by flake8 because, among other reasons, they lead to noisy git diffs. Doctest want the
             expected output to be exactly the same as the actual output and considers a trailing whitespace to be a significant difference.
             We could configure flake8 to ignore this particular violation for the files in which we have these doctests, but this may cause
             other trailing whitespaces to creep in our code, which we don't want. Unfortunately it's not possible to just add `# NoQA`
             comments to get flake8 to ignore the violation only for specific lines because that creates a difference between expected and
             actual output from doctest point of view. Flake8 doesn't allow to disable checks for blocks of code either.

             Is there a reason for having this trailing whitespace in DatasetGroupBy representation? Whould it be OK to remove it? If so
             please let me know and I can make a pull request.

 diff --git a/xarray/core/groupby.py b/xarray/core/groupby.py            diff --git a/xarray/core/groupby.py b/xarray/core/groupby.py
 index bf63803..7f9a25e 100644                                           index bf63803..9aac7fc 100644
 --- a/xarray/core/groupby.py                                            --- a/xarray/core/groupby.py
 +++ b/xarray/core/groupby.py                                            +++ b/xarray/core/groupby.py
 @@ -1011,5 +1011,10 @@ class DatasetGroupBy(GroupBy,                    @@ -436,7 +436,7 @@ class GroupBy(SupportsArithmetic):
 ImplementsDatasetReduce):                                                      return zip(self._unique_coord.values, self._iter_grouped())
        return self.map(lambda ds: ds.assign(**kwargs))
                                                                             def __repr__(self):
 +def __repr__(self):                                                    -      return "{}, grouped over {!r} \n{!r} groups with labels
 + # Original representation with trailing whitespace removed            {}.".format(
 + groups = "', '".join(str(k) for k in self.groups)                     +       return "{}, grouped over {!r}\n{!r} groups with labels
 + return f"DatasetGroupBy, grouped over                                 {}.".format(
 {self._group.name}\n{len(self.groups)} groups with labels                         self.__class__.__name__,
 '{groups}'."                                                                      self._unique_coord.name,
 + ops.inject_reduce_methods(DatasetGroupBy)                                       self._unique_coord.size,
 - ops.inject_binary_ops(DatasetGroupBy)
 + ops.inject_binary_ops(DatasetGroupBy)


                        (a) RepoGraph                                                               (b) Groundtruth


          Tests


Figure 15: An example of contextual misalignment. The model-generated patch places the repr
method in the wrong class DatasetGroupBy, whereas the correct patch modifies it in the GroupBy
class. The repr method should be implemented in the GroupBy class because it deals with the
general group-by functionality. “DatasetGroupBy” is a subclass and doesn’t require a new represen-
tation method if “GroupBy” already has one. Additionally, when fixing white space trailing, while
functionally similar, R EPO G RAPH’s generation doesn’t exactly match the style or intention of the
correct patch.


tion of R EPO G RAPH not only significantly improves Large Language Models (LLMs) in navigating
and comprehending entire codebases, but also showcases the potential of integrating repository-wide
structures into AI workflows. By extending the scope from function-level tasks to holistic repository
management, R EPO G RAPH pushes the boundaries of AI’s utility in modern software engineering.


                                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               expr.atoms() should return objects with no args instead of subclasses of Atom
               `expr.atoms()` with no arguments returns subclasses of `Atom` in `expr`. But the correct definition of a leaf node should be that it
               has no `.args`.
  Issue
               This should be easy to fix, but one needs to check that this doesn't affect the performance.

 diff --git a/sympy/core/basic.py b/sympy/core/basic.py                                diff --git a/sympy/core/basic.py b/sympy/core/basic.py
 index 97eb81a..4fa2f3c 100644                                                         index 97eb81a..f1f411f 100644
 --- a/sympy/core/basic.py                                                             --- a/sympy/core/basic.py
 +++ b/sympy/core/basic.py                                                             +++ b/sympy/core/basic.py
 @@ -500,15 +500,11 @@ class Basic(metaclass=ManagedProperties):                       @@ -507,7 +507,7 @@ class
        {I*pi, 2*sin(y + I*pi)}                                                        Basic(metaclass=ManagedProperties):
 -      if types:                                                                                types = (Atom,)
 -          types = tuple(                                                                    result = set()
 -              [t if isinstance(t, type) else type(t) for t in types])                       for expr in preorder_traversal(self):
 +       if not types:                                                                 -         if isinstance(expr, types):
 +           result = {expr for expr in preorder_traversal(self) if not expr.args}     +          if isinstance(expr, types) and not expr.args:
        else:                                                                                        result.add(expr)
 -          types = (Atom,)                                                                   return result
 -      result = set()
 -      for expr in preorder_traversal(self):
 -          if isinstance(expr, types):
 -              result.add(expr)
 +           types = tuple(t if isinstance(t, type) else type(t) for t in types)
 +           result = {expr for expr in preorder_traversal(self) if isinstance(expr,
 types)}
        return result
                           (a) RepoGraph                                                               (b) Groundtruth


          Tests


Figure 16: An example of regressive fix. The model-generated patch successfully resolves the issue
which requires the return of objects with no args instead of subclasses of Atom by adding the key
code line if not expr.args. However, the fix introduces other new issues such as the size of return
objects, as exemplified in the unit tests.


This advancement opens new opportunities for using LLMs in complex engineering tasks such as
automated debugging, repository maintenance, and large-scale refactoring. Furthermore, by high-
lighting the importance of repository-level context for accurate code generation and maintenance,
the paper sets a new trajectory for future research in AI and software engineering. It encourages
deeper exploration of AI’s ability to not only write code but also understand and manage large-scale
software projects more efficiently. We foresee minimal risks or negative societal impacts from this
work. All datasets and benchmarks used in the evaluation are publicly available, and we adhered
to their respective licenses. Additionally, R EPO G RAPH has been open-sourced, making it accessi-
ble to the research community, particularly to groups with limited access to extensive computing
resources, thus fostering broader adoption and further development.


                                                                             24
