Herb-GANNet: Synthetic Data Generation through Conditional
GANs for Improving Accuracy in Medicinal Leaf Classification
Smitha Reddy Sa , Vaishnavi Kb , Sapna Rc*
a
 Department of Computer Science, School of Computer Science and Engineering and Information
Science, Presidency University, Bengaluru, India
b
    Associate 1 software engineer, Capegemini, Bengaluru, India
c
*Department of Information Technology, Manipal Institute of Technology Bengaluru, Manipal
Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India

Corresponding author: Sapna R
Email: sapna.r@manipal.edu



Abstract
Accurate classification of medicinal leaves is essential across various fields, including agriculture,
Ayurveda, drug discovery, and biodiversity conservation. However, this task can be complex and time
consuming for experts due to the complexity of plant morphology, limited public datasets, and inherent
class imbalances among species. These issues not only hinder effective identification and utilization of
medicinal plants but also impede research and development in related domains. This study explores the
application of Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (CGANs) to generate synthetic data aimed
at improving medicinal leaf classification models. CGANs offer effective solution for augmenting
datasets and addressing class imbalance issues. We employed a conditional Deep Convolution
Generative Adversarial Network (cDCGAN) to produce 500 synthetic images for each of thirty different
plant species. To evaluate the effectiveness of the generated data, we trained and evaluated three popular
convolutional neural networks: ResNet-34, VGG-16, and EfficientNet-B1, on both the original and
augmented datasets. Our results show that CGAN-generated data significantly improved the
performance across all tested models. EfficientNet-B1 achieved the lowest test loss of 1.74% on the
augmented dataset, while ResNet-34 exhibited the highest test accuracy of 98.26%. These findings
indicate that cDCGANs can generate synthetic data that effectively mimics real images, leading to (1)
larger training datasets, (2) reduced data collection cost, and (3) increased data diversity and model
generalization by providing a broader range of training examples.
Keywords: medicinal leaf classification, data augmentation, generative adversarial networks (GAN),
deep learning, image generation, classification, drug discovery
