Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025.


CSGO: C ONTENT-S TYLE C OMPOSITION IN T EXT- TO -
I MAGE G ENERATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                          Content Image   Style Image       StyleID         Ours           Content Image           Style Image          StyleID                        Ours
     (1) Image-Driven Style Transfer
     (2) Text-Driven Stylized Synthesis


                                                                        ”A man”                    ”A rocket”                        Content Image                New prompt           Ours
                                           Style Image    ”A dog”                     ”A panda”                     ”A building”
                                                                                                                                                       Original


                                                                                                                                                                     a small house
                                                                                                                                                                      with a bike
                                                                                                                                                       prompt:


                                                                                                                                                                                              (3) Text Editing -Driven
                                                                                                                                                        a small


                                                                                                                                                                                                  Stylized Synthesis
                                                                                                                                                     house with a
                                                                                                                                                     sheep statue
                                                                                                                                                      on top of it
                                                                                                                                      Style Image


                                                                                                                                                                       a small house
Figure 1: (1) Comparison of the style transfer results of the proposed method with the recent
state-of-the-art method StyleID Chung et al. (2024). (2) Our CSGO achieves high-quality text-driven
stylized synthesis. (3) Our CSGO achieves high-quality text editing-driven stylized synthesis, where
content, where the italicized text (e.g., content image) is the CSGO input.

                                                                                                   A BSTRACT

                                           The diffusion model has shown exceptional capabilities in controlled image gen-
                                           eration, which has further fueled interest in image style transfer. Existing works
                                           mainly focus on training free-based methods (e.g., image inversion) due to the
                                           scarcity of specific data. In this study, we present a data construction pipeline
                                           for content-style-stylized image triplets that generates and automatically cleanses
                                           stylized triplets. Based on this pipeline, we construct a dataset IMAGStyle, the
                                           first large-scale style transfer dataset containing 210k image triplets, available for
                                           the community to explore and research. Equipped with IMAGStyle, we propose
                                           a simple yet effective framework CSGO, a style transfer model based on end-
                                           to-end training, which explicitly decouples content and style features employing
                                           independent feature injection. Our CSGO implements image-driven style transfer,
                                           text-driven stylized synthesis, and text editing-driven stylized synthesis in the same
                                           model. We conduct extensive experiments on CSGO to validate the effectiveness
                                           of synthetic stylized data for style control. Meanwhile, ablation experiments show
                                           the effectiveness of CSGO.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in diffusion models have significantly improved the field of text-to-image gener-
ation (Song et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2020). Models such as SD Rombach et al. (2022) excel at creating
visually appealing images based on textual prompts, playing a crucial role in personalized content
creation (Ruiz et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024). Despite numerous studies on general controllability,
image style transfer remains particularly challenging.


                                                                                                                1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025.


Image style transfer aims to generate a plausible target image by combining the content of one image
with the style of another, ensuring that the target image maintains the original content’s semantics
while adopting the desired style (Jing et al., 2019; Deng et al., 2020). This process requires fine-
grained control over content and style, involving abstract concepts like texture, color, composition,
and visual quality, making it a complex and nuanced challenge (Chung et al., 2024).
A significant challenge in style transfer is the lack of a large-scale stylized dataset, which makes
it impossible to train models end-to-end and results in suboptimal style transfer quality for non-
end-to-end methods. Existing methods typically rely on training-free structures, such as DDIM
inversion Song et al. (2020) or carefully tuned feature injection layers of pre-trained IP-Adapter (Ye
et al., 2023). Methods like Plug-and-Play Tumanyan et al. (2023), VCT Cheng et al. (2023), and
the state-of-the-art StyleID Chung et al. (2024) employ content image inversion and sometimes
style image inversion to extract and inject image features into specifically designed layers. However,
inverting content and style images significantly increases inference time, and DDIM inversion can lose
critical information Mokady et al. (2023), leading to failures, as shown in Figure 1. InstantStyle Wang
et al. (2024a) employs the pre-trained IP-Adapter. However, it struggles with accurate content control.
Another class of methods relies on a small amount of data to train LoRA and implicitly decouple
content and style LoRAs, such as ZipLoRA Shah et al. (2023) and B-LoRA Frenkel et al. (2024),
which combine style and content LoRAs to achieve content retention and Style transfer. However,
each image requires fine-tuning, and implicit decoupling reduces stability.
To overcome the above challenges, we start by constructing a style transfer-specific dataset and
then design a simple yet effective framework to validate the beneficial effects of this large-scale
dataset on style transfer. Initially, we propose a dataset construction pipeline for Content-Style-
Stylized Image Triplets (CSSIT), incorporating both a data generation method and an automated
cleaning process. Using this pipeline, we construct a large-scale stylized dataset, IMAGStyle,
comprising 210K content-style-stylized image triplets. Next, we introduce an end-to-end trained
style transfer framework, CSGO. Unlike previous implicit extractions, it explicitly uses independent
content and style feature injection modules to achieve high-quality image style transformations. The
framework simultaneously accepts style and content images as inputs and efficiently fuses content and
style features using well-designed feature injection blocks. Benefiting from the decoupled training
framework, once trained, CSGO realizes any form of arbitrary style transfer without fine-tuning at the
inference stage, including sketch or nature image-driven style transfer, text-driven, text editing-driven
stylized synthesis. Finally, we introduce a Content Alignment Score (CAS) to evaluate the quality of
style transfer, effectively measuring the degree of content loss post-transfer. Extensive qualitative and
quantitative studies validate that our proposed method achieves advanced zero-shot style transfer.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Text-to-Image Model. In recent years, diffusion models have garnered significant attention in the
text-to-image generation community due to their powerful generative capabilities demonstrated by
early works (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022). Owing to large-scale training Schuh-
mann et al. (2022), improved architectures Radford et al. (2021); Peebles & Xie (2023), and latent
space diffusion mechanisms, models like Stable Diffusion have achieved notable success in text-to-
image generation (Ramesh et al., 2022). The focus on controllability in text-to-image models has
grown in response to practical demands. Popular models such as ControlNet Zhang et al. (2023a),
T2Iadapter Mou et al. (2024), and IP-Adapter Ye et al. (2023) introduce additional image conditions
to enhance controllability. These models use sophisticated feature extraction methods and integrate
these features into well-designed modules to achieve layout control. In this paper, we present a
style transfer framework, CSGO, based on an image-conditional generation model that can perform
zero-shot style transfer.
Style Transfer. Style transfer has garnered significant attention and research due to its practical
applications in art creation (Gatys et al., 2016). Early methods, both optimization-based Gatys
et al. (2016) and inference-based Chen et al. (2017); Dumoulin et al. (2016), are limited by speed
constraints and the diversity of style transfer. The AdaIN approach Huang & Belongie (2017), which
separates content and style features from deep features, has become a representative method for style
transfer, inspiring a series of techniques using statistical mean and variance (Chen et al., 2021; Hertz
et al., 2024). Additionally, transformer-based methods such as StyleFormer Wu et al. (2021) and


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025.


StyTR2 Deng et al. (2022) improve content bias. However, these methods primarily focus on color or
stroke transfer and face limitations in arbitrary style transfer.
Currently, inversion-based Style Transfer (InST) Zhang et al. (2023b) is proposed to obtain inversion
latent of style image and manipulate attention maps to edit generated Images. However, DDIM
(Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models) inversion results in content loss and increased inference
time (Song et al., 2020). Hertz et al. explore self-attention layers using key and value matrices for
style transfer (Hertz et al., 2024). DEADiff Qi et al. (2024) and StyleShot Junyao et al. (2024) are
trained through a two-stage style control method. However, it is easy to lose detailed information
within the control through sparse lines. InstantStyle Wang et al. (2024a;b) to achieve high-quality style
control through pre-trained prompt adapter Ye et al. (2023) and carefully designed injection layers.
However, these methods struggle with achieving high-precision style transfer and face limitations
related to content preservation. Some fine-tuning approaches, such as LoRA Hu et al. (2021), DB-
LoRA Ryu, Zip-LoRA Shah et al. (2023), and B-LoRA Frenkel et al. (2024), enable higher-quality
style-controlled generation but require fine-tuning for different styles and face challenges in achieving
style transfer. Our proposed method introduces a novel style transfer dataset and develops the CSGO
framework, achieving high-quality arbitrary image style transfer without the need for fine-tuning.


3     DATA P IPELINE

In this section, we first introduce the proposed pipeline for constructing content-style-stylized image
triplets. Then, we describe the constructed IMAGStyle dataset in detail.

3.1    P IPELINE FOR C ONSTRUCTING C ONTENT-S TYLE -S TYLIZED I MAGE T RIPLETS
                                                            Content Image   Style Image   Failure Case 1   Failure Case 2
The lack of a large-scale open-source
dataset of content-style-stylized image
pairs (CSSIT) in the community seriously
hinders the research on style transfer.
In this work, we propose a data construction
pipeline that automatically constructs and cleans
to obtain high-quality content-style-stylized im-
age triplets, given only arbitrary content images
and style images. The pipeline contains two
steps: (1) stylized image generation and (2) styl-
ized image cleaning.                                Figure 2: Failure cases in step (1), which fail to
                                                    maintain the layout of the content image.
Stylized image generation. Given an arbitrary
content image C and an arbitrary style image S,
the goal is to generate a stylized image T that Algorithm 1 Pipeline of Constructing CSSIT
preserves the content of C while adopting the Input: content images Setcontent , style images Setstyle
style of S. We are inspired by B-LoRA Frenkel Output: Content-style-stylized image triplets Set
                                                    1: for each C ∈ Setcontent do
et al. (2024), which finds that content LoRA 2: CLoRA ← Train               LoRA for C
and style LoRA can be implicitly separated by 3: CLoRA       content
                                                                      ← Separate content LoRA in CLoRA
SD-trained LoRA, preserving the original im- 4: for each S ∈ Setstyle do
                                                    5:
age’s content and style information, respectively. 6:         SLoRA ← Train LoRA for S
                                                                style
                                                              SLoRA    ← Separate style LoRA in SLoRA
Therefore, we first train a large number of Lo- 7:            CSLoRA ← Combine CLoRA    content      style
                                                                                                and SLoRA
RAs with lots of content and style images. To 8:              T = {T1 , T2 , ..., Tn } ← Generate n images by SDXL
ensure that the content of the generated image                and CSLoRA
T is aligned to C as much as possible, the loRA 9:            CAS1 , CAS2 , ..., CASn ← Compute CAS for each
                                                              generated image based on Equ.( 1)
for C is trained using only one content image 10:              i ← Obtain the index of the minimum value of all CAS
C. Then, Each trained loRA is decomposed into 11:              Set.append([C, S, Ti ])
                                                    12:     end for
a content LoRA and a style LoRA through im- 13: end for
plicit separate mentioned by work Frenkel et al. 14: return Set
(2024). Finally, the content LoRA of image C is
combined with the style LoRA of S to generate the target images T = {T1 , T2 , ..., Tn } using the base
model. However, the implicit separate approach is unstable, resulting in the content and style LoRA
not reliably retaining content or style information. This manifests itself in the form of the generated


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025.


image Ti , which does not always agree with the content of C, as shown in Figure 2. Therefore, it is
necessary to filter T , sampling the most reasonable Ti as the target image.
Stylized image cleaning. Slow methods of cleaning data with human involvement are unacceptable
for the construction of large-scale stylized data triplets. To this end, we develop an automatic cleaning
method to obtain the ideal and high-quality stylized image T efficiently. First, we propose a content
alignment score (CAS) that effectively measures the content alignment of the generated image with
the content image. It is defined as the feature distance between the content semantic features (without
style information) of the generated image and the original content image. It is represented as follows:
                                                                          2
                               CASi = ∥Ada(ϕ(C)) − Ada(ϕ(Ti ))∥ ,                                        (1)
where CASi denotes the content alignment score of generated image Ti , ϕ(·) denotes image encoder.
We compare the mainstream feature extractors and the closest to human filtering results is DINO-
V2 (Li et al., 2023). Ada(F ) represents a function of feature F to remove style information. We
follow AdaIN Huang & Belongie (2017) to express style information by mean and variance. It is
represented as follows:
                                                    F − µ(F )
                                       Ada(F ) =               ,                                   (2)
                                                      ρ(F )
where µ(F ) and ρ(F ) represent the mean and variance of feature F . Obviously, a smaller CAS
indicates that the generated image is closer to the content of the original image. In Algorithm 1, we
provide a pseudo-code of our pipeline.

3.2   IMAGS TYLE DATASET D ETAILS

Content Images. To ensure that the content images have clear semantic information and fa-
cilitate separating after training, we employ the saliency detection datasets, MSRA10K Cheng
et al. (2015; 2013) and MSRA-B Jiang et al. (2013), as the content images. In addi-
tion, for sketch stylized, we sample 1000 sketch images from ImageNet-Sketch Wang et al.
(2019) as content images. The category distribution of content images is shown in Figure 3.
We use BLIP Li et al. (2023) to generate a caption for each                         Toys
content image. A total of 11,000 content images are trained           6%
                                                                         3%4%
                                                                              8%
                                                                                    Architecture
                                                                                    Transportation
and used as content LoRA.                                                        6% Food
                                                                      22%             4%  Clothing
Style Images. To ensure the richness of the style diversity,                              Tools
                                                                                       9%
we sample 5000 images of different painting styles (history                               Natural Landscapes

painting, portrait, genre painting, landscape, and still life) from                       Furniture

                                                                        13%               Terrestrial Animals
the Wikiart dataset (Saleh & Elgammal, 2016). In addition,                        17%
                                                                                          Aquatic Animals
                                                                             8%
we generated 5000 images using Midjourney covering diverse                                Others

styles, including Classical, Modern, Romantic, Realistic, Sur-
                                                                    Figure 3: Distribution of content
real, Abstract, Futuristic, Bright, Dark styles etc. A total of
                                                                    images.
10,000 style images are used to train style LoRA.
Dataset. Based on the pipeline described in Section 3.1, we construct a style transfer dataset,
IMAGStyle, which contains 210K content-style-stylized image triplets as training dataset. Further-
more, we collect 248 content images from the web containing images of real scenes, sketched scenes,
faces, and style scenes, as well as 206 style images of different scenes as testing dataset. For testing,
each content image is transferred to 206 styles. This dataset will be used for community research on
style transfer and stylized synthesis.

4     A PPROACH
4.1   CSGO FRAMEWORK

The proposed style transfer model, CSGO, shown in Figure 4, aims to achieve arbitrary stylization
of any image without fine-tuning, including sketch and natural image-driven style transfer, text-
driven stylized synthesis, and text editing-driven stylized synthesis. Benefiting from the proposed
IMAGStyle dataset, the proposed CSGO supports an end-to-end style transfer training paradigm. To
ensure effective style transfer and accurate content preservation, we carefully design the content and
style control modules. In addition, to reduce the risk that the content image leaks style information or


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025.


                                     Text Embedding
                                                                                                                    CSGO                              IMAGStyle Dataset
              Text Prompt: “a cat”                                                                                                                         Style Image
                                                                                                                                           Content Image                 Target Image
                                                                                                                          ℱ(𝑆)

                                                                                                     ℱ(𝑆)!
                                                                                Cross                          Style              Image
  𝐶                                                                            Attention                     Projection          Encoder


                                                 ControlNet
                       ℱ(𝐶)

                                             !
       Image                     Content ℱ(𝐶)   Cross                              Cross                             𝑆
      Encoder                   Projection     Attention                          Attention

                             Content Control                                                           Style Control


                                                        Content Block
 Base Model


                                                                                       Style Block
                                                                        UNet                                                Output


Figure 4: (a) Left: Overview of the proposed end-to-end style transfer framework CSGO. (b) Right:
Samples from our IMAGStyle dataset. For content control, firstly, we use an image encoder and
projection layer to extract the content features F(C)′ , and inject them into the down-sampling blocks
through an additional cross attention layer. Secondly, we use the pre-trained ControlNet to extract the
fine-grained information of the content image and inject it into the up-sampling blocks to ensure the
content preservation. For style control, we use an image encoder to extract the style features F(S)′
of the style image S, which are injected into the up-sampling blocks of the ControlNet model and the
base model using the cross attention layer, respectively. Finally, in the inference stage, the styled
results can be generated efficiently without fine-tuning.

the style image leaks content, the content control and style control modules are explicitly decoupled,
and the corresponding features are extracted independently. To be more specific, we categorize our
CSGO into two main components and describe them in detail.
Content Control. The purpose of content control is to ensure that the stylized image retains the
semantics, layout, and other features of the content image. To this end, we carefully designed two ways
of content control. First, we implement content control through pre-trained ControlNet Zhang et al.
(2023a), whose input is the content image and the corresponding caption. We leverage the capabilities
of the specific content-controllable model(Tile ControlNet) to reduce the data requirements and
computational costs of training content retention from scratch Following the ControlNet, the output
of ControlNet is directly injected into the up-sampling blocks of the base model (pre-trained UNet
in SD) to obtain fusion output Di′ = Di + δc × Ci , Di denotes the output of i-th block in the base
model, Ci denotes the output of i-th block in ControlNet, δc represents the fusion weight.
In addition, to achieve content control in the down-sampling blocks of the base model, we utilize an
additional learnable cross-attention layer to inject content features into down blocks. Specifically, we
use pre-trained CLIP image encoder Radford et al. (2021) and a learnable projection layer to extract
the semantic feature F(C)′ of the content image. Then, we utilize an additional cross-attention
layer to inject the extracted content features into the down-sampling blocks of the base model, i.e.,
  ′
DC   = D + λc × DC , D denotes the output of in the base model, DC denotes the output of content
IP-Adapter, λc represents the fusion weight (Ye et al., 2023). These two content control strategies
ensure small content loss during the style transfer.
Style Control. To ensure that the proposed CSGO has strong style control capability, we also
design two simple yet effective style control methods. Generally, we feed the style images into a
pre-trained image encoder to extract the original embedding F(S) ∈ Ro×d and map them to the
new embedding F(S)′ ∈ Rt×d through the Style Projection layer. Here, o and t represent the token
number of original and new embeddings, d denotes the dimension of F(S). For style projection, we
employ the Perceiver Resampler structure Alayrac et al. (2022) to obtain more detailed style features.
Then, we utilize an additional cross-attention layer to inject the new embedding into the up-sampling
blocks of the base model.
Furthermore, we note that relying only on the injection of the up-sampling blocks of the base model
weakens the style control since ControlNet injections in the content control may leak style information


                                                                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025.


       Content Image   Style Image   Ours      Instantstyle   StyleShot_lienart   StyleShot   StyleID   styTR2   StyleAligned


   Figure 5: Comparison of image-driven style transfer results. Zoomed in for the best viewing.

of the content image C. For this reason, we propose to use an independent cross attention module
to simultaneously inject style features into, and the fusion weight is λs , as shown in Figure 4. The
insight of this is to pre-adjust the style of the content image using style features making the output of
the Controlnet model retain the content while containing the desired style features.
In summary, the proposed CSGO framework explicitly learns separate feature processing modules
that inject style and content features into different locations of the base model, respectively. Despite
its simplicity, CSGO achieves state-of-the-art style transfer results.

4.2   M ODEL T RAINING AND I NFERENCE .

Training. Based on the proposed dataset, IMAGStyle, our CSGO is the first implementation of
end-to-end style transfer training. Given a content image C, a caption P of the content image, a style
image S, and a target image T , we train a style transfer network based on a pre-trained diffusion
model. Our training objective is to model the relationship between the styled image T and Gaussian
noise under content and style image conditions, which is represented as follows:
                                                  h                             i
                                                                              2
                        L = Ez0 ,t,P,C,S,ϵ∼N (0,1) ∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, C, S, P )∥ ,                   (3)
where ε denotes the random sampled Gaussian noise, εθ denotes the trainable parameters of CSGO,
t represents the√timestep. Note
                              √ that the latent latent zt is constructed with a style image T during
training, zt = ᾱt ψ(T ) + 1 − ᾱt ε, where ψ(·) mapping the original input to the latent space
function, ᾱt is consistent with diffusion models (Song et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2020). We randomly
drop content image and style image conditions in the training phase to enable classifier-free guidance
in the inference stage.
Inference. During the inference phase, we employ classifier-free guidance. The output of timestep t
is indicated as follows:
                           ϵ̂θ (zt , t, C, S, P ) = wϵθ (zt , t, C, S, P ) + (1 − w)ϵθ (zt , t),                                (4)
where w represents the classifier-free guidance factor (CFG).


                                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025.


Table 1: Comparison of style similarity (CSD) and content alignment (CAS) with recent state-of-the-
art methods on the test dataset.
                        StyTR2                          Style-Aligned                  StyleID                      InstantStyle                       StyleShot                             StyleShot-lineart                         CSGO
                    (Deng et al., 2022)               (Hertz et al., 2024)        (Chung et al., 2024)           (Wang et al., 2024a)             (Junyao et al., 2024)                    (Junyao et al., 2024)                        Ours

 CSD (↑)                      0.2695                        0.4274                          0.0992                        0.3175                           0.4522                                      0.3903                          0.5146
 CAS (↓)                      0.9699                        1.3930                          0.4873                        1.3147                           1.5105                                      1.0750                          0.8386


5          E XPERIMENTS
5.1               E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

                       Prompts         InstantStyle       StyleShot          StyleAligned     DEADiff              Ours            InstantStyle        StyleShot              StyleAligned               DEADiff                   Ours


                         a
                       monkey



                    girl playing
 Style Image A      with a ball in
                         the
                     playground



                    a church in
                        the
 Style Image B       mountain



                       a man
                     reading a
                       book



                       a robot
                       near the
                        house


Figure 6: Comparison of generation results for text-driven stylized synthesis with recent methods.

                                                                                                                                                    Src Prompt: a painting of a     a painting of a wizard wearing    a painting of a wizard
                                                                                                        Content Image          Style Image          wizard with a book and a hat   sunglasses with a book ang a hat       wearing a hat
    Style Image     “A giraffe”           “A man”         “A house”      “A computer”


                                                                                                                                                     Src Prompt: arafed view of a arafed view of a building and       arafed view of a building
                                                                                                                                                    building with a sky background plants with a sky background         and a car with a sky
                                                                                                                                                           and a cloudy sky              and a cloudy sky                    background


Figure 7: Generated results of the proposed Figure 8: The generated results of the proposed CSGO
CSGO in text-driven stylized synthesis.     in text editing-driven stylized synthesis.
Setup. For the IMAGstyle dataset, during the training phase, we suggest using ‘a [vcp]’ as a prompt
for content images and ‘a [stp]’ as a prompt for style images. The rank is set to 64 and each B-loRA
is trained with 1000 steps. During the generation phase, we suggest using ‘a [vcp] in [stv] style’ as
the prompt. For the CSGO framework, we employ stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0 as the base
model, pre-trained ViT-H as image encoder, and TTPlanet/TTPLanet SDXL Controlnet Tile Realistic
as ControlNet. we uniformly set the images to 512 × 512 resolution. The drop rate of text, content
image, and style image is 0.15. The learning rate is 1e-4. During training stage, λc = λs = δc = 1.0.
During inference stage, we suggest λc = λs = 1.0 and δc = 0.5. Our experiments are conducted on
8 NVIDIA H800 GPUs (80GB) with a batch size of 20 per GPU and trained 80000 steps.
Datasets and Evaluation. We use the proposed IMAGStyle as a training dataset and use its testing
dataset as an evaluation dataset. It is worth noting that the style transfer task, unlike the rest of
the style control tasks, requires a trade-off between content retention and style quality at the same
time. We use the CSD score Somepalli et al. (2024) as an evaluation metric to evaluate the style
similarity. Meanwhile, we employ the proposed content alignment score (CAS) as an evaluation
metric to evaluate the content similarity.


                                                                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025.


                                    (1) W/O             (2) W Content Control
                                                                                            (3) Ours
   Content Image   Style Image   Content Control    W/O style injection in ControlNet
                                                                                                         Content Image   Style Image   (1) w/o resampler (2) w resampler


Figure 9: Ablation studies of content control and style con- Figure 10: Ablation studies of style im-
trol.                                                        age projection.
 Content Image Style Image       𝑡=4               𝑡 = 12               𝑡 = 16               𝑡 = 32    Style Image          𝑡 = 32           𝑡 = 16            𝑡=4


                                                                                                       Prompt: “a
                                                                                                       helicopter”


                                                                                                       Prompt:
                                                                                                       “a cat”


Figure 11: Ablation studies of style token number t. Left: Image style transfer results. Right:
Text-driven stylized synthesis results.

Baselines.      We compare recent advanced inversion-based StyleID Chung et al. (2024),
StyleAligned Hertz et al. (2024) methods, and StyTR2 Deng et al. (2022) based on the Trans-
former structure. In addition, we compare Instantstyle Wang et al. (2024a) and StyleShot (and their
fine-grained control method StyleShot-lineart) Junyao et al. (2024) that introduce ControlNet and
IPAdapter structures as baselines. For text-driven style control task, we also introduce DEADiff Qi
et al. (2024) as a baseline.

5.2      E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

Image-Driven Style Transfer. In Table 1, we demonstrate the CSD scores and CAS of
the proposed method with recent advanced methods for the image-driven style transfer task.
In terms of style control, our CSGO achieves the        Image A       Image A as content image, Image B as style image

highest CSD score, demonstrating that CSGO
achieves state-of-the-art style control. Due to
                                                                     Image B as content image, Image A as style image
the decoupled style injection approach, the pro-         Image B


posed CSGO effectively extracts style features
and fuses them with high-quality content fea-
tures. As illustrated in Figure 5, Our CSGO
precisely transfers styles while maintaining the Figure 12: Results of content-style cycle transfer.
semantics of the content in natural, sketch, face, and art scenes. More results for style control can be
found in the supplementary material.
In terms of content retention, it can be observed that StyleID Chung et al. (2024) and
StyleAligned Hertz et al. (2024), which are based on inversion, maintain the original content too
strongly in sketch style transfer scenarios (CAS is very low). However. they are unable to inject
style information since CSD score is low. InstantStyle Wang et al. (2024a) and StyleShot Junyao
et al. (2024) (including Lineart), which use lines to control the content, are affected by the level of
detail of the lines and have different degrees of loss of content (such as face scenes). The proposed
CSGO directly utilizes all the information of the content image, and content preservation is optimal.


                                                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025.


The quantitative results in Table 1 also show that the proposed CSGO maintains high-quality content
retention with precise style transfer. It is worth noting that it is possible to implement a content-style
cycle transfer in CSGO (as shown in Figure 12; see the Appendix for more results).
Text-Driven Stylized Synthesis. The proposed method enables text-driven style control, i.e., given a
text prompt and a style image, generating images with similar styles. Figure 6 shows the comparison
of the generation results of the proposed CSGO with the state-of-the-art methods. In a simple scene,
it is intuitive to observe that our CSGO obeys textual prompts more. The reason for this is that thanks
to the explicit decoupling of content and style features, style images only inject style information
without exposing content. In addition, in complex scenes, thanks to the well-designed style feature
injection block, CSGO enables optimal style control while converting the meaning of text. As
illustrated in Figure 7, we demonstrated more results.
Text editing-Driven Stylized Synthesis. The proposed CSGO supports text editing-driven style
control. As shown in Figure 8, in the style transfer, we maintain the semantics and layout of the
original content images while allowing simple editing of the textual prompts. The above excellent
results demonstrate that the proposed CSGO is a powerful framework for style control.

5.3   A BLATION S TUDIES .

Content control and style control.              We discuss the impact of the two feature
injection methods, as shown in Fig- Content Image Style Image    w ControlNet         w/o ControlNet
ure 9. The content image must be
injected via ControlNet injection to
maintain the layout while preserv-
ing the semantic information. If
content images are injected into the
base model only through an additional
Cross attention layer, only semantic
information is guaranteed, while the            Figure 13: Ablation studies of ControlNet.
full content information is not preserved (Figure 9(1)). After introducing the ControlNet injection,
the quality of content retention improved, as shown in Figure 13. However, if the style features are
injected into base UNet only without ControlNet injection, this weakens the style of the generated
images, which can be observed in the comparison of Figure 9(2) and (3). Therefore, the proposed
CSGO pre-injects style features in the ControlNet branch to further fuse the style features to enhance
the transfer effect.
Style image projection layer. The style image projection layer can effectively extract style features
from the original embedding. We explore the normal linear layer and the Resampler structure, and the
experimental results are shown in Figure 10. Using the Resampler structure captures more detailed
style features while avoiding content leakage.
Token number. We explore the effect of the number of token t in the style projection layer on
the results of style transfer and text-driven style synthesis. The experimental results are shown in
Figure 10, where the style control becomes progressively better as t increases. This is in line with our
expectation that t influences the quality of feature extraction. A larger t means that the projection
layer can extract richer style features.
The impact of content scale δc . As shown in Figure 14, when δc is small, the content feature
injection is weak, and CSGO obeys the textual prompts and style more. As δc increases, the quality
of content retention becomes superior. However, we notice that when δc is large (e.g., 0.9 and 1.2),
the style information is severely weakened.
The impact of CFG scale. Classifier-free guidance enhances the capabilities of the text-to-image
model. The proposed CSGO is similarly affected by the strength of CFG scale. As shown in Figure 14,
the introduction of CFG enhances the style transfer effect.
The impact of style scale λs and content scale λc . The style scale affects the degree of style
injection. Figure 14 shows that if the style scale is less than 1.0, the style of the generated image is
severely weakened. We suggest that the style scale should be between 1.0 and 1.5. Content control in
the down-sampling blocks utilizes the semantic information of the content image to reinforce the
accurate retention of content. Figure 14 shows that λc is most effective when it is near 1.0.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025.


                                                                                                                                                                (4) Fix 𝑪𝑭𝑮 = 𝟏𝟎. 𝟎, 𝜹𝒄 =
                                                                 (1) Fix 𝑪𝑭𝑮 = 𝟏𝟎. 𝟎, 𝝀𝒔 = 𝟏. 𝟎, 𝝀𝒄 = 𝟏. 𝟎
                                                                                                                                                                      𝟎. 𝟓, 𝝀𝒔 = 𝟏. 𝟎

    Content Image   𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟏                𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟑                  𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟓                𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟕              𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟗                 𝜹𝒄 = 𝟏. 𝟐             𝝀# = 𝟎. 𝟏


     Style Image    𝑪𝑭𝑮 = 1.0               𝑪𝑭𝑮 = 10.0                𝑪𝑭𝑮 = 20.0                 𝝀𝒔 = 𝟎. 𝟓              𝝀𝒔 = 𝟏. 𝟎                  𝝀𝒔 = 𝟏. 𝟓             𝝀# = 𝟏. 𝟎


                                (2) Fix 𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟓 , 𝝀𝒔 = 𝟏. 𝟎, 𝝀𝒄 = 𝟏. 𝟎                                 (3) Fix 𝑪𝑭𝑮 = 𝟏𝟎. 𝟎, 𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟓, 𝝀𝒄 = 𝟏. 𝟎
    Content Image   𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟏                𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟑                   𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟓               𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟕             𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟗                   𝜹𝒄 = 𝟏. 𝟐             𝝀# = 𝟎. 𝟏


     Style Image    𝑪𝑭𝑮 = 1.0               𝑪𝑭𝑮 = 10.0                𝑪𝑭𝑮 = 20.0                 𝝀𝒔 = 𝟎. 𝟓                𝝀𝒔 = 𝟏. 𝟎                 𝝀𝒔 = 𝟏. 𝟓           𝜹𝒄 = 𝟏. 𝟎


       Figure 14: Ablation studies of content scale δc , CFG, content scale λc , and style scale λs .

In style transfer, the retention of content and style varies from person to person. We can set the
hyperparameter content scale δc so that the generated result meets the expectation. As shown in
Figure 15, different levels of detailed information can be retained by different content scales to meet
different design requirements.


6      C ONCLUSION .

We first propose a pipeline Content image    Style image 𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟕   𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟓   𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟑    𝜹𝒄 = 𝟎. 𝟏
for the construction of
content-style-stylized im-
age triplets. Based on this
pipeline, we construct the
first large-scale style trans-
fer dataset, IMAGStyle,
which contains 210K im-
age triplets and covers a
wide range of style sce-
narios. To validate the
impact of IMAGStyle on
style transfer, we propose
CSGO, a simple but highly
effective end-to-end train-
ing style transfer frame-
work, and we verify that
the proposed CSGO can si-
multaneously perform im-             Figure 15: Effects of content scale in style transfer task.
age style transfer, text-driven style synthesis, and text editing-driven style synthesis tasks in a
unified framework. Extensive experiments validate the beneficial effects of IMAGStyle and CSGO
for style transfer. We hope that our work will inspire the research community to further explore
stylized research.
Future work. Although the proposed dataset and framework achieve very advanced performance,
there is still room for improvement. Due to time and computational resource constraints, we
constructed only 210K data triplets. We believe that by expanding the size of the dataset, the style
transfer quality of CSGO will be even better. Meanwhile, the proposed CSGO framework is a basic
version, which only verifies the beneficial effects of generative stylized datasets on style transfer. We
believe that the quality of style transfer can be further improved by optimizing the style and content
feature extraction and fusion methods.


                                                                                      10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025.


R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, Jing Liao, Nenghai Yu, and Gang Hua. Stylebank: An explicit representa-
  tion for neural image style transfer. In CVPR, 2017.
Haibo Chen, Zhizhong Wang, Huiming Zhang, Zhiwen Zuo, Ailin Li, Wei Xing, Dongming Lu, et al.
  Artistic style transfer with internal-external learning and contrastive learning. NeurIPS, 2021.
Bin Cheng, Zuhao Liu, Yunbo Peng, and Yue Lin. General image-to-image translation with one-shot
  image guidance. In ICCV, 2023.
Ming-Ming Cheng, Jonathan Warrell, Wen-Yan Lin, Shuai Zheng, Vibhav Vineet, and Nigel Crook.
 Efficient salient region detection with soft image abstraction. In ICCV, 2013.
Ming-Ming Cheng, Niloy J. Mitra, Xiaolei Huang, Philip H. S. Torr, and Shi-Min Hu. Global contrast
 based salient region detection. IEEE TPAMI, 37(3):569–582, 2015.
Jiwoo Chung, Sangeek Hyun, and Jae-Pil Heo. Style injection in diffusion: A training-free approach
  for adapting large-scale diffusion models for style transfer. In CVPR, 2024.
Yingying Deng, Fan Tang, Weiming Dong, Wen Sun, Feiyue Huang, and Changsheng Xu. Arbitrary
  style transfer via multi-adaptation network. In ACM MM, 2020.
Yingying Deng, Fan Tang, Weiming Dong, Chongyang Ma, Xingjia Pan, Lei Wang, and Changsheng
  Xu. Stytr2: Image style transfer with transformers. In CVPR, 2022.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. NeurIPS,
  2021.
Vincent Dumoulin, Jonathon Shlens, and Manjunath Kudlur. A learned representation for artistic
  style. arXiv, 2016.
Yarden Frenkel, Yael Vinker, Ariel Shamir, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Implicit style-content separation
  using b-lora. arXiv, 2024.
Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Image style transfer using convolutional
  neural networks. In CVPR, 2016.
Amir Hertz, Andrey Voynov, Shlomi Fruchter, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Style aligned image generation
 via shared attention. In CVPR, 2024.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In NeurIPS,
  2020.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv, 2021.
Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normal-
  ization. In ICCV, 2017.
Huaizu Jiang, Jingdong Wang, Zejian Yuan, Yang Wu, Nanning Zheng, and Shipeng Li. Salient
  object detection: A discriminative regional feature integration approach. In CVPR, 2013.
Yongcheng Jing, Yezhou Yang, Zunlei Feng, Jingwen Ye, Yizhou Yu, and Mingli Song. Neural style
  transfer: A review. IEEE TVCG, 26(11):3365–3385, 2019.
Gao Junyao, Liu Yanchen, Sun Yanan, Tang Yinhao, Zeng Yanhong, Chen Kai, and Zhao Cairong.
  Styleshot: A snapshot on any style. arXiv, 2024.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In ICML, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025.


Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models. In CVPR, 2023.
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Yanze Wu, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, and Ying Shan.
  T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion
  models. In AAAI, 2024.
William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In ICCV, 2023.
Tianhao Qi, Shancheng Fang, Yanze Wu, Hongtao Xie, Jiawei Liu, Lang Chen, Qian He, and Yong-
  dong Zhang. Deadiff: An efficient stylization diffusion model with disentangled representations.
  In CVPR, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In CVPR,
  2023.
Simo Ryu. Low-rank adaptation for fast text-to-image diffusion fine-tuning. 2022. URL https://github.
  com/cloneofsimo/lora.
Babak Saleh and Ahmed Elgammal. Large-scale classification of fine-art paintings: Learning the
  right metric on the right feature. IJDAH, 2016.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. NeurIPS, 2022.
Viraj Shah, Nataniel Ruiz, Forrester Cole, Erika Lu, Svetlana Lazebnik, Yuanzhen Li, and Varun
  Jampani. Ziplora: Any subject in any style by effectively merging loras. arXiv, 2023.
Gowthami Somepalli, Anubhav Gupta, Kamal Gupta, Shramay Palta, Micah Goldblum, Jonas
  Geiping, Abhinav Shrivastava, and Tom Goldstein. Measuring style similarity in diffusion models.
  In ECCV, 2024.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In ICLR,
   2020.
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. In CVPR, 2023.
Haofan Wang, Qixun Wang, Xu Bai, Zekui Qin, and Anthony Chen. Instantstyle: Free lunch towards
  style-preserving in text-to-image generation. arXiv, 2024a.
Haofan Wang, Peng Xing, Renyuan Huang, Hao Ai, Qixun Wang, and Xu Bai. Instantstyle-plus:
  Style transfer with content-preserving in text-to-image generation. arXiv, 2024b.
Haohan Wang, Songwei Ge, Zachary Lipton, and Eric P Xing. Learning robust global representations
  by penalizing local predictive power. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Xiaolei Wu, Zhihao Hu, Lu Sheng, and Dong Xu. Styleformer: Real-time arbitrary style transfer via
  parametric style composition. In ICCV, 2021.
Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong.
   Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation. NeurIPS,
   2024.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025.


Hu Ye, Jun Zhang, Sibo Liu, Xiao Han, and Wei Yang. Ip-adapter: Text compatible image prompt
  adapter for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv, 2023.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In ICCV, 2023a.
Yuxin Zhang, Nisha Huang, Fan Tang, Haibin Huang, Chongyang Ma, Weiming Dong, and Chang-
  sheng Xu. Inversion-based style transfer with diffusion models. In CVPR, 2023b.


                                             13
