Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L ONG - HORIZON V ISUAL I NSTRUCTION G ENERATION
WITH L OGIC AND ATTRIBUTE S ELF - REFLECTION

 Yucheng Suo Fan Ma Kaixin Shen Linchao Zhu                                                  Yi Yang ∗
 ReLER Lab, CCAI, Zhejiang University, China



                                       Task: How to make matcha blondies?
         Line an 8x8 inch Stir in 1 cup of all- Fold in 1/2 cup          Pour the batter      Bake for 20-25       Let the blondies
         baking pan with  purpose flour and of white                     into the prepared    minutes or until a   cool in the pan
         parchment paper matcha powder … chocolate chips                 baking pan …         toothpick inserted   before cutting into
                                                                                              into the center…     squares …
 SDXL


          Missing object:         Missing history context:           Wrong attribute:                 Inconsistent identity:
          parchment paper    White chocolate should be in the bowl   batter is not green         not showing green matcha blondies
 LIGER


         With object:              With history context:             Correct attribute:                Consistent identity:
         parchment paper         White chocolate in the bowl         batter is green                baked green matcha blondies
         Figure 1: Visual instruction generated by LIGER, key merits are highlighted in the figure.


                                                          A BSTRACT

              Visual instructions for long-horizon tasks are crucial as they intuitively clarify
              complex concepts and enhance retention across extended steps. Directly generat-
              ing a series of images using text-to-image models without considering the context
              of previous steps results in inconsistent images, increasing cognitive load. Addi-
              tionally, the generated images often miss objects or the attributes such as color,
              shape, and state of the objects are inaccurate. To address these challenges, we
              propose LIGER, the first training-free framework for Long-horizon Instruction
              GEneration with logic and attribute self-Reflection. LIGER first generates a draft
              image for each step with the historical prompt and visual memory of previous
              steps. This step-by-step generation approach maintains consistency between im-
              ages in long-horizon tasks. Moreover, LIGER utilizes various image editing tools
              to rectify errors including wrong attributes, logic errors, object redundancy, and
              identity inconsistency in the draft images. Through this self-reflection mechanism,
              LIGER improves the logic and object attribute correctness of the images. To verify
              whether the generated images assist human understanding, we manually curated
              a new benchmark consisting of various long-horizon tasks. Human-annotated
              ground truth expressions reflect the human-defined criteria for how an image
              should appear to be illustrative. Experiments demonstrate the visual instructions
              generated by LIGER are more comprehensive compared with baseline methods.
              Code and dataset are provided in https://github.com/suoych/LIGER.



   ∗
       Corresponding Author.


                                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1    I NTRODUCTION


Humans learn to accomplish real-world tasks quickly through step-by-step text instructions. How-
ever, without visual aids, it is challenging to imagine the object attribute status and judge the comple-
tion status of the steps. For instance, when frying potato chips, merely reading the text description
makes it hard to judge whether the chips are done. In contrast, viewing a video or a series of images
accelerates individual understanding of task procedures, enhancing the success rate of completing
various tasks. Generating illustrative visual instructions eases the comprehension burden and there-
fore becomes a crucial and trending task (Lu et al., 2023; Bordalo et al., 2024; Menon et al., 2024;
Damen et al., 2024). Moreover, generating visual instructions unleashes the potential applications
including multi-modal embodied agent perception and new task adaptation (Fan et al., 2024; Zhou
et al., 2024a). In this paper, we aim to generate a series of images given task step descriptions.
A naive approach to generating visual instructions involves directly using text-to-image models,
such as Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) (Rombach et al., 2022). As Figure 1 illustrates, this
method results in images lacking object consistency, thereby confusing users about the relationships
between steps. To enhance image continuity, GenHowTo (Damen et al., 2024) trains a controllable
U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) model to enhance identity consistency. StackDiffusion (Menon
et al., 2024) uses a diffusion model that takes concatenated latents from different steps as input.
Sequential Latent Diffusion Model (SLDM) (Bordalo et al., 2024) trains a language model to re-
generate consistent textual descriptions and use latents of the previous steps to enhance consistency.
However, these approaches tend to produce overly consistent images that fail to capture changes
in object states. An illustrative visual instruction should balance continuity with sufficient variabil-
ity. This leads to the first challenge: the need for logical coherence across steps while allowing for
appropriate changes.
Moreover, we empirically observe that the attributes of objects, e.g. color, state, and shape, might
be incorrect in the images as depicted in Figure 1. These errors can accumulate, impacting the
generation result of other steps and posing a significant challenge in long-horizon tasks. This leads
to the second challenge, i.e. , attribute error and cumulation.
Our intuition for addressing these issues is to first generate a draft image for each step with the visual
and textual context of previous steps, ensuring continuity between images. Then, through a process
of self-reflection, we refine the draft images by adjusting for excessive continuity and correcting
object attribute errors. This iterative approach not only prevents the accumulation of attribute errors
in long-horizon tasks but also maintains appropriate logic relations across steps, similar to drafting
and refining sketches.
To this end, we propose LIGER, a training-free framework for long-horizon visual instruction gener-
ation consisting of (1) historical prompt and visual memory, (2) self-reflection and memory calibra-
tion. Specifically, we leverage the reasoning ability of LLM to explicitly output history context for
each step, facilitating relation comprehension. Inspired by the recent training-free identity consistent
generation works (Zhou et al., 2024b; Tewel et al., 2024), LIGER additionally injects the previous
step visual latent embedding into the frozen text-to-image diffusion model, generating coherent im-
ages for different steps. To further refine the object attribute in the images and avoid over-consistent,
a MLLM receives multi-modal in-context prompting and tells the rectifying solutions. Various edit-
ing tools deal with errors including attribute error, object redundancy, identity inconsistency, and
logic misunderstanding. Then the visual memory is calibrated to the embedding of the edited image
via a latent inversion procedure, avoiding the error affecting future step image generation. Having
this step-by-step generation manner, LIGER is capable of tasks with arbitrary steps without training.
To evaluate whether the generated visual instructions align with human comprehension, we curate a
benchmark containing 569 long-horizon tasks along with human-annotated ground truth expressions
and logic relations. Moreover, we evaluate the method from semantic alignment, logic correctness,
and illustrativeness. Results show that LIGER surpasses baseline methods by a large margin. User
studies and qualitative comparisons further verify that visual instructions generated by LIGER are
more illustrative. In summary, the contribution of this paper includes:
(1) We propose LIGER, the first training-free framework generating visual instructions for long-
horizon tasks.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(2) History prompts, visual memory, and self-reflection are introduced to promise logic coherent and
object property accuracy. Inversion-based memory calibration is devised to avoid exposure bias.
(3) A dataset for long-horizon tasks with human-annotated expressions is curated to evaluate the
effectiveness of LIGER.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   I MAGE G ENERATION AND E DITING

Recent advances in multi-modal diffusion models (Ramesh et al., 2022; Koh et al., 2024; Peebles
& Xie, 2023; Saharia et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020) show a remarkable ability to
generate images in high fidelity. Among these models, Latent diffusion models (LDMs) (Rombach
et al., 2022) show strong robustness and semantic richness since the denoising process is conducted
on the latent space. Based on LDMs, researchers further exploit exciting application topics including
controllable image generation (Zhang et al., 2023; Mou et al., 2024b; Liang et al., 2024; Ma et al.,
2024b), personalized generation (Ruiz et al., 2023; Kumari et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024a; Gal et al.,
2022), coherent generation Zhou et al. (2024b); Tewel et al. (2024), image editing (Brooks et al.,
2023; Hertz et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022; Mou et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024b;
Mou et al., 2024a), etc. Storydiffusion (Zhou et al., 2024b) and Consistory (Tewel et al., 2024) share
a similar idea of KV sharing to generate content-consistent images in a training-free manner.
Image editing, different from previous image generation tasks, involves manipulating the contents
of the given image (Pan et al., 2023). There are various settings for editing, including text-driven
(Tumanyan et al., 2023; Cao et al., 2023; Kawar et al., 2023), location-based (Chen et al., 2024b;
Avrahami et al., 2023; Nichol et al., 2021), appearance modulation (Chen et al., 2024a; Mou et al.,
2023), object moving (Pan et al., 2023; Mou et al., 2024a), etc. Common techniques for text-guided
editing involve modifying the latent attention module e.g. MasaCtrl (Cao et al., 2023) or fine-tuning
a model e.g. Instructpix2pix and SmartEdit (Brooks et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024). Location-
based editing leverages the region restriction prior like bounding box, mask, or even point (Ling
et al., 2023). Our method utilizes different image editing methods to rectify the errors in the image.

2.2   TASK I NSTRUCTION G ENERATION

Generating procedures for a task is a popular research topic as it has potential application scenarios
like intelligent assistants (Shen et al., 2024; Surı́s et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024b), embodied agents
navigation (Liu et al., 2023; 2024) and instruction comprehension (Xu et al., 2023), etc. This paper
focuses on visual instruction generation, i.e. generating a series of images to explain a task. Previous
work like TIP (Lu et al., 2023) and MGSL (Wang et al., 2022) generates textual instructions for
the tasks based on the visual information. StackDiffusion (Menon et al., 2024) is the first method
for generating coherent visual instructions, which is trained on step-wise annotated VSGI dataset
(Yang et al., 2021). However, the step number for a task is restricted. GenHowTo (Damen et al.,
2024) infers states before and after actions by learning from instructional videos. Sequential Latent
Diffusion Model (Bordalo et al., 2024) trains a model to output coherent text prompts for the text-
to-image diffusion model, therefore generating coherent images. Phung et al. Phung et al. (2024)
propose a training-free method yet the utmost step length is 5. Different from previous methods,
LIGER is a training-free method that can deal with long-horizon tasks having large step lengths.

2.3   T OOL - BASED METHODS

As the growing emergent capabilities of LLMs (Achiam et al., 2023), researchers deal with complex
vision and natural language tasks (Yao et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2024a) by using surrogate tools (Schick
et al., 2024) or programming languages, pioneer works include VisProg (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023),
ViperGPT (Surı́s et al., 2023), HuggingGPT (Shen et al., 2024), etc. In the image and video genera-
tion area, LLMs are widely used for arranging layouts (Gani et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023; Lian et al.,
2023; Yang et al., 2024a), enriching textual prompts (Cheng et al., 2024; Long et al., 2024; Yuan
et al., 2024; Zhuang et al., 2024), tool calling (Wang et al., 2024), verification (Wu et al., 2024).
Our method is also a tool-based framework unleashing the strong reasoning ability of Multi-modal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) to call tools, enrich textual information, and do self-reflection.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       (1) Draft Image Generation
 Step 1: Start by
 preheating the grill to    History                                                                          Generation
                                                    Clean grates      Wipe the exterior
 burn off any ...
 Step 2: Use a wire
                            Analyse                  reinstalled   + of the grill with a +                    (SDXL with
 brush to scrape off          (GPT4O)                                    damp cloth                           Consist Attn)
 the burnt food ...                              Input:
                                                 Historcal Prompt +    Step Description   + Visual Memory                     Draft Image
    Previous Steps


                                     (2) Self-Reflection                                              (3) Post-Processing
                      Error Detector                    Regenerate                                          Referee
                           (GPT4O)                        (SDXL)                                            (GPT4O)


 Draft Image                                           Rectifier                      Revised Image
                                                                                                        Memory Calibration      Output
                     Locator
                                         Identity      Attribute       Removal                                   ......
                     (LISA)
                                        (DragonDiff) (SD Inpaint)       (Lama)



Figure 2: Pipeline overview. LIGER generates visual instructions step-by-step, starting with (1)
generating a draft image taking the visual memory, step description and historical prompt as input.
(2) The error detector identifies the error and the corresponding tool fixes it, generating a revised
image. (3) The referee tool compares the two images and selects one as the final output. LIGER
further uses inversion-guided visual memory calibration for future step generation.
3      M ETHOD
The overall pipeline of LIGER is shown in Figure 2. Harnessing the visual memory and historical
prompt, LIGER generates a draft image for each step. Self-reflection mechanism corrects the errors
in the draft images. To prevent error accumulation in the long horizon generation procedure, LIGER
calibrates the visual memory according to the edited image through inversion.

3.1      H ISTORY- AWARE D RAFT I MAGE G ENERATION

Given a set of step descriptions Sn for a task Q of n steps, our goal is to generate a series of
coherent images V for corresponding descriptions without training. To this end, a frozen text-to-
image diffusion model generates a draft image Vi′ for step i for each step in the task. The diffusion
model generates a single image through iterative denoising steps. Specifically, a U-Net network U
predicts the noise
                                            ϵt = U (zt , c),                                       (1)
where zt is the latent representation at timestep t and c is the textual condition. Naively generating
individual images using the step description ignores the continuity between steps. Therefore, we
first introduce the historical prompt and visual memory to enhance consistency.
Historical prompt. Each step description Si ∈ S often describes an incremental action relative
to the previous scene settings. For instance, in a task cooking potato chips, two consecutive steps
are: place the potato chips on a paper towel to drain excess oil and seasoning with salt and pepper.
Without context, the text-to-image diffusion model is unaware that salt and pepper should be added
to the potato chips. Motivated by this, we use an LLM to generate a description Hi for each step that
specifies which objects from the previous steps should appear in the current step. The text condition
c for the diffusion model is formulated as
                                                              c = ET (Si , Hi ),                                                         (2)
where ET is the text encoder network.
Visual memory sharing. Merely using the historical prompt results in generating objects with
varied appearances and backgrounds. To address this issue, inspired by StoryDiffusion (Zhou et al.,
2024b), we incorporate visual embeddings from the previous step as the visual context. When
generating the draft image Vi′ of step i, we randomly sample several visual feature tokens pi−1 ∈
RM ×C of the previous image Vi−1 ∈ V and inject them into the self-attention operation in the U-
Net. Here M represents the number of sampled tokens and C is the number of feature channels.
The query input of the attention operation is the current image feature tokens pi ∈ RN ×C , the key
and value inputs are the concatenation of pi−1 and pi . The procedure can be formulated as:
                                     Qi = W q pi , Ki = W k [pi , pi−1 ], Vi = W v [pi , pi−1 ],
                                                                                                                                         (3)
                                                   Oi = Attention(Qi , Ki , Vi ),

                                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     Draft Image             After Self-reflection            Draft Image             After Self-reflection


(a)                                                                                  (b)


       Previous Step:            Current Step: Heat olive oil in a skillet             Begining Step: Preheat the oven to 325 degrees Fahrenheit
       Shape the mixture into
       small meatballs                    Over-consistent                                           Object Redundant
                                   Draft Image               After Self-reflection            Draft Image             After Self-reflection


 (c)                                                                                 (d)



       Previous Step:            Current Step: Pour the milkshake into a glass         Begining Step: Place the chicken breasts on a cutting board
       Blend the mixture until
       smooth
                                      Inconsistent identity                                          Wrong Attribute

Figure 3: Visualization of different error types and the effect of self-reflection. The motivation of
self-reflection is to rectify errors including (a) over-consistent, (b) object redundant, (c) inconsistent
identity, and (d) wrong attributes.

where W q , W k ,W v are the linear projection layers for the query, key, and value respectively. The
output feature Oi is used as the input of the next layer in the UNet U . Note that neither the historical
prompt nor the visual memory are provided in the first step of any task.


3.2      T OOL - BASED S ELF - REFLECTION

Empirically, we observe errors in the draft images as illustrated in Figure 3. Leveraging the ad-
vanced multi-modal capabilities of MLLMs, LIGER employs the state-of-the-art GPT4O model as
an error detector to identify errors across four aspects, then output tool calling instructions to revise
the draft images. For accuracy in error recognition, the error detector is prompted with multimodal
in-context examples. The prompt template is attached in the appendix.
Over-consistent. In long-horizon tasks, not all steps necessarily require visual continuity. For ex-
ample, consider the task of cooking wanton noodles where the steps Drain the noodles and rinse with
cold water and In a separate pan, heat some oil are sequential yet independent. The former step con-
cludes noodle preparation, while the latter step initiates cooking with different ingredients. These
steps lack logistic connection, making consistency between the two images unnecessary. Breaking
this consistency can help users recognize the transition to a new step. To address the over-consistent
issue, the error detector assesses whether to maintain or disrupt the continuity. If breaking con-
sistency is required, the error detector outputs the error rectification instruction in the format of
Regenerate(N ew text), then regenerates an image according to the new description.
Identity inconsistent. Despite historical prompt and visual memory contributing to global visual
consistency, local details occasionally remain misaligned, as depicted in Figure 3. To enhance lo-
cal consistency, LIGER employs an intuitive method that aligns object appearances across images.
Specifically, the error detector compares objects in successive images, identifying whether two ob-
jects should have similar appearance with the command M odif y(object in Vi′ , object in Vi−1 ).
Subsequently, a locator tool, i.e. LISA (Lai et al., 2024) outputs the masks of the objects according
to the object descriptions generated by the error detector. Then the identity-keeping tool i.e. Drag-
onDiffusion (Mou et al., 2023) receives the masks and modifies the object appearance in the current
image to match the previous image.
Wrong attribute. Correct object attributes such as color, shape, and state are crucial for instruc-
tions. For instance, considering the tasks of baking chicken wings, the model may incorrectly gen-
erate cooked chicken wings at the seasoning the prepared chicken wings step, where they should be
raw. To address this problem, the error detector describes the desired attributes for an object with
the instruction Add(new description, object in Vi′ ). The same locator tool segments the object,
then an attribute reformulation tool i.e. SD inpainting Rombach et al. (2022) generates an image
with modified object attributes according to the object mask.
Redundant object. The last type of error is object hallucination, where frozen text-to-image


                                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


diffusion models sometimes generate irrelevant objects for a step description. For instance, in
Figure 3 (b), the image illustrating preheating the oven mistakenly includes bread in the pan.
The error detector flags the object to be removed in
a format of Remove(object in Vi′ ), and the locator Algorithm 1 Single Step Self-reflection
tool pinpoints the specific region. LIGER opts for Input: Draft Image Vi′ , Previous Image Vi−1 ,
the widely used LAMA (Suvorov et al., 2022) as Step Description Si , Si−1 , and Task Q.
an object removal tool. The tool removes the corre- if i = 0 then
sponding part of the image given the object mask.          A ← [Attribute, Object]
LIGER evaluates the image across these four as- else
pects iteratively and only modifies the draft im-          A ← [Relation, Identity, Attribute, Object]
                                                       end
age for once. In other words, once an error is for A in A do
detected, the verification procedure halts, and the        if A in [Attribute, Object] then
corresponding editing operation is applied to the               error ← Detect(Vi′ , Si , Q)
draft image. It is also worth noting that the over-        else
consistent and identity inconsistent errors are veri-           error ← Detect(Vi′ , Si , Q, Si−1 , Vi−1 )
fied based on two consecutive steps, while wrong           end
attribute and redundant object are conducted as            if error is detected then
single-image verifications. The execution order of              V̂i ← Rectify(Vi′ , Si , Q)
the pipeline is detailed in Algorithm 1. Conse-                 Vi ← Compare(Vi′ , V̂i )
quently, for the draft image of the first step in each          break
task, LIGER only performs attribute modification           end
or object removal. Having the various tools col- end
laboratively verify the images, LIGER generates il- if Vi = V̂i then Refresh(V̂i ) end
lustrative visual instructions for long-horizon tasks Output: Final Image Vi ,
with accurate logic in a self-reflection manner.

3.3   J UDGEMENT AND M EMORY C ALIBRATION

The aforementioned tool-based self-reflection generates a revised image V̂i . Yet every rose has its
thorn, self-reflection sometimes produces low-quality images or makes incorrect judgments during
editing. To stabilize the pipeline predictions and improve robustness, we devise a referee tool to
compare the draft image with the revised image. The referee evaluates both the quality and semantic
alignment of the images and selects the better one as the final result Vi . For more details, refer to
the prompt template provided in the appendix. Since LIGER generates images step by step, with
visual memory providing visual continuity between steps, any error in the output image Vi impacts
the memory and can accumulate in subsequent steps of image generation. To prevent this exposure
bias, we propose inversion-guided visual memory calibration to update the memory.
Inversion-guided visual memory calibration. As discussed in Section 3.1, the visual memory
is a set of image feature tokens sampled from the previous generation step pi−1 ∈ RM ×C . These
tokens are saved during the denoising process of the draft image, which exhibits a discrepancy with
the features of the revised images. Since the revised image is generated in a post-processing manner,
storing the feature tokens alongside the generation process is inapplicable. However, the sampling
process can be reversed using DDIM inversion which is formulated as:
                                 p                   √
                          xt+1 = αt+1 /αt · xt + αt+1 (βt+1 − βt ) · ϵt ,                          (4)
where pαt is the variance schedule depend on timestep t, and the step-wise coefficient is set to
βt = 1/αt − 1. ϵt is the noise predicted by the U-Net according to Eq 1. This allows us to
obtain the attention output of the U-Net during the inversion procedure. Therefore, for the revised
images, we apply this inversion operation over the same number of timesteps as in the generation
procedure, effectively calibrating the visual memories to current image Vi features. Correcting the
visual memories prevents accumulated errors affecting subsequent image generation procedures.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

For the historical textual prompt, the error detector and referee, we use GPT-4O (Achiam et al.,
2023) introduced by OpenAI. The draft image generation uses the SDXL (Podell et al., 2023) with


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Figure 4: Dataset statistics and the influence of the step length of tasks.

a guidance scale of 5 along with the Free-U plugin (Si et al., 2024). The DDIM generation and
inversion timesteps are set to 50. In terms of the visual memory, we set the number of the previous
step image feature token M to half of the sequence length N , in other words, M = N/2. For the
location tool, we leverage the LISA-7B model (Lai et al., 2024) to balance the performance and
computing resources requirement. All experiments are conducted on a single RTX A6000 GPU.

4.2   DATASET

Effective visual instructions for long-horizon tasks should help users quickly understand complex
procedures, but evaluating this capability remains challenging. Existing datasets lack appropriate
evaluation methods for this aspect. To address this gap, we curate a new textual dataset consisting
of 569 long-horizon tasks. These tasks are extracted from different resources including Howto100M
(Miech et al., 2019), Youcook2 (Zhou et al., 2018), and RecipeQA (Yagcioglu et al., 2018). The
tasks focus on the recipe domain, as cooking procedures typically involve strong logical relations
between steps and require multiple stages. Specifically, we prompt the GPT4O model with in-
context samples to filter out tasks that are hard to illustrate and tasks that are easy to accomplish,
e.g. How to prepare a family meal for 20 people. The LLM then outputs step-by-step action de-
scriptions for each task. Unlike existing planning datasets (Menon et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2023), our
dataset offers following novel features:
Long-horizon tasks. The average number of steps per task is 9.8, with a minimum of 6 steps and
a maximum of 17. The detailed distribution is shown in Figure 4 (a). We categorize the tasks into
three types: short (6-8 steps), medium (9-11 steps), and long (12 or more steps).
Manual annotations for step logics. For each task, we ask human annotators to select a pair of
consecutive steps with continuous logic and another pair with logically independent steps. Our intu-
ition is that the images corresponding to logically consistent steps should exhibit visual continuity,
while the images of locally independent steps should be visually distinct.
Human-written ground truth descriptions reflecting comprehension. We introduce a novel an-
notation for evaluating illustrative images. Since step descriptions often omit details about object
attributes, we ask the annotators to write a sentence describing what components should appear in
the illustrative image for every step. These sentences reflect the appearance and state of the ob-
jects with previous steps information. For example, the step Arrange the chicken wings on the wire
rack from task How to bake chicken wings, one can infer the wings are raw and ready for baking.
Therefore, a suitable illustrative expression could be The raw chicken wings are neatly arranged in a
single layer on the wire rack, with the spices and oil giving the skin a glossy, seasoned appearance.
These expressions allow us to evaluate whether the generated images match human expectations of
how an illustrative image should look. Annotation examples are provided in the appendix.

4.3   BASELINES

To thoroughly evaluate the effectiveness of LIGER and its components, we conduct both quantita-
tive and qualitative comparisons with different baselines including: (1) Frozen SDXL (Podell et al.,
2023). We simply generate visual instructions for the tasks using a frozen SDXL model prompted
with the vanilla textual step descriptions. (2) Frozen SDXL + Visual memory (+V). The image
generation model is provided with the visual memory while the text prompts remain vanilla step
descriptions. (3) Frozen SDXL + Historical prompt (+H). The text prompt for the frozen SDXL
model is modified by concatenating the step description and the historical prompt. No visual mem-
ories are provided. (4) Frozen SDXL + Visual Memory + Historical prompt (+V+H). The image
generation model is equipped with both visual memory and the historical prompt. This baseline can


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                          How to make a california burrito?
             Step1:                Step2:                   Step3:                                         Step5:                 Step6:               Step7:              Step8:                   Step9:
                                                                                 Step4:
                                                            Add a generous                                                                                                 Carefully fold the       Grill the burrito on a
             Lay out a large       Spread guaca-                                 Sprinkle shredded Add a serving of Place a handful of Drizzle some
                                                            portion of carne                                                                                               sides of the tortilla    heated skillet for a
             flour tortilla on     mole in the                                   cheese over the   pico de gallo on French fries on top sour cream over                    in, then roll it up to
                                                            asada on top of                                                                                                                         couple of minutes on
             a clean surface       center of tortilla                            carne asada       top of the cheese of the pico de gallo the French fries                 form the burrito         each side …
                                                            the guacamole
T2I-Bridge
SLDM
LIGER


                                                                                        How to make general tso chicken?
             Step1:              Step2:            Step3:                 Step4:              Step5:               Step6:             Step7:                 Step8:               Step9:              Step10:
             Cut 500g of         In a bowl, mix 1 Heat oil in a deep Remove the               In a separate bowl, Heat 1 tbsp of oil Add the sauce           Add the fried        Garnish with        Serve hot with
             chicken breast      cup of cornstarch fryer or large skillet chicken pieces      prepare the sauce by in a large skillet mixture to the         chicken pieces to chopped green          steamed rice or
             into bite-sized     with the chicken to 350°F (175°C)        and place them combining 1 tbsp or wok over                 skillet and cook       the skillet and toss onions and          your choice of
                                                   and fry the chicken
             pieces              pieces until they pieces until golden on paper towels hoisin sauce, 1 tbsp medium heat               until thickened        to coat them with sesame seeds           side
                                 are well coated brown and crispy         to drain excess oil cornstarch, and…                        and bubbly             the sauce
T2I-Bridge
SLDM
LIGER


                                                                               How to make penne pasta with arrabiata sauce?
             Step1:          Step2:        Step3:            Step4:          Step5:           Step6:           Step7:           Step8:         Step9:        Step10:      Step11:       Step12:        Step13:
             In a large pot, Add 2 cups Cook the pasta       Drain the       In a separate    Add 2 minced Sauté until          Add 2 cups Add a pinch       Simmer the   Add the       Toss the pasta Serve the pasta
             bring water of penne          until al dente    pasta and set   pan, heat 2      garlic cloves and the garlic is   of tomato      of salt and   sauce for    drained penne in the sauce hot and garnish
             to a boil and pasta to the according to         aside           tablespoons of   2 chopped red golden              sauce and stir pepper to     about 10     pasta to the until evenly with freshly
                                           the package                       olive oil over   chili peppers to                                                                                         chopped
             add salt        boiling water instructions                      medium heat      the pan
                                                                                                                brown           to combine the sauce         minutes      sauce         coated         parsley…
T2I-Bridge
SLDM
LIGER


 Figure 5: Detailed qualitative comparisons on different long-horizon tasks. Zoom in to see details.

also be considered LIGER without self-reflection. (5) T2I-Bridge (Lu et al., 2023) uses an LLM
to imagine what the image for each step should depict based on the step descriptions. T2I-Bridge
represents a type of re-captioning method. (6) Sequential Latent Diffusion Model (SLDM) (Bor-
dalo et al., 2024) trains a language model to produce coherent captions for the steps of a task and
uses a sequential context decoder to establish visual connections between images. Note that the
text-to-image generation diffusion model is still frozen in SLDM.


4.4                Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION

To assess the effectiveness of LIGER, we conduct a detailed quantitative comparison including:
Automatic evaluation. We calculate several metrics using pre-trained models. First, we evalu-
ate the semantic alignment between the images and human-annotated ground truth expressions by
calculating the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) similarity. These curated expressions reflect human un-
derstanding of each step. Hence a higher CLIP-Score indicates that the images are more relevant to
the expressions, implying that the images are more illustrative for human comprehension.


                                                                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Automatic evaluation                                      GPT evaluation
       Method
                     CLIP-Score↑        DINO-Score ↓ BERT-Score ↑                      Semantic↑ Logic↑ Illustrative↑
  T2I-Bridge             2.4350                0.8576                  0.8669            3.4717         2.5843           2.5150
      SLDM               2.5054                0.6746                  0.8694            3.3634         2.7286           2.5771
       Ours              2.7555                0.6338                  0.8743            4.1141         3.0595           3.0536
                   Table 1: Automatic quantitative evaluation and GPT evaluation results.

The second metric tests the logic correctness between consecutive steps. To evaluate image similar-
ity, we use the DINO-v2 (Caron et al., 2021; Oquab et al., 2023) model and calculate the average
l2 Distance between the embeddings of the two images for the annotated step pairs. Inspired by
the Signal-to-Noise Ratio formulation, we define the DINO-Score Ds as the l2 distance between
coherent steps divided by the l2 distance between independent steps which can be expressed as
Ds = l2p /l2n . This metric evaluates the ability to generate consistent images for logically coherent
steps and distinct images for unrelated steps. A lower DINO-Score indicates higher logical accuracy.
The last metric evaluates the method performance in a modality-transfer test. Our intuition is that
illustrative visual instruction should help people summarize or describe the steps in text. There-
fore, we transfer the images back into text and measure the textual similarity with the annotated
descriptions. Specifically, we adopt the widely-used BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023) model to gener-
ate captions for images, then calculate the BERT-Score (Zhang et al., 2019) between the cap-
tions and descriptions. A higher BERT-Score represents the image is more illustrative. The re-
sults shown in Table 1 demonstrate that LIGER significantly outperforms the baseline methods.
GPT evaluation. We further                                            How to make pizza from scratch?
                                            Step5:          Step6:         Step7:            Step8:        Step9:          Step10:
harness the advanced logical          Place the dough in Preheat the  Punch down the Transfer the rolled Spread pizza Sprinkle shredded
reasoning and multi-modal per-         a greased bowl, oven to 475°F dough then roll out dough on pizza sauce over the mozzarella cheese
                                        and let it rise... (245°C) on a floured surface... stone or...      dough          over ...
ception ability of MLLMs to
evaluate the methods. Specif-
                                               SDXL


ically, we prompt the GPT4O
model to rate how well each
individual image aligns with
its corresponding description.
                                               SDXL+H


Then we input the entire image
series to the MLLM and ask it
to rate whether the image series
                                               SDXL+V


is illustrative with correct logics.
The rating ranges from 1 to 5,
where 1 represents low quality
and 5 indicates perfect quality.
                                               SDXL+V+H


The results are shown in Table
1, and the prompt templates are
attached in the appendix.
User study. We invite 20 par-
                                               LIGER


ticipants for the user study, with
each person asked to select the
best generation results for 15
tasks. Participants rate aspects           Figure 6: Qualitative ablation on different components.
including semantic alignment, logical correctness, and task illustration. Results in Table 3 show
that LIGER generates visual instructions that better match user preferences while maintaining se-
mantic alignment and logic accuracy.

4.5     Q UALITATIVE C OMPARISONS

The overall qualitative comparisons between LIGER and baseline methods are shown in Figure
5. We provide a detailed comparison of LIGER with two prior works, namely T2I-Bridge and
SLDM. For the task How to make a California burrito, both T2I-Bridge and SLDM overlook that
the seasoning and ingredients are added to the tortilla in Steps 3 to 7. In contrast, LIGER clearly
illustrates the progressive process of adding different ingredients. Additionally, LIGER correctly
visualizes the burrito being wrapped and heated in a skillet. For the task How to make general


                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tso chicken, LIGER presents a smooth sequence, showing the process of frying the chicken pieces,
making the sauce, combining sauce with chicken, and serving with rice. In comparison, SLDM
omits the chicken pieces in Step 2 and incorrectly shows the finished dish in Step 5. T2I-Bridge
lacks visual continuity, making it hard to comprehend. To further demonstrate the effectiveness of
LIGER in long-horizon tasks, we visualize the results for the task How to make penne pasta with
arrabbiata sauce consisting of 13 steps. SLDM shows an over-consistent process during cooking,
while T2I-Bridge generates distinct images. In contrast, LIGER accurately illustrates the procedure.

4.6    A BLATION S TUDY

Effectiveness of different components. We provide both qualitative and quantitative comparisons
in Figure 6 and Table 2. Results show that adding historical prompts and visual memory both
improve the alignment between image and text semantics while also increasing logical accuracy.
Additionally, these two components complement each other. When self-reflection is introduced, we
observe a performance gain of +0.04 in CLIP-Score, a reduction of -0.112 in DINO-Score, and an
improvement of +0.002 in BERT-Score, demonstrating the importance of self-reflection. In Figure
6, we observe that self-reflection correctly identifies which steps should be visually coherent and
which steps should be distinct. Moreover, LIGER effectively shows the process of transforming
pizza dough into a raw pizza. Essentially, the historical prompt and visual memory enhance visual
continuity, while self-reflection aligns the images with human comprehension.
We further provide an example to highlight the importance of visual memory calibration in Figure
7. For Step of season the steak, the steak should be raw, yet the draft image incorrectly shows a
cooked appearance. After correcting the attribute, the subsequent step should also depict the steak
as raw since the description does not indicate a state change. Without memory calibration, the steak
in the next step still appears cooked, but with calibration, the steak is correctly shown in a raw state.
                                                                                        Draft Image          After Self-reflection
                CLIP-Score ↑      DINO-Score ↓    BERT-Score ↑
        SDXL         2.5837          0.8516          0.8699
                                                                  Season the steak
      SDXL+V         2.6251          0.8239          0.8719       with salt and
      SDXL+H         2.6842          0.8224          0.8707       pepper on both
    SDXL+V+H         2.7168          0.7459          0.8721       sides
         Ours        2.7555          0.6338          0.8743
                                                                                   W/O Memory Calibration After Memory Calibration
Table 2: Ablation on different components of LIGER.
          Method       Semantic      Logic    Illustrative        Place the
                                                                  Seasoned steak
        T2I-Bridge       24%        18.3%        22.3%            on a skillet

         SLDM           11.7%        21%          9.3%
          Ours          64.3%       60.7%        68.3%

Table 3: User study on image-text semantic matching, Figure 7: Example of visual memory cali-
logic continuity and illustrative.                   bration.
Influence of task step length. In Figure 4 (b) and (c), we present the CLIP-Score and DINO-Score
for tasks of varying lengths, comparing LIGER with SLDM. As the number of task steps increases,
the CLIP-Score of SLDM decreases significantly, while LIGER maintains stable performance. Ad-
ditionally, the relative improvement in DINO-Score increases for medium and long tasks, indicating
LIGER is robust to long-horizon tasks.


5     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose LIGER, the first training-free framework for long-horizon visual instruc-
tion generation. LIGER first leverages historical prompts and visual memory to generate draft
images step-by-step, enhancing continuity between images in long-horizon tasks. The tool-based
self-reflection rectifies four types of errors in the draft images including over-consistent, identity
inconsistent, wrong attributes, and object redundant. LIGER also deploys inversion-guided visual
memory calibration to prevent error accumulation in the sequential image generation procedure. We
also curate a new benchmark testing the alignment of generation results with human comprehension.
We hope this work inspires future research on instruction generation.


                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U2336212). This
work is also supported in part by “Pioneer” and “Leading Goose” R&D Program of Zhejiang
(No.2024C01142). We are grateful for the user study participants. This work was partially sup-
ported by ZJU Kunpeng&Ascend Center of Excellence. We also thank Dr Xiao Pan for discussing
about the paper writing.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski. Blended latent diffusion. ACM transactions on
 graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–11, 2023.

João Bordalo, Vasco Ramos, Rodrigo Valério, Diogo Glória-Silva, Yonatan Bitton, Michal Yarom,
   Idan Szpektor, and Joao Magalhaes. Generating coherent sequences of visual illustrations for
   real-world manual tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.10122, 2024.

Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 18392–18402, 2023.

Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Yinqiang Zheng. Mas-
 actrl: Tuning-free mutual self-attention control for consistent image synthesis and editing. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 22560–22570,
 2023.

Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 9650–9660, 2021.

Xi Chen, Yutong Feng, Mengting Chen, Yiyang Wang, Shilong Zhang, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen,
  and Hengshuang Zhao. Zero-shot image editing with reference imitation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.07547, 2024a.

Xi Chen, Lianghua Huang, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Hengshuang Zhao. Anydoor: Zero-
  shot object-level image customization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6593–6602, 2024b.

Junhao Cheng, Xi Lu, Hanhui Li, Khun Loun Zai, Baiqiao Yin, Yuhao Cheng, Yiqiang Yan, and Xi-
  aodan Liang. Autostudio: Crafting consistent subjects in multi-turn interactive image generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01388, 2024.

Dima Damen, Michael Wray, Ivan Laptev, Josef Sivic, et al. Genhowto: Learning to generate actions
  and state transformations from instructional videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6561–6571, 2024.

Sheng Fan, Rui Liu, Wenguan Wang, and Yi Yang. Navigation instruction generation with bev
  perception and large language models. In ECCV, 2024.

Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.

Hanan Gani, Shariq Farooq Bhat, Muzammal Naseer, Salman Khan, and Peter Wonka. Llm
  blueprint: Enabling text-to-image generation with complex and detailed prompts. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.10640, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tanmay Gupta and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Visual programming: Compositional visual reasoning
  without training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 14953–14962, 2023.

Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Yuzhou Huang, Liangbin Xie, Xintao Wang, Ziyang Yuan, Xiaodong Cun, Yixiao Ge, Jiantao Zhou,
  Chao Dong, Rui Huang, Ruimao Zhang, et al. Smartedit: Exploring complex instruction-based
  image editing with multimodal large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8362–8371, 2024.

Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6007–6017, 2023.

Gwanghyun Kim, Taesung Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusionclip: Text-guided diffusion models
 for robust image manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
 and pattern recognition, pp. 2426–2435, 2022.

Jing Yu Koh, Daniel Fried, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. Generating images with multimodal language
   models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-concept
  customization of text-to-image diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1931–1941, 2023.

Xin Lai, Zhuotao Tian, Yukang Chen, Yanwei Li, Yuhui Yuan, Shu Liu, and Jiaya Jia. Lisa: Rea-
  soning segmentation via large language model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9579–9589, 2024.

Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 19730–19742. PMLR, 2023.

Long Lian, Baifeng Shi, Adam Yala, Trevor Darrell, and Boyi Li. Llm-grounded video diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17444, 2023.

Chao Liang, Fan Ma, Linchao Zhu, Yingying Deng, and Yi Yang. Caphuman: Capture your mo-
  ments in parallel universes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 6400–6409, 2024.

Han Lin, Abhay Zala, Jaemin Cho, and Mohit Bansal. Videodirectorgpt: Consistent multi-scene
  video generation via llm-guided planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15091, 2023.

Pengyang Ling, Lin Chen, Pan Zhang, Huaian Chen, and Yi Jin. Freedrag: Point tracking is not you
  need for interactive point-based image editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04684, 2023.

Rui Liu, Xiaohan Wang, Wenguan Wang, and Yi Yang. Bird’s-eye-view scene graph for vision-
  language navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 10968–10980, 2023.

Rui Liu, Wenguan Wang, and Yi Yang. Volumetric environment representation for vision-language
  navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 16317–16328, 2024.

Fuchen Long, Zhaofan Qiu, Ting Yao, and Tao Mei. Videodrafter: Content-consistent multi-scene
  video generation with llm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01256, 2024.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yujie Lu, Pan Lu, Zhiyu Chen, Wanrong Zhu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Multimodal
  procedural planning via dual text-image prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01795, 2023.

Fan Ma, Xiaojie Jin, Heng Wang, Yuchen Xian, Jiashi Feng, and Yi Yang. Vista-llama: Reducing
  hallucination in video language models via equal distance to visual tokens. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 13151–13160,
  June 2024a.

Wan-Duo Kurt Ma, Avisek Lahiri, John P Lewis, Thomas Leung, and W Bastiaan Kleijn. Directed
 diffusion: Direct control of object placement through attention guidance. In Proceedings of the
 AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 4098–4106, 2024b.

Sachit Menon, Ishan Misra, and Rohit Girdhar. Generating illustrated instructions. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6274–6284, 2024.

Antoine Miech, Dimitri Zhukov, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Makarand Tapaswi, Ivan Laptev, and Josef
  Sivic. Howto100m: Learning a text-video embedding by watching hundred million narrated
  video clips. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp.
  2630–2640, 2019.

Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Jiechong Song, Ying Shan, and Jian Zhang. Dragondiffusion: Enabling
  drag-style manipulation on diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02421, 2023.

Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Jiechong Song, Ying Shan, and Jian Zhang. Diffeditor: Boosting accu-
  racy and flexibility on diffusion-based image editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8488–8497, 2024a.

Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Yanze Wu, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, and Ying Shan.
  T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion
  models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 4296–
  4304, 2024b.

Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.

Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning
 robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193, 2023.

Xingang Pan, Ayush Tewari, Thomas Leimkühler, Lingjie Liu, Abhimitra Meka, and Christian
  Theobalt. Drag your gan: Interactive point-based manipulation on the generative image mani-
  fold. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–11, 2023.

William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4195–4205, 2023.

Quynh Phung, Songwei Ge, and Jia-Bin Huang. Coherent zero-shot visual instruction generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04337, 2024.

Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceed-
  ings, part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 22500–
  22510, 2023.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can
  teach themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hugging-
  gpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Jing Shi, Wei Xiong, Zhe Lin, and Hyun Joon Jung. Instantbooth: Personalized text-to-image gen-
   eration without test-time finetuning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
   Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8543–8552, 2024a.
Yujun Shi, Chuhui Xue, Jun Hao Liew, Jiachun Pan, Hanshu Yan, Wenqing Zhang, Vincent YF Tan,
  and Song Bai. Dragdiffusion: Harnessing diffusion models for interactive point-based image edit-
  ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 8839–8849, 2024b.
Chenyang Si, Ziqi Huang, Yuming Jiang, and Ziwei Liu. Freeu: Free lunch in diffusion u-net.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  4733–4743, 2024.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Dı́dac Surı́s, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. Vipergpt: Visual inference via python execution for
   reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
   11888–11898, 2023.
Roman Suvorov, Elizaveta Logacheva, Anton Mashikhin, Anastasia Remizova, Arsenii Ashukha,
  Aleksei Silvestrov, Naejin Kong, Harshith Goka, Kiwoong Park, and Victor Lempitsky.
  Resolution-robust large mask inpainting with fourier convolutions. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of computer vision, pp. 2149–2159, 2022.
Yoad Tewel, Omri Kaduri, Rinon Gal, Yoni Kasten, Lior Wolf, Gal Chechik, and Yuval Atzmon.
  Training-free consistent text-to-image generation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 43(4):
  1–18, 2024.
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1921–1930, 2023.
Qingyun Wang, Manling Li, Hou Pong Chan, Lifu Huang, Julia Hockenmaier, Girish Chowd-
  hary, and Heng Ji. Multimedia generative script learning for task planning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2208.12306, 2022.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhenyu Wang, Aoxue Li, Zhenguo Li, and Xihui Liu. Genartist: Multimodal llm as an agent for
  unified image generation and editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05600, 2024.
Tsung-Han Wu, Long Lian, Joseph E Gonzalez, Boyi Li, and Trevor Darrell. Self-correcting llm-
  controlled diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6327–6336, 2024.
Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and
  Daxin Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12244, 2023.
Semih Yagcioglu, Aykut Erdem, Erkut Erdem, and Nazli Ikizler-Cinbis. Recipeqa: A challenge
  dataset for multimodal comprehension of cooking recipes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00812,
  2018.
Ling Yang, Zhaochen Yu, Chenlin Meng, Minkai Xu, Stefano Ermon, and CUI Bin. Mastering text-
  to-image diffusion: Recaptioning, planning, and generating with multimodal llms. In Forty-first
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024a.
Yue Yang, Artemis Panagopoulou, Qing Lyu, Li Zhang, Mark Yatskar, and Chris Callison-Burch.
  Visual goal-step inference using wikihow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05845, 2021.
Zongxin Yang, Guikun Chen, Xiaodi Li, Wenguan Wang, and Yi Yang. DoraemonGPT: Toward un-
  derstanding dynamic scenes with large language models (exemplified as a video agent). In Forty-
  first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024b. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=QMy2RLnxGN.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022.
Zhengqing Yuan, Ruoxi Chen, Zhaoxu Li, Haolong Jia, Lifang He, Chi Wang, and Lichao Sun.
  Mora: Enabling generalist video generation via a multi-agent framework. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.13248, 2024.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 3836–3847, 2023.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluat-
  ing text generation with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675, 2019.
Luowei Zhou, Chenliang Xu, and Jason Corso. Towards automatic learning of procedures from web
  instructional videos. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32,
  2018.
Tianfei Zhou, Fei Zhang, Boyu Chang, Wenguan Wang, Ye Yuan, Ender Konukoglu, and Daniel Cre-
  mers. Image segmentation in foundation model era: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.12957,
  2024a.
Yupeng Zhou, Daquan Zhou, Ming-Ming Cheng, Jiashi Feng, and Qibin Hou. Storydiffu-
  sion: Consistent self-attention for long-range image and video generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.01434, 2024b.
Shaobin Zhuang, Kunchang Li, Xinyuan Chen, Yaohui Wang, Ziwei Liu, Yu Qiao, and Yali Wang.
  Vlogger: Make your dream a vlog. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8806–8817, 2024.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Additional qualitative results are shown in Figure 8 and Figure 9.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         Task: How to Make General Tso Chicken
 Step1:                 Step2:                Step3:               Step4:              Step5:              Step6:               Step7:               Step8:                Step9:               Step10:
 Cut 500g of            In a bowl, mix 1      Heat oil in a        Remove the          In a separate       Heat 1 tbsp of       Add the sauce        Add the fried         Garnish with         Serve hot with
 chicken breast         cup of cornstarch     deep fryer or        chicken pieces      bowl, prepare       oil in a large       mixture to the       chicken pieces        chopped green        steamed rice or
 into bite-sized        with the chicken      large skillet and    and place them      the sauce by        skillet or wok       heated skillet       to the skillet        onions and           your choice of
 pieces                 pieces until they     fry the chicken      on paper towels     combining 1         over medium          and cook until       and toss to coat      sesame seeds         side
                        are well coated       pieces …             to drain excess     tbsp hoisin         heat                 thickened and        them evenly
                                                                   oil                 sauce …                                  bubbly               with the sauce


                                                                                  Task: How to Cook Parathas
Step1:                Step2:           Step3:               Step4:              Step5:           Step6:              Step7:            Step8:             Step9:             Step10:             Step11:
In a mixing           Add a pinch of   Slowly pour in  Cover the dough Divide the                Roll each ball      Heat a tawa or    Place the rolled- Flip the dough Cook both sides          Serve hot with
bowl, add 2           salt and a       water and knead with a damp      dough into               into a flat,        flat skillet      out dough onto and apply oil or until golden              your choice of
cups of whole         tablespoon of    the mixture to  cloth and let it small, equal-            round shape                           the tawa and      ghee on the    brown                    accompaniment
wheat flour           oil or ghee      form a smooth rest for 20-30     sized balls              using a rolling                       cook until small cooked side
                                       dough           minutes                                   pin                                   bubbles appear


                                                                            Task: How to cook calamari
Step1:                    Step2:                Step3:                     Step4:               Step5:                 Step6:                  Step7:                 Step8:                  Step9:
Clean the fresh           Slice the             Marinate the               In a separate        Dredge the mari-       Heat oil in a deep      Fry the coated         Remove the fried        Serve the calamari
calamari by               calamari body         calamari rings with        bowl, mix flour,     nated calamari         skillet or fryer to     calamari rings in      calamari and place      hot with lemon
removing the              into rings            lemon juice, salt,         paprika, and         rings in the flour     350°F (175°C)           batches until          them on a paper         wedges and your
head, beak,                                     and pepper for             garlic powder        mixture, ensuring                              golden brown…          towel-lined plate       choice of dipping
and innards                                     about 15 minutes                                well coated                                                           to drain excess oil     sauce


                                                                            Task: How to cook singapore curry laksa
Step1:                   Step2:                Step3:                   Step4:                 Step5:                 Step6:                   Step7:                  Step8:                  Step9:
Gather rice              Boil water and        Drain the noodles        In a pot, heat         Stir in coconut        Add vegetables           Simmer until            Add cooked              Serve hot,
noodles, coconut         cook the rice         and set them             some oil and add       milk, bringing the     and proteins (like       proteins are            noodles to the          garnished with
milk, curry paste,       noodles according     aside                    curry paste            mixture to a           shrimp or chicken)       cooked and              laksa soup              fresh herbs like
vegetables, and          to package                                                            simmer                 to the pot               vegetables are                                  coriander and
proteins like            instructions                                                                                                          tender                                          lime wedges
shrimp or chicken


                                                                             Task: How to Make a California Burrito
Step1:                  Step2:                  Step3:                   Step4:                Step5:                 Step6:                 Step7:                   Step8:                Step9:
Lay out a large         Spread a layer of       Add a generous           Sprinkle shredded     Add a serving of       Place a handful of     Drizzle some sour        Carefully fold the    Grill the burrito on
flour tortilla on a     guacamole in the        portion of carne         cheese over the       pico de gallo on       French fries on        cream over the           sides of the          a heated skillet for a
clean surface           center of the           asada on top of          carne asada           top of the cheese      top of the pico de     French fries             tortilla in, then     couple of minutes
                        tortilla                the guacamole                                                         gallo                                           roll it up to form    on each side to seal
                                                                                                                                                                      the burrito           it and make it crispy


                                                                              Task: How to Make Popcorn in a Pan
Step1:                 Step2:               Step3:                Step4:              Step5:              Step6:               Step7:               Step8:                Step9:                Step10:
Place a large,         Add 2-3           Put 2-3 corn             Wait until the test Remove the test     Add 1/3 cup of       Cover the pan        Shake the pan         Listen for the        Carefully
heavy-bottomed         tablespoons of kernels into the            kernels pop         kernels from the    popcorn kernels      with a lid           occasionally to       popping sounds        remove the lid
pan on the stove       vegetable oil and pan and cover                                pan with a spoon    to the pan                                ensure even           to slow down,         and pour the
                       let it heat up    with a lid                                                                                                 popping               then remove the       popcorn into a
                                                                                                                                                                          pan from heat         large bowl


            Figure 8: Additional qualitative results generated by LIGER. Zoom in to see the detail.


A.2          A DDITIONAL Q UANTITATIVE E XPERIMENTS

We present the following quantitative ablation studies in addition:


                                                                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         Task: How to Make Stuffed Acorn Squash
Step1:          Step2:            Step3:             Step4:                Step5:            Step6:              Step7:              Step8:           Step9:               Step10:              Step11:
Preheat the     Cut the acorn     Place the          Drizzle the           Roast the         In a skillet,       Add chopped         Stir in cooked   Fill each            Return the           Remove from
oven to 400°F   squash in half    squash halves,     squash halves         squash in the     cook sausage        onions, celery,     quinoa and       roasted squash       stuffed squash       oven and serve
(200°C)         and scoop out     cut side up, on    with olive oil        oven for about    until browned       and apple to        season with      half with the        to the oven          hot
                the seeds         a baking sheet     and season            40-50 minutes                         the skillet and     herbs and        quinoa and           and bake for an
                                                     with salt and         until tender                          cook until          spices           sausage              additional 10
                                                     pepper                                                      tender                               mixture              minutes


                                                                           Task: How to make a Jelly Sandwich
Step1:                            Step2:                              Step3:                           Step4:                              Step5:                              Step6:
Take two slices of bread and      Open a jar of jelly                 Use a butter knife to scoop      Spread the jelly evenly on          Place the other slice of            Cut the sandwich in half if
place them on a clean                                                 out a good amount of jelly       one slice of bread                  bread on top of the jelly-          desired and serve
surface                                                               from the jar                                                         covered slice


                                                                         Task: How to Make a Sweet Cream Cake
                                 Step3:                 Step4:           Step5:              Step6:            Step7:              Step8:             Step9:              Step10:              Step11:
Step1:          Step2:                                                                                                                                                 Allow the cakes
                                                                         In another bowl,    Gradually add     Stir in 2           Divide the batter Bake in the                               Once the cakes
Preheat your Grease and          In a mixing bowl, Add 4 eggs one
                                 cream together 1 at a time,             whisk together      the dry           teaspoons of        evenly between preheated oven to cool in the                are completely
oven to       flour two 9-
                                 cup of unsalted      beating well       3 cups of flour,    ingredients to    vanilla extract     the prepared      until a toothpick pans for 10             cool, frost with
350°F (175°C) inch round
                                 butter and 2 cups after each            1 tablespoon of     the creamed                           cake pans         inserted into the minutes, …              your favorite
              cake pans
                                                                         baking powder,      mixture…                                                center comes                              sweet cream
                                 of sugar until light addition
                                                                         and 1/2                                                                     out clean                                 frosting
                                 and fluffy
                                                                         teaspoon of salt


                                                                         Task: How to Make Cabbage Rolls
Step1:               Step2:                 Step3:                    Step4:                 Step5:                 Step6:                  Step7:               Step8:                      Step9:
Remove the core      In a bowl,             Place a portion of        Roll up the            Place the cabbage      Pour tomato             Cover the baking    Remove the foil              Serve the cabbage
from a head of       combine ground         the meat mixture          cabbage leaves,        rolls seam-side        sauce over the          dish with foil and  and bake for an              rolls hot, garnished
cabbage and          meat, cooked rice,     onto each                 folding in the         down in a baking       cabbage rolls           bake in a preheated additional 10-15             with fresh parsley if
blanch the           chopped onions,        cabbage leaf              sides to enclose       dish                                           oven at 350°F for   minutes to thicken           desired
cabbage leaves …     salt, and pepper                                 the filling                                                           about 1 hour        the sauce


                                                                                Task: How to Make Pickles
Step1:                  Step2:                      Step3:                   Step4:                   Step5:                       Step6:                  Step7:                      Step8:
Start by gathering      Slice the                   In a saucepan,           Add garlic, dill, and    Pack the cucumber            Pour the hot vinegar    Seal the jars with          Store the jars in the
cucumbers and           cucumbers into              combine water,           any other desired        slices tightly into          mixture over the        sterilized lids and let     refrigerator or
preparing them by       your desired                vinegar, and             spices or herbs to       sterilized jars              cucumbers, leaving      them cool to room           process them in a
washing                 thickness (spears           pickling salt, and       the boiling vinegar                                   a small amount of       temperature                 hot water bath for
thoroughly              or chips)                   bring to a boil          mixture                                               headspace                                           longer shelf life


                                               Task: How to Make Gulab Jamun (Indian Sweet) from Package Mix
Step1:             Step2:              Step3:               Step4:              Step5:                Step6:                Step7:               Step8:                 Step9:                Step10:
Pour the package Add water or milk     Knead the mixture Divide the dough Heat oil or ghee in Fry the dough        Remove the fried Prepare sugar                       Soak the fried        Serve the gulab
mix into a mixing as directed on the   to form a smooth into small,         a deep frying pan balls until they are balls and drain the syrup by boiling                 dough balls in the    jamun warm or
bowl              package              dough             marble-sized balls                   golden brown         excess oil          sugar and water                  sugar syrup for a     at room
                                                                                                                                       with cardamom                    few hours             temperature
                                                                                                                                       and saffron


           Figure 9: Additional qualitative results generated by LIGER. Zoom in to see the detail.



(1) Effectiveness of different components. To thoroughly evaluate the importance, we conduct fur-
ther ablation and report results in Table 4.


                                                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Method    CLIP-Score↑     DINO-Score ↓      BERT-Score ↑
                          SDXL          2.5837           0.8516           0.8699
                       SDXL+V           2.6251           0.8239           0.8719
                       SDXL+H           2.6842           0.8224           0.8707
                       SDXL+R           2.7270           0.7346           0.8732
                     SDXL+H+V           2.7168           0.7459           0.8721
                     SDXL+V+R           2.7428           0.7053           0.8734
                     SDXL+H+R           2.7440           0.6653           0.8740
                         LIGER          2.7555           0.6338           0.8743
             Table 4: Different combination of Self-reflection and other components.

(2) Robustness towards MLLMs. LIGER integrates the strong GPT4o as the error detector and
referee agent. To evaluate the influence of MLLM, we conduct an ablation by substituting the
GPT4o model with two open-source models i.e. Pixtral-12B and QwenVL-7B. Automatic metric
comparison is shown in Table 5. There is a performance drop when using open-source models.
We empirically find the output of the open-source model lacks reasoning ability and detail region
comprehension ability, leading to misunderstanding the error type or missing the obvious errors.

                             Method     CLIP-Score↑      DINO-Score ↓      BERT-Score ↑
                             SDXL          2.5837            0.8516           0.8699
                LIGER(QwenVL-7b)           2.7244            0.7305           0.8725
                 LIGER(Pixtral-12b)        2.7316            0.7061           0.8716
                    LIGER(GPT4o)           2.7555            0.6338           0.8743
                                    Table 5: Ablation on MLLMs.

(3) Variance test. We run another trial on the whole 569 tasks and report the result in Table 6.
Results indicate that there is a relatively small variance in the three evaluation metrics. Never the
less, LIGER still consistently outperforms baseline methods.

                          Method      CLIP-Score ↑       DINO-Score ↓     BERT-Score ↑
                     T2I-Bridge          2.4350             0.8576            0.8669
                         SLDM            2.5054             0.6746            0.8694
                         LIGER           2.7555             0.6338            0.8743
                LIGER (new trial)        2.7738             0.6276            0.8745
                        Table 6: Variance test results on the whole dataset.

(4) Image quality evaluation. We evaluate the image quality using the GPT4O model to rate the
quality of individual images of the whole 569 tasks from 1 to 5 where a higher rating indicates
higher quality. We further conduct a user study, 5 participants view 50 images generated by each
method and picked the best image from the three methods, and the win rate is reported in Table 3.


                              Method      GPT-score ↑       User Win Rate ↑
                           T2I-Bridge        3.8525               41.2%
                               SLDM          3.7078               11.6%
                              LIGER          3.8976               47.2%

                                 Table 7: Image quality evaluation.

A.3   A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE E XPERIMENTS

We present the following qualitative comparison in addition:
(1) Comparison with relative works. Figure 10 shows a comparison between LIGER, Consistory
and StoryDiffusion. LIGER shows a clear object attribute change along the task procedure. Not that
we also need to manually define a subject concept for Consistory and StoryDiffusion, which id not
required by LIGER.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Figure 10: Additional qualitative results generated by LIGER. Zoom in to see the detail.


(2) Error analysis. Figure 11 shows two types of errors in LIGER. For the reasoning error case, the
precious step is putting an egg in the batter and whisk. The current step is adding vanilla extraction.
However, the error detector mistakenly believes the egg should be visible in the current step, which
should not be after whisking. The referee agent finds the error and keeps the draft image as the final
output. The right lane shows a case of generation error due to the location tool failure. The balls are
mistakenly removed and the referee agent finds the mistake considering image quality and picks the
draft image as the final output.


                                   Figure 11: Error case analysis.


(3) Qualitative results in different scenarios. In Figure 12, we show the generalization ability of
LIGER on tasks in other scenarios.
(4) Comparison on other short datasets. Figure 13 shows comparison on the recipeplan dataset with
short abstract textual instructions. LIGER generates images fluently indicating the task procedure.


A.4    L IMITATIONS

LIGER shows a strong ability to generate visual instructions for various tasks, yet there are still
limitations. First is that the action generation is still uncontrollable. Future work may efficiently
fine-tune the generation model to add illustrative actions in the images. Second, the amount of
ingredients is not controllable. It is challenging for the frozen text-to-image diffusion models to
identify how to visualize 1/2 cup of water and 1/4 teaspoon of salt. We believe future research on
generating videos for instructions might be an ideal way to show these details.
Another limitation is that since LIGER is a training-free framework, the generation quality depends
on the pre-trained diffusion model. We find the current models struggle to generate fine-grained
actions, or part of a complex structures. We believe LIGER can benefit from storng models.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Figure 12: Qualitative results on other scenarios.
LIGER adopts many tools to collaboratively generate illustrative instructions, therefore the inference
time is longer. A speed test over 50 randomly selected tasks using a locally deployed multi-modal
large language model. LIGER takes around 120 seconds to generate instructions for a 10-step task
while the frozen stable diffusion model takes around 60 seconds on a single A100 GPU. In the
future, using quantilized models or conducting accelerating strategies may increase the efficiency.


                        Figure 13: Qualitative results on recipeplan dataset.
A.5   P ROMPT T EMPLATES

We provide several detailed prompt templates here. The prompt for the four types of error are:
(1) Over-consistent:
Now I wish you to use logic reasoning ability to judge whether
the current image should be regenerated. If the previous and
current step action does not have logic correlation, the
previous scene description of current step description is wrong,
then the current image needs to be regenerated. You need to
change the step description and tell me in a format of:
*-Regenerate(new step description)-*. The new description should
describe in detail about what objects should be in the new image.
For example, {In-context example with reason}


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


If the logic between the two step action descriptions are
coherent, you just answer Correct, no error.
Please ignore the objects in the background and be tolerent to
errors that are not obvious. You must tell why to make the
choice and only correct the most obvious error with only one
operation. Now, for a procedure of {task}, the previous step
is {pre_step}, and the previous image is: {pre_image} the
current step description is {cur_step} and the current image
is: {cur_image}

(2) Identity:

Use logic reasoning ability to judge whether the subject object
should look exactly the same between the two images based on the
previous and current step description. If there is an object
should look totally the same but not, tell in a format of:
*-Modify(object in current image, object in previous image)-*.
For example, {In-context example with reason}. If the image is
correct, you just answer Correct, no error. You only consider
whether the foreground object appearance texture (not including
shape and size) should be the exactly the same. Please ignore
the objects in the background and be tolerent to errors that
are not obvious. You must tell why to make the choice and only
correct the most obvious error with only one operation.
Now, for a procedure of {task}, the previous step is {pre_step},
and the previous image is {pre_image}. The current step
description is {cur_step} and the current image is {cur_image}.

(3) Attribute:

We are generating illustrations for a procedure. Please evaluate
the image quality according to the current step description. You
need to identify whether the salient main object attribute
matches the step description. If the attribute is not ideal, you
need to tell me how to add it in a format of:
*-Add(object description, place to add the object)-*.
Must start with *-Add( and end with )-*. \
For example, {In-context example with reason}
If the image is correct, you just answer Correct, no error. You
only consider the forground salient object of the image. Please
ignore the objects in the background and be tolerent to errors
that are not obvious. You must tell why to make the choice and
only correct the most obvious error with only one operation.
The current procedure is {task} and the current step is
{cur_step}, and the image is {cur_image}

(4) Redundant:

We are generating illustrations for a procedure. Please
evaluate the image quality according to the current step
description. You need to identify whether there are
redundant objects. If redundant object exists, you need
to tell me in a format like:
*-Remove(object description)-*. Must start with *-Remove(
and end with )-*. For example, {In-context example with
reason}. The objects described in the Previous scene part
of the step description should not be regarded as
redundant object. If the image is correct, you just
answer Correct, no error. You only consider whether there
is obvious redundant object in foreground of the image.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Please ignore the objects in the background and be
tolerant to errors that are not obvious. You must tell
why to make the choice and only correct the most obvious
error with only one operation. The current procedure is
{task} and the current step is {cur_step}, and the image
is {cur_image}.

The prompt for comparing the draft image and the revised image is:

Please pick the better image between the two images
considering the image quality and the alignment with the
current step description. You only answer A or B within
one word. For example, {In-context example with reason}.
Now, consider the following step, {input_cur}, and the
image A is: {image_initial}, the image B is: {image_final}.

The prompt for GPT evaluation is:
(1) Single image evaluation

Rate the image from 1 (worst) to 5 (perfect) considering:
A. Does the image contains the objects should appear for
the text description?
B. The image does not contain unrelated objects?
C. According to the text description, imagine the subject
object attribute (adjective, state, color, texture), and
does the image show correct attributes?
Give a rate from 1 to 5 on each aspect within 30 words
in a format like A:rating*.
The text description is {input_overall} and the image is:

(2)Image series evaluation

Please rate the series images from 1 (worst) to 5 (ok)
considering:
A. In some consecutive steps, the images are coherent.
B. The image is diverse when the text descriptions deviate.
C. Overall, can the whole image series roughly describe
the coarse idea of the task?
Give a rate from 1 to 5 on each aspect. Do not be too
strict since the task is hard. The response should be in
a format of A:(number of ratings)* Reason: (reasons).
Considering the task of {task}. The text description for
each step is {steps} and the image series are:

A.6   DATASET E XAMPLES AND DISCUSSIONS

We showcase an example of How to cook salmon fillet in the annotated dataset:

Most unrelated step: 1 and 2
related step: 4 and 5 *
Step 1:
Action: Preheat your oven to 400°F (200°C).
Ground Truth Description: A modern metal oven is slightly
open with the display showing 400°F. The interior oven light
softly illuminates the empty metal racks inside, indicating
the oven is warming up. *
Step 2:
Ground Truth Description: A baking sheet is lined with
aluminum foil or parchment paper.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Action: Line a baking sheet with aluminum foil or
parchment paper. *
Step 3:
Ground Truth Description: The salmon fillet is placed
on the prepared baking sheet, skin side down, with the
pink flesh exposed for seasoning.
Action: Place the salmon fillet on the baking sheet,
skin side down. *
Step 4:
Ground Truth Description: Olive oil is being drizzled
over the top of the salmon fillet, giving it a glossy
sheen and helping to lock in moisture while baking.
Action: Drizzle olive oil over the salmon fillet. *
Step 5:
Ground Truth Description: The salmon is seasoned with
salt and pepper, and herbs or spices are sprinkled
over the top for added flavor.
Action: Season with salt and pepper, and add any
desired herbs or spices. *
Step 6:
Ground Truth Description: The baking sheet with the
seasoned salmon fillet is placed in the preheated oven.
Action: Place the baking sheet in the preheated oven. *
Step 7:
Ground Truth Description: The salmon is baking in the
oven for 12-15 minutes, turning opaque and flaking
easily with a fork when fully cooked.
Action: Bake for 12-15 minutes, or until the salmon is
cooked through and flakes easily with a fork. *
Step 8:
Ground Truth Description: The baked salmon is removed
from the oven, resting for a few minutes on the baking
sheet to allow the juices to settle.
Action: Remove the salmon from the oven and let it
rest for a few minutes before serving. *


                                               23
