Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T WEEDIE M IX : I MPROVING M ULTI -C ONCEPT F USION
FOR D IFFUSION - BASED I MAGE /V IDEO G ENERATION

 Gihyun Kwon                                Jong Chul Ye
 KRAFTON                                    Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST
 gkwon@krafton.com                          jong.ye@kaist.ac.kr


Figure 1: Multi-concept Generation Results from TweedieMix. Our model can generate high-
quality multi-concept generation results on both of image and video domains. More results can be
found in the experiment section.

                                             A BSTRACT

           Despite significant advancements in customizing text-to-image and video genera-
           tion models, generating images and videos that effectively integrate multiple per-
           sonalized concepts remains challenging. To address this, we present TweedieMix,
           a novel method for composing customized diffusion models during the inference
           phase. By analyzing the properties of reverse diffusion sampling, our approach
           divides the sampling process into two stages. During the initial steps, we apply
           a multiple object-aware sampling technique to ensure the inclusion of the desired
           target objects. In the later steps, we blend the appearances of the custom concepts
           in the de-noised image space using Tweedie’s formula. Our results demonstrate
           that TweedieMix can generate multiple personalized concepts with higher fidelity
           than existing methods. Moreover, our framework can be effortlessly extended to
           image-to-video diffusion models by extending the residual layer’s features across
           frames, enabling the generation of videos that feature multiple personalized con-
           cepts. Results and source code are in our project page.1


1       I NTRODUCTION

In recent years, text-to-image generation models (Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh
et al., 2022) have made remarkable strides, empowering creatives to produce high-quality images
simply by crafting text prompts. This success has quickly expanded into other domains like video
and 3D scene generation (Zhang et al., 2023a; Esser et al., 2023; Poole et al., 2022; Xu et al.,
2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a), achieving impressive results. Significant progress has
been made in developing models that can customize images for specific subjects or visual concepts
(Kumari et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2023; Tewel et al., 2023). These have enabled new
possibilities for content creation, allowing users to leverage their own personalized characters.
Despite significant advancements in customizing these models for specific subjects or visual con-
cepts, a major challenge persists: generating images that effectively combine multiple personalized
concepts. Existing methods (Kumari et al., 2023; Tewel et al., 2023) allow for joint training of
models on multiple concepts or merging customized models to create scenes featuring more than
    1
        https://github.com/KwonGihyun/TweedieMix


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


one personalized element. However, these approaches often struggle with semantically related con-
cepts—such as cats and dogs—and have difficulty scaling beyond three concepts. For instance,
Mix-of-Show (Gu et al., 2023) attempted to tackle multi-concept generation using disentangled
Low-Rank (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021) weight merging and regional guidance during sampling. Yet,
issues like concept blending remain due to the complexities involved in weight merging. To ad-
dress these limitations, ConceptWeaver (Kwon et al., 2024) introduced a training-free method that
combines multiple concepts during inference by splitting the generation process into multiple stages.
In this paper, we introduce an enhanced, tuning-free approach for composing customized text-to-
image diffusion models during the inference stage. Unlike previous methods that require weight
merging or additional inversion steps for multi-object generation, our technique utilizes only the
reverse sampling steps and divides the process into two main stages. First, we conduct multi-object-
aware sampling using text prompts that include multiple objects, introducing a novel resampling
strategy to further improve generation quality. In the second stage, we integrate custom concept
models through object-wise region guidance. To ensure stable and high-quality sampling, we com-
bine each custom concept sample within the intermediate denoised image space calculated using
Tweedie’s formula. To expand the versatility of our method, we also propose a training-free strategy
for extending these custom concept-aware images into the video domain.
Our experimental results demonstrate that our method can compose images featuring semantically
related concepts without incorrectly blending their appearances. Moreover, our model seamlessly
handles more than two concepts, overcoming a common limitation of baseline approaches. The
images generated closely align with the semantic intent of the input prompts, achieving high CLIP
scores. Finally, our video outputs outperform existing fine-tuning-based custom video generation
methods, underscoring the effectiveness of our proposed framework.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Text-to-image (T2I) generation models have seen remarkable advancements over the years, evolving
from early Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based models (Esser et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2017) to the latest diffusion-based approaches (Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Yu et al.,
2023; Ramesh et al., 2022). The development of diffusion models has opened up a range of applica-
tions, including text-guided image editing (Hertz et al., 2023; Couairon et al., 2023; Mokady et al.,
2022), image translation (Kwon & Ye, 2023; Tumanyan et al., 2023), and style transfer (Zhang et al.,
2023c). Recently, the success of T2I models has seamlessly extended to other modalities, such as 3D
scene and asset generation (Poole et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023), as well as video generation (Zhang
et al., 2023a; Esser et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Bar-Tal et al., 2024). This expansion has spurred
research into applications like Image-to-3D (Liu et al., 2023a; 2024) and Image-to-Video generation
(Xing et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b), along with editing capabilities for 3D scenes (Park et al.,
2024; Chen et al., 2023) and videos (Jeong et al., 2023; Ceylan et al., 2023).
Building upon these advancements, there has been a growing interest in customizing T2I models us-
ing user-provided images or visual concepts. The pioneering work of Textual Inversion (Gal et al.,
2022) focused on optimizing textual embeddings to represent custom concepts, enabling the genera-
tion of images that reflect these custom concepts. Subsequent studies have enhanced performance by
developing extended textual embeddings (Voynov et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023) and fine-tuning model
parameters (Kumari et al., 2023; Ruiz et al., 2023; Tewel et al., 2023), leading to more efficient and
flexible customization options. Recently, framework of mutli-concept extraction (Hao et al., 2024)
from single image has been proposed as an improved framework.
Extending beyond single-concept frameworks, researchers have explored methods for incorporat-
ing multiple concepts into customized models which use joint training to embed multiple concepts
simultaneously or weight merging of single-concept customized model parameters (Kumari et al.,
2023; Han et al., 2023; Tewel et al., 2023). However, these methods face challenges when scaling
to a larger number of concepts or when dealing with semantically similar concepts, often resulting
in the concept blending or disappearance of specific concepts. To address these issues, recent work
like Mix-of-Show (Gu et al., 2023) applied regional guidance during the sampling process using
merged weights to mitigate concept blending. Despite this improvement, the approach still requires
additional optimization steps for weight merging.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As a further enhancement, ConceptWeaver (Kwon et al., 2024) introduced a training-free method
that combines multiple concepts during the reverse sampling stage by dividing the inference process
into multiple stages. While this method reduces the need for optimization, it suffers from longer
inference times due to extra inversion steps and has limitations in flexibility, as it requires manip-
ulation of attention layers. In contrast to previous methods, our approach eliminates the need for
additional optimization or inversion steps and avoids direct manipulation of attention layers. This
results in the production of higher-quality images while maintaining efficiency and flexibility in
generating customized content featuring multiple concepts.


3    BACKGROUNDS

Text-to-image Sampling with Classifier-free Guidance. Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models
(DDIMs) (Song et al., 2020) modify the reverse diffusion process of Denoising Diffusion Proba-
bilistic Models (DDPMs) (Ho et al., 2020) to be deterministic and non-Markovian, allowing for
more efficient sampling. As explained in the previous works (Kwon et al., 2023; Chung et al.,
2023), the DDIM sampling process is divided into two parts: denoising with Tweedie’s formula
(Kim & Ye, 2021; Chung et al., 2022) and renoising part. If the score estimation model ϵθ is trained
the various text conditioned c, we can obtain the text-guided DDIM update rule given by:
                             √                        p
                     xt−1 = ᾱt−1 x̂[ϵθ (xt , t, c)] + 1 − ᾱt−1 ϵθ (xt , t, c),                  (1)
                             |         {z          } |          {z            }
                                       Denoising                       Re-noising
                                                           √                           √
                            x̂[ϵθ (xt , t, c)] := (xt −        1 − ᾱt ϵθ (xt , t, c))/ ᾱt ,         (2)

where ϵθ (xt , t, c) is the predicted noise at time step t with text condition c. Also, αt = 1 − βt and
     Qt
ᾱt = s=1 αs in which βt ∈ (0, 1) is a variance schedule.
In general text-to-image sampling, the model use Classifier-free guidance (CFG) (Ho & Salimans,
2022) which enhances conditional generation by combining the outputs of a conditional model and
an unconditional model within the diffusion framework. This method allows for stronger condition-
ing without the need for an external classifier. During training, the model ϵθ (xt , t, c) is trained both
with and without conditioning information c (e.g., text embeddings), where c is set to a null token
with a certain probability puncond .
At inference time, the guided noise prediction and sampling update is computed as:

                      ϵw
                       c (xt ) = ϵθ (xt , t, ∅) + w (ϵθ (xt , t, c) − ϵθ (xt , t, ∅)) ,               (3)
                                 √
                        xt−1 = ᾱt−1 x̂[ϵw
                                                         p
                                              c (xt )] +   1 − ᾱt−1 ϵwc (xt ),                       (4)

where w > 1 is the guidance scale, ϵθ (xt , t, c) is the conditional prediction, and ϵθ (xt , t, ∅) is the
unconditional or null-text prediction.
Improved Sampling with CFG++. The traditional CFG framework employs a method where the
CFG scale is set to w > 1, extrapolating between the unconditional score estimation output and the
conditional score estimation. This approach causes off-manifold issues, such as abnormal saturation
of the posterior mean calculated using Tweedie’s formula during the early stages of sampling. These
issues lead to a degradation in the text-image alignment quality of the final output. To address
this problem, Chung et al. (2024) proposed a new framework that improves upon CFG. By using
a smaller CFG scale, they interpolate between the conditional and unconditional scores, thereby
alleviating the off-manifold problem of the posterior mean. The formulation of CFG++ is as follows:

                       ϵλc (xt ) = ϵθ (xt , t, ∅) + λ (ϵθ (xt , t, c) − ϵθ (xt , t, ∅)) ,             (5)
                                  √
                       xt−1 = ᾱt−1 x̂[ϵλc (xt )] + 1 − ᾱt−1 ϵθ (xt , t, ∅),
                                                        p
                                                                                                      (6)

where 0 < λ < 1 is the guidance scale, ϵθ (xt , t, c) is the conditional prediction, and ϵθ (xt , t, ∅)
is the unconditional or null-text prediction. The notable difference between CFG and CFG++ is
that this framework use unconditional score in the renoising part. See Chung et al. (2024) for the
mathematical motivation.


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Method Overview. (a) To enhance the multi-object generation of text-to-image model, we
use content-aware sampling in which we sample the image with non fine-tuned model ϵθ0 and multi-
object aware text cmul . In the intermediate step tcon , we extract mask from the images denoised
with Tweedie’s formula. (b) After tcon , we apply custom concept using region-wise guidance and
concept-wise finetuned models. We propose to region-wise mixing of different models in Tweedie’s
denoised space.


4   M ETHODS

Building on the previous sampling strategy, we propose a methodology to combine individually
fine-tuned U-Net models for custom concepts, applied exclusively during the sampling stage. In our
approach, the fine-tuned U-Nets are models that have been adapted using various methods, such as
weight fine-tuning as proposed in DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023), Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al.,
2023), or low-rank adaptation (Hu et al., 2021). This flexibility allows us to utilize different types
of fine-tuned models. We refer to the base model that has not been fine-tuned as ϵθ0 , and the model
fine-tuned for the nth concept as ϵθn .
Content-aware Sampling. An overview of our method is shown in the Figure 2. Our sampling
method is divided into two stages. First, as illustrated in Figure 2(a), we perform sampling up to a
specific timestep tcon using the base model ϵθ0 that has not been fine-tuned for any custom concepts.
This approach addresses the issue where models fine-tuned on multiple concepts easily lose the abil-
ity to generate multiple objects. To prevent the loss of major basic components during the sampling
process, we initially use the non fine-tuned model and a multiple context-aware text prompt cmul
that includes all the basic objects (e.g., “a cat and a dog playing with a ball, mountain background”)
for sampling. In this stage, we utilize the CFG++ framework introduced earlier for sampling. This
is crucial not only to achieve higher text-to-image alignment performance but also because it’s im-
portant to use a smoothly varying posterior mean—not an off-manifold one—in the denoised image
space where we will later perform multi-concept fusion. Also, we use latent diffusion framework in
which the sample is conducted on latent space z.
Regional Mask Extraction. In Figure 2(a), at the step just before tcon , we extract regional masks
needed for the subsequent concept fusion sampling. In existing methods, this process was cum-
bersome as it involved extracting masks from pre-sampled images, performing inversion to convert
them back into initial noise, or manually applying regional guidance. Our approach streamlines this
process, allowing for more efficient and automated integration of regional masks during sampling.
More specifically, at timestep tcon + 1, we perform one-step denoising using Tweedie’s formula
and pass the result through the decoder to obtain an intermediate image D(ẑ[ϵλcmul (ztcon +1 )]). This
intermediate image, along with the words corresponding to each object (e.g. ’a dog’, ’a cat’), is fed
into a pre-trained off-the-shelf text-guided segmentation model to obtain region mask information
for each object M1 , M2 , . . .. At this point, instead of using precise dense masks, we extract and
use the rectangular regions that enclose thePrespective masks. For the background, we set the mask
as rest of object regions such as : 1 − (Mi ). Optionally, instead of directly segmenting the
intermediate image at timestep tcon + 1, we can improve the segmentation quality by performing a
few more additional sampling steps to ẑtcon +1 and use them as the source for segmentation model.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Resampling Strategy. To improve the multi-object sampling in content-aware sampling
stage, we use resampling strategy. At initial timestep T , we subtract the single-concept samples from
multi-concept samples to fortify the multi-concept text condition. This process is again calculated
in the denoised space using Tweedie’s formula. With the denoised image visualizations, we can see
the effectiveness of our proposed resampling.


Multi-concept Resample Strategy. Despite the improved quality of using CFG++, we experimen-
tally observed that it remains challenging to generate images containing multiple objects simultane-
ously due to the inherent limitations of the text-to-image (T2I) model performance. To address this
issue, we discovered that it is possible to set an optimal starting point that enables the model to better
generate multiple objects by performing multiple resampling steps at the initial phase, specifically
at the most noisy timestep T , which significantly influences the overall quality of image generation.
Specifically, as illustrated in Figure 3, we sample the initial noise zT and perform denoising to pro-
ceed to the next timestep. At this point, we adjust the denoising output by subtracting the denoised
samples from single-object text conditions c1 , c2 , . . . , cn (e.g. “a cat is playing with a ball”, “a dog
is playing with a ball”) from the denoised output obtained using the multiple-object text condition
cmul (e.g. “a cat and a dog is playing with a ball”) , which includes all the objects. Therefore, our
sampling step at timestep T can be described as:
                                                                      N
                                                                      X
                                     ẑadj = N ẑ[ϵλcmul (zT )] −           ẑ[ϵλcn (zT )].             (7)
                                                                      i=1
                                     √                    p
                           zT −1 =       ᾱT −1 ẑadj +       1 − ᾱT −1 ϵθ (zT , T, ∅),                (8)
where ϵλc (zT ) represents the score output at timestep T conditioned on text c. By moving to the
next timestep T − 1 using this adjusted denoised output, we observed that the multiple-object text
condition cmul is more prominently emphasized in the generation process. After the mixing the
denoised images, re-noising is performed using the unconditional score as suggested in CFG++.
Subsequently, we perform DDIM forward sampling from T − 1 back to the initial timestep T using
cmul and repeat this process P times to amplify the effect. This resampling strategy effectively
enhances the model’s ability to generate images containing multiple objects by refining the initial
starting point.
To clearly show the effect of our proposed resampling strategy, we show the Tweedie’s denoised
visualization output at timestep tcon in the right side of Figure 3. When we sample the output without
resampling, only one target object appears on the image, while the output from our proposed method
shows multiple objects.
Multi-concept Fusion Sampling. After completing the previous content-aware sampling stage, we
combine the custom concept-aware models in the subsequent steps. Since we have already obtained
the sampling for multiple objects and the corresponding regional masks in the previous stage, we
can apply the custom concepts to each different regions. Previous methods (Gu et al., 2023; Kwon
et al., 2024; Yao et al., 2024) have also utilized region-wise sampling, but they mostly adopted
approaches that mix concepts in the cross-attention features of the U-Net. While these methods


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


allow for differentiated sampling by region, applying mask regions can sometimes cause unwanted
modifications due to the very small size of the bottleneck layer. Additionally, since all operations
must be performed within a single model, there is a drawback of reduced flexibility due to limitations
on the types of customized models that can be used.
To address these issues, we propose a method of mixing each concept in the denoised space using
Tweedie’s formula as shown in Figure 2(b). This approach enables more stable multi-concept fusion
than using attention maps or noisy latent spaces. Since we leverage the framework of CFG++,
we can confine the denoised space to exists on the same manifold. Therefore, it can correct the
differences between outputs that occur when using different fine-tuned models. It also allows us to
combine various models that have been fine-tuned in different ways for each custom concept (e.g.,
LoRA, key-value fine-tuning, etc.). Therefore, our multi-concept fusion sampling can be expressed
as follows:
                                           N
                             √             X                 p
                    zt−1 =       ᾱt−1 {     Mi · ẑ[ϵ̃i ]} + 1 − ᾱt−1 ϵθ0 (zt , t, ∅),            (9)
                                           i=1
                          ϵ̃i = ϵθ0 (zt , t, ∅) + λ (ϵθi (zt , t, ci ) − ϵθ0 (zt , t, ∅)) ,        (10)
where ϵθi (zt , t, ci ) is estimated score output from U-net fine-tuned on ith custom concept using
single-concept aware text prompt ci in which the sentence exclusively contains word corresponding
to ith concept. (e.g. c1 : “A [c1] cat playing with a ball.” , c2 :“A [c2] dog playing with a ball.”,
. . .). In the unconditional score estimation using null-text prompts, we found that using the null-text
outputs from each concept’s fine-tuned model ϵθi hinders the natural mixing between objects and
background. To address this issue, we commonly used the unconditional score estimation output
obtained from the non fine-tuned model ϵθ0 , across all concepts.
Extension to Video Domain. Using the
proposed sampling strategy, we success-
fully generated images that accurately rep-
resent multiple custom concepts. Build-
ing on this success, we propose a novel
method to extend multi-concept genera-
tion into the video domain.
Previous methods (Molad et al., 2023;
Wei et al., 2023) for video generation of
custom concepts have primarily focused Figure 4: Method for Video Extension. To preserve
on single concepts, often employing tech- the context of reference image which is generated from
niques that fine-tune the attention layers our multi-concept sampling strategy, we propose to in-
of text-to-video models. These approaches ject the residual features of first frame to the other
require extensive computational resources frame features.
and significant training time due to the
need for video model fine-tuning. The
problem becomes more serious when dealing with multiple custom concepts. Additionally, these
methods tend to suffer from overfitting, leading to a substantial degradation in performance when
generating multiple objects.
To overcome these limitations, we introduce a simple yet powerful training-free strategy. Since we
already have well-generated images of multiple custom concepts from earlier steps, our approach
focuses on animating these images using a pre-trained image-to-video model (Zhang et al., 2023b) to
enable multi-concept video generation. However, merely conditioning the video generation on these
images often causes the generated frames to lose the context of the original concepts easily. Our
goal is to ensure that the video consistently maintains the appearance of the same custom concepts
from start to finish.
To address this issue, we drew inspiration from feature injection methods recently used in 2D im-
age editing (Tumanyan et al., 2023). In Figure 4, we begin by sampling with the image-to-video
model using random noise zT1:F and image conditions Iref which is sampled from our method. We
observed that the initial timestep T plays a critical role in determining the semantics of subsequent
frames. During the first timestep T when utilizing the I2V U-Net, we transfer the U-Net features
from the first frame (Reference Frame) to the following frames.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Qualitative Evaluation of Multi-Concept Image Generation. We evaluate the image
generation quality of our method in comparison to baseline approaches, using prompts that incorpo-
rate each concept displayed on the left. In the overall results, our method maintains the appearance
of the target concepts without any concept missing problems, whereas the baseline methods fails to
preserve the identity of the concepts or generate the intended action corresponding the text.


Transferring features from all layers, however, led to artifacts or a complete loss of motion. To
mitigate this, we carefully selected which layers to inject features into. We found that injecting
features from the residual layers in the bottleneck of the U-Net allows us to preserve the appearance
while still generating the desired motion in the video.
Moreover, we noticed that simply replacing the features of the first frame significantly reduced
motion. To prevent this, we employ linear interpolation between the features of the first frame and
those of the other frames. Denoting the residual features of I2V U-Net as f 1:F if the total frame
number is F , the intermediate features at timestep T can be expressed as follows:
                                     fT2:F ← ηfT1 + (1 − η)fT2:F                                 (11)
For feature interpolation, we used all the lowest resolution U-Net bottleneck blocks (Midblocks) and
the first residual layer of upsampling block. For the lowest resolution blocks, we set η = 1, and for
the first upsampling block, we set η = 0.3.

5     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Baseline Methods. We compare the proposed method with various existing concept personalization
techniques. For this, we adopted earlier methods such as Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022), Custom


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             CLIP score         DINO score                  User Study
      Method
                      Text sim↑    Image sim↑   Image sim↑    Text match↑   Concept Match↑   Realism↑
  Textual Inversion    0.3472        0.7692       0.4420         3.01            2.05          2.16
  Custom Diffusion     0.3343        0.7456       0.4965         2.82            2.63          2.48
     Perfusion         0.3222        0.7182       0.4201         2.01            2.44          1.88
    Mix-of-show        0.3581        0.7839       0.5211         3.82            3.77          3.56
   Concept Weaver      0.3707        0.8095       0.5352         4.14            4.32          4.11
ß TweedieMix (ours)    0.3816        0.8311       0.5950         4.56            4.71          4.47

Table 1: Quantitative Evaluation of Multi-Concept Image Generation. Our model outperforms
baselines in overall scores for both of text-alignment and image-alignment CLIP scores. Also our
model shows improved perceptual quality with obtaining the highest scores in user preference study.


Diffusion (Kumari et al., 2023), and Perfusion (Tewel et al., 2023), and show the results from the
models joint-trained with multi-concept data. Additionally, we used Mix-of-Show (Gu et al., 2023),
a state-of-the-art method for multi-concept generation. We conducted experiments using the official
source code of the model. Since this model requires manual region guidance, we provided region
guidance for each image. Furthermore, we incorporated the more advanced ConceptWeaver (Kwon
et al., 2024) method as the latest baseline for comparison.
Evaluation Settings. For the evaluation dataset, we utilized the dataset proposed in the prior work,
drawing from various data sources for both quantitative and qualitative analyses. For the quantitative
evaluation, we selected 32 distinct concepts from the Custom Concept 101 dataset (Kumari et al.,
2023), organized into 10 unique combinations. These concepts span a wide variety of categories,
including animals, humans, natural scenes, and objects. For the qualitative analysis, we expanded
the concept pool by adding three animated character concepts sourced from YouTube Blender Open
Movie. All the dataset contains 5 - 8 images per each concept.
For evaluation metrics, we also borrowed the protocol provided in the recent work (Kwon et al.,
2024). We evaluate our method against baseline approaches by measuring Text-alignment (Text-
sim) and Image-alignment (Image-sim) using CLIP scores (Radford et al., 2021). Text-alignment
calculates the cosine similarity between the CLIP embedding of the generated image and the CLIP
embedding of the text prompt. To better assess our model’s ability to generate multiple concepts,
we use modified the standard Image-alignment metric. This adaptation computes cosine similarity
between the visual embeddings of specific concept regions and the embeddings of the corresponding
target concepts. We calculate these metrics across 100 unique images generated by each model. The
evaluation uses ten combinations of multiple concepts, with each combination containing more than
three concepts. For more thorough evaluation of our concept generation performance, we calculated
same image similarity score on pre-trained DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2024) model. We report the
average Text-alignment and Image-alignment scores across all generated images.


5.2   M ULTI - CONCEPT I MAGE G ENERATION R ESULTS

Qualitative Evaluation. To compare our method with the baselines, we generated images com-
bining three different custom concepts. Our results included both simple text prompts and more
complex prompts where objects interact with each other. Figure 5 presents our qualitative evalua-
tion results. In the case of early models like Textual Inversion, Perfusion, and Custom Diffusion,
we observed that due to training failures caused by joint training, the target concepts did not ap-
pear accurately in the images, and the generated images did not match the text prompts. Even with
the multi-concept sampling model, Mix-of-Show, although multiple custom objects were generated,
their appearance did not accurately follow the target concepts, and some results did not align with
the target text. When compared to the latest model, ConceptWeaver, this model reflected custom
concepts and text conditions to a certain extent, but there were slight differences in the texture or
color appearance of the images from the target, and some images showed unnecessary modifications.
Our results more accurately represented the target concepts than the baselines and more naturally
incorporated the text conditions into the generated images.
Quantitative Evaluation. Table 1 shows the comparison results of CLIP, DINO scores and hu-
man preference user study between our model and baseline models. In terms of CLIP and DINO
scores, the early models demonstrated relatively lower values for both text-image alignment scores


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Ablation Study on Image Generation. To evaluate the proposed method components, we
conduct ablation study. (a) Results without CFG++. (b) Results without using resampling strategy.
(c) Results without content aware sampling. (d) Results with mixing in noisy latent space.

and image-image matching scores. While the scores of the latest multi-concept models showed
significant improvement over the early models, our model achieved the best quantitative scores.
To validate the perceptual quality of our results, we conducted a user study with 20 different par-
ticipants. In the user study, we followed the protocol of previous work. Specifically, we asked
users three questions across different categories: 1) alignment with the text prompt(text-match), 2)
whether all target concepts were accurately generated(concept-match), and 3) whether the generated
image appeared realistic(realism). Each participant viewed 60 images and rated them on a 5-point
scale, where 1 indicated “strongly disagree” and 5 indicated “strongly agree.” The results of the user
study clearly demonstrated that our model significantly outperformed the baseline models in terms
of perceptual quality.
Ablation Study. We conducted an ab-
lation study to evaluate the components                                          CLIP score
of our proposed method in Figure 6. (a)                Settings
                                                                           Text sim↑       Image sim↑
First, we observed that some concepts             (a) w/o resample           0.3551          0.8078
disappeared when the resampling strategy           (b) w/o CFG++             0.3496          0.8020
was not used. (b) Next, we replaced the (c) w/o content sampling             0.3427          0.8026
CFG++ framework with standard CFG.               (d) with eps mixing         0.3821          0.8146
Without using CFG++, we found that the                   ours                0.3872          0.8202
proposed resampling strategy did not func-
tion properly, so this setup excluded both Table 2: Ablation Study on Image Generation.
CFG++ and resampling. In this case, we Quantitative evaluation on ablation study. Our best set-
observed a decline in output quality, along ting shows the highest scores.
with the disappearance of some concepts.
(c) To demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed two-step strategy, we conducted an experiment without using our content-aware sampling
in the initial steps and instead applied manual masks for fusion sampling from the start. In this case,
we saw that some specific concepts disappeared, and the overall quality deteriorated. (d) Finally,
to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method for mixing in the Tweedie’s denoised space, we
experimented with mixing concepts in the noisy latent space. While multi-concept images were gen-
erated successfully, we noticed a slight reduction in realism when generating small objects. When
using our best setting, we achieved the highest image quality, and the multi-concept objects were
accurately represented. This is further confirmed in our quantitative comparison in Table 2.

5.3   M ULTI - CONCEPT V IDEO G ENERATION R ESULTS

Qualitative Evaluation. To evaluate our video generation model, we used existing video cus-
tomization models as a baseline. Specifically, we employed the latest video customization model
Dreamvideo (Wei et al., 2023). As it is originally designed for single-concept customization, we
used jointly fine-tuned model using our multi-concept dataset.
Figure 7 presents the results of our qualitative comparison. In the case of the baseline Dreamvideo,
it failed to generate multiple concepts, and even the generated single concept did not accurately
represent the target concept. Although our method extends the Image-to-Video model, making direct


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Qualitative Evaluation of Video Generation. Our model can generate high-quality
multi-concept video generation while the baseline Dreamvideo fails to generate concept-aware
videos.


Figure 8: Ablation study on Video Generation Without using our proposed feature injection
method, the output video shows degraded performance without preserving the inter-frame context.

comparisons less straightforward, our results demonstrate that multiple concepts were generated
without mixing, and the continuity and context of consecutive frames were accurately preserved.
We also conducted a user study to compare perceptual quality, where 20 participants were shown
4 videos, and their overall preference scores were recorded. In this study, our model scored 4.5
whereas the baseline DreamVideo scored 1.7, which further indicate the superiority or our results.
Ablation Study. Additionally, to assess the effectiveness of our proposed feature injection method,
we compared the results with and without feature injection in Figure 8. When feature injection was
not properly applied, we observed that the shape of the concept object was excessively distorted or
disappeared entirely, resulting in a complete mismatch with the original context. On the other hand,
when injection was used, the object’s appearance from the first frame was consistently maintained
throughout the video. This confirms that our method is actually effective in context preservation.

6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we proposed a novel framework for generating multiple custom concepts. Our ap-
proach splits the sampling process into two main steps. In the initial phase, we perform multi-object
sampling, introducing a resampling strategy to enhance performance. Following this, we extract
masks in the intermediate steps and apply custom concepts to specific regions using these masks for
regional sampling. By integrating the region-wise concept mixing within the denoised image space,
we achieved superior results. Additionally, we extended our framework to the video domain through
feature injection, enabling the generation of multi-concept videos. Experimental results demonstrate
that our model outperforms baseline approaches, confirming improved generative performance.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea un-
der Grant RS-2024-00336454 and by the Institute for Information & Communications Technology
Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (RS-2019-11190075,
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program, KAIST).

R EFERENCES
Omer Bar-Tal, Hila Chefer, Omer Tov, Charles Herrmann, Roni Paiss, Shiran Zada, Ariel Ephrat,
 Junhwa Hur, Guanghui Liu, Amit Raj, Yuanzhen Li, Michael Rubinstein, Tomer Michaeli, Oliver
 Wang, Deqing Sun, Tali Dekel, and Inbar Mosseri. Lumiere: A space-time diffusion model for
 video generation, 2024.
Duygu Ceylan, Chun-Hao Huang, and Niloy J. Mitra. Pix2video: Video editing using image diffu-
  sion. 2023.
Yiwen Chen, Zilong Chen, Chi Zhang, Feng Wang, Xiaofeng Yang, Yikai Wang, Zhongang Cai, Lei
  Yang, Huaping Liu, and Guosheng Lin. Gaussianeditor: Swift and controllable 3d editing with
  gaussian splatting, 2023.
Hyungjin Chung, Byeongsu Sim, Dohoon Ryu, and Jong Chul Ye. Improving diffusion models for
  inverse problems using manifold constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00941, 2022.
Hyungjin Chung, Suhyeon Lee, and Jong Chul Ye. Fast diffusion sampler for inverse problems by
  geometric decomposition, 2023.
Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, Geon Yeong Park, Hyelin Nam, and Jong Chul Ye. Cfg++:
  Manifold-constrained classifier free guidance for diffusion models, 2024. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2406.08070.
Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. Diffedit: Diffusion-
  based semantic image editing with mask guidance. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  3lge0p5o-M-.
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
  tion, pp. 12873–12883, 2021.
Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and Anastasis Germani-
  dis. Structure and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion models, 2023.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Yuchao Gu, Xintao Wang, Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yujun Shi, Yunpeng Chen, Zihan Fan, Wuyou Xiao,
  Rui Zhao, Shuning Chang, Weijia Wu, et al. Mix-of-show: Decentralized low-rank adaptation for
  multi-concept customization of diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18292, 2023.
Ligong Han, Yinxiao Li, Han Zhang, Peyman Milanfar, Dimitris Metaxas, and Feng Yang. Svdiff:
  Compact parameter space for diffusion fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11305, 2023.
Shaozhe Hao, Kai Han, Zhengyao Lv, Shihao Zhao, and Kwan-Yee K. Wong. Conceptexpress:
  Harnessing diffusion models for single-image unsupervised concept extraction, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07077.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross-attention control. In The Eleventh International Con-
 ference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
 id=_CDixzkzeyb.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.           Classifier-free diffusion guidance.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models, 2021.
Hyeonho Jeong, Geon Yeong Park, and Jong Chul Ye. Vmc: Video motion customization using
  temporal attention adaption for text-to-video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00845,
  2023.
Kwanyoung Kim and Jong Chul Ye. Noise2score: tweedie’s approach to self-supervised image
 denoising without clean images. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:864–
 874, 2021.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-concept
  customization of text-to-image diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1931–1941, 2023.
Gihyun Kwon and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusion-based image translation using disentangled style and
  content representation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Nayau9fwXU.
Gihyun Kwon, Simon Jenni, Dingzeyu Li, Joon-Young Lee, Jong Chul Ye, and Fabian Caba Heil-
  bron. Concept weaver: Enabling multi-concept fusion in text-to-image models. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 8880–8889,
  June 2024.
Mingi Kwon, Jaeseok Jeong, and Youngjung Uh. Diffusion models already have a semantic la-
 tent space. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=pd1P2eUBVfq.
Dongxu Li, Junnan Li, and Steven C. H. Hoi. Blip-diffusion: Pre-trained subject representation for
  controllable text-to-image generation and editing, 2023.
Minghua Liu, Chao Xu, Haian Jin, Linghao Chen, Mukund Varma T, Zexiang Xu, and Hao Su. One-
 2-3-45: Any single image to 3d mesh in 45 seconds without per-shape optimization. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
  Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11328, 2023a.
Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023b.
Luca Medeiros.   lang-segment-anything, 2023.                 URL https://github.com/
  luca-medeiros/lang-segment-anything.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models, 2022.
Eyal Molad, Eliahu Horwitz, Dani Valevski, Alex Rav Acha, Yossi Matias, Yael Pritch, Yaniv
  Leviathan, and Yedid Hoshen. Dreamix: Video diffusion models are general video editors, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.01329.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mahmoud Assran, Nico-
 las Ballas, Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael
 Rabbat, Vasu Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Hervé Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Ar-
 mand Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision,
 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.07193.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jangho Park, Gihyun Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. Ed-nerf: Efficient text-guided editing of 3d scene
  with latent space nerf, 2024.

Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14988, 2022.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–
  22510, 2023.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.

Yoad Tewel, Rinon Gal, Gal Chechik, and Yuval Atzmon. Key-locked rank one editing for text-to-
  image personalization, 2023.

Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1921–1930, 2023.

Andrey Voynov, Qinghao Chu, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Kfir Aberman. p+: Extended textual condi-
  tioning in text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09522, 2023.

Yujie Wei, Shiwei Zhang, Zhiwu Qing, Hangjie Yuan, Zhiheng Liu, Yu Liu, Yingya Zhang, Jingren
  Zhou, and Hongming Shan. Dreamvideo: Composing your dream videos with customized subject
  and motion, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.04433.

Jinbo Xing, Menghan Xia, Yong Zhang, Haoxin Chen, Wangbo Yu, Hanyuan Liu, Xintao Wang,
   Tien-Tsin Wong, and Ying Shan. Dynamicrafter: Animating open-domain images with video
   diffusion priors, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12190.

Jiale Xu, Xintao Wang, Weihao Cheng, Yan-Pei Cao, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Shenghua Gao.
   Dream3d: Zero-shot text-to-3d synthesis using 3d shape prior and text-to-image diffusion models.
   In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
   20908–20918, 2023.

Zebin Yao, Fangxiang Feng, Ruifan Li, and Xiaojie Wang. Concept conductor: Orchestrating mul-
  tiple personalized concepts in text-to-image synthesis, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2408.03632.

Lili Yu, Bowen Shi, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Benjamin Muller, Olga Golovneva, Tianlu Wang, Arun
  Babu, Binh Tang, Brian Karrer, Shelly Sheynin, et al. Scaling autoregressive multi-modal models:
  Pretraining and instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02591, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


David Junhao Zhang, Jay Zhangjie Wu, Jia-Wei Liu, Rui Zhao, Lingmin Ran, Yuchao Gu, Difei
  Gao, and Mike Zheng Shou. Show-1: Marrying pixel and latent diffusion models for text-to-
  video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15818, 2023a.
Han Zhang, Tao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Shaoting Zhang, Xiaogang Wang, Xiaolei Huang, and Dimitris
  Metaxas. Stackgan: Text to photo-realistic image synthesis with stacked generative adversarial
  networks, 2017.
Shiwei Zhang, Jiayu Wang, Yingya Zhang, Kang Zhao, Hangjie Yuan, Zhiwu Qin, Xiang Wang,
  Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. I2vgen-xl: High-quality image-to-video synthesis via cascaded
  diffusion models, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.04145.
Yuxin Zhang, Nisha Huang, Fan Tang, Haibin Huang, Chongyang Ma, Weiming Dong, and Chang-
  sheng Xu. Inversion-based style transfer with diffusion models, 2023c.
Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng. Magicvideo:
  Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    M ORE E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
Implementation Details. We can utilize any customization framework to train a model fine-tuned
for individual custom concepts to build the concept bank. Among these, we used major two methods:
fine-tuning the cross-attention layer’s key-value weights as proposed in Custom Diffusion and the
DreamBooth method combined with low-rank adaptation. Half of the custom concept models we
used were trained with low-rank adaptation, while the other half were trained using the Custom
Diffusion framework.
As the backbone diffusion model, we used Stable Diffusion 2.1 or higher. In this paper, we primarily
used the SDXL model as the base model, and for fair comparison, the baseline models were retrained
using SDXL. However, for the latest models like Mix-of-Show and Concept Weaver, we found that
adapting them to SDXL is not appropriate according to their proposed methods, so we used the
official source code and settings provided in their respective papers for our experiments.
Regarding sampling hyperparameters, we set the reference timestep tcon for content-aware sampling
to 0.8T , and we found that values between 0.8T and 0.7T did not significantly affect output quality.
The total timestep is set to T =50, and the we used image resolution of 768x768. In terms of sampling
time, it takes approximately 30 seconds using a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. For resampling, we
used P = 10, and found no significant quality difference when using between 5 and 10 resampling
steps.
For the text-guided segmentation model, we used the langsam (Medeiros, 2023) package, which
combines Grounding DINO (Liu et al., 2023b) and Segment-Anything models (Kirillov et al., 2023),
to obtain masks based on the text condition. Instead of dense masks, we used rectangular regions
containing the mask, and in cases where masks for two concepts overlapped, we modified only the
overlapping area to retain the shape of the original dense mask. If mask extraction failed, causing
complete overlap between the two objects’ masks or no mask was found, we did not proceed with
additional sampling. To ensure non-overlapping masks for each concept, once the region for the first
object was extracted, that area was excluded from the region range for the next object’s extraction.
For the video model, we used the recently proposed image-to-video model, I2VGen-XL (Zhang
et al., 2023b). For video sampling, we set T =50. The total number of frames was 16, with a
resolution of 512x512. As described earlier, we performed feature injection at three residual layers
(midblock 2, upsampling 1). This process took approximately 50 seconds on a single RTX 3090
GPU.
Evaluation Details. To calculate the image-alignment score, we followed the procedure outlined
in the previous work, ConceptWeaver (Kwon et al., 2024). Since our generated images include
multiple concepts, we couldn’t rely on whole image similarity scores. Instead, we used a text-guided
segmentation model to extract concept-specific images. For example, when evaluating images with
‘[c1] dog’ and ‘[c2] cat,’ we applied the segmentation model using the prompts ‘dog’ and ‘cat’ to
obtain segmented masks. We then cropped the regions containing these masks and calculated the
cosine similarity between the image embeddings of the extracted sections and the corresponding
concept (training) images. Since baseline methods often fail to generate all concepts, we excluded
scores for images lacking all foreground objects to ensure a fair comparison. For ablation study,
we choose 15 different concepts from customconcept101 dataset and experimented with unique 5
different combinations. For CLIP score calculation, we also followed same protocol of quantitative
evaluation. In DINO score calculation, we used the pre-trained DINO-v2-base model and reported
cosine similarity between the embedding of target concept images and extracted generated object
images.
For human preference evaluation, we gathered feedback from 20 participants aged 20-49. We cre-
ated a survey set containing 10 generated images per baseline model and 10 questions. The models
used for generating outputs were Textual Inversion, Custom Diffusion, Perfusion, Mix-of-Show,
ConceptWeaver, and ours, resulting in a total of 60 generated images per survey set.

B    E FFECT OF H YPERPARAMETERS
In order to show the effect of hyperparameter change, we additionally conducted experiment by
varying the key hyperparameter components: timestep for content-aware sampling tcon and the

                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Results with various hyperparameter settings. With changing the content-aware sam-
pling timestep, we can control how much each object contains the appearance of target custom
concepts. With different number of resampling steps, we can observe the different ability of multi-
object generation.


number of resampling steps P . In Figure 9, we show the generated results with different settings.
With varying the content-aware sampling, we can obtain more custom-concept aware outputs with
using larger timestep of tcon , and the output shows more generic concepts with using smaller tcon .
The result means that if we use smaller steps for custom-concept fusion, the output becomes far
from target custom concepts.
With changing the resampling steps, we can observe that there is significant concept missing prob-
lem when we do not use any resampling. With using small resampling steps, we can alleviate the
concept missing partially, but still there exists some of the artifacts in the generated objects. With us-
ing more resampling steps, the multi-concept outputs are more clearly generated compared to other
settings.

C    T IME E FFICIENCY C OMPARISON
To compare the time consumption between our proposed method and baselines, we calculated times
taken for inference on single 768x768 image. For our method, single sampling path takes 28 seconds
on single RTX3090 GPU, which includes time for segmentation. For our baseline Concept Weaver,
the method takes about 65 seconds, which include template generation, inversion, segmentation and
sampling. For our early baseline of Mix-of-show, the method takes about 23 seconds. Although
the method requires additional weight merging stage for each concept combination, we did not
considered it for fair comparison. For earlier baseline of Perfusion, Custom Diffusion, Textual
Inversion takes about 10 seconds for sampling, which is almost same as vanilla sampling case.
Considering the superior quality of our shown results, our proposed TweedieMix shows the best
efficiency on multi-concept generation.

D    R ESULTS ON S TYLE C OMPOSITION
To verify that our proposed framework is not limited on specific custom concepts, we experimented
with showing composition on various custom styles. In Figure 10, we show the output of various
objects with different styles. When we see the output from vanilla sampling case, the generated
outputs show difficulty in discriminating the style of each components. In our proposed method, the
generated images contain separated objects with accurately reflecting the indicated style represen-
tations. The results shows that our method is not limited on specific custom concepts, but it can be
extended to wider domain of image styles.

E    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
Results on more concepts. To show the generation performance when using more than 3 concepts,
we show the comparison results using 4 different concepts in Fig. 11. The results show that our
proposed method can generate realistic multi-concept aware outputs even with fusing 4 different


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Results with various style composition. Our proposed method successfully combines
multiple objects with different styles, while vanilla sampling method suffer from mixed styles be-
tween the objects.


Figure 11: Results on more concepts. Our model can generate high-quality multi-concept gener-
ation results when using 4 custom concepts, while our baseline Concept weaver fails to reflect the
appearance of target concepts.



concepts. Our baseline of Concept Weaver also can generate multiple objects, but the generated
concepts often deviate from target concepts, and also suffer from severe artifacts.
Detailed comparison with baseline. In order to thoroughly compare the generation quality of
our proposed method and baseline of Concept Weaver, we show the multiple generated images in
Figs. 14,15,16. The results from our method successfully reflect the appearance of multiple custom
concepts. In our baseline Concept Weaver, although the images contain the multiple objects, most
of the generated custom concepts suffer from severe artifacts or unwanted modifications, and the
generated outputs are unrealistic.
Extension to Stable Video Diffusion. To verify the flexibility of our video extension method, we
applied same feature injection method on Stable Video Diffusion I2V in Figure 12. Our method
can still prevent the excessive modification of target objects and generate high-quality multi-concept
video.
In order to further show the detailed results, we present more results in Figure 17. The results show
that our method can generate detailed multiple custom concepts while maintaining the semantic of
given text prompts.
We also show the additional video results in Figure 18. The results again shows that our video gen-
eration method successfully synthesize multiple custom concepts while preventing extreme changes
between the frames. For better visualization, we attached the video samples in our supplementary
materials.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Results from Stable Video Diffusion. Our video extension can be easily adapted to
other Image-to-video framework.


Figure 13: Failure cases. If the text condition becomes extremely complex, then the generated
concepts loses the detailed appearance.


F   L IMITATIONS
While our method demonstrates strong performance in multi-concept generation, it still has some
limitations. When presented with highly complex or unrealistic text prompts, the performance in text
alignment remains restricted. As shown in Figure. 13, we can observe that the method can generate
multiple objects in the text conditions, but the objects loses its fine details of the target concept
images, and the detailed text descriptions are slightly unaligned with the text. This issue stems
from the constraints of the pre-trained Stable Diffusion model. We anticipate that using enhanced
diffusion model backbones will help address this challenge in the future.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: Additional Comparison Results. Our model can generate high-quality multi-concept
generation results on image domains.


Figure 15: Additional Comparison Results. Our model can generate high-quality multi-concept
generation results compared to Concept Weaver.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: Additional Comparison Results. Our model can generate high-quality multi-concept
generation results compared to Concept Weaver.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 17: Additional Results. Our model can generate high-quality multi-concept generation
results on image domains.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 18: Additional Results. Our model can generate high-quality multi-concept generation
results on video domains.


                                               22
