Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


N EURAL E XPLORATORY L ANDSCAPE A NALYSIS FOR
M ETA -B LACK -B OX -O PTIMIZATION
 Zeyuan Ma1 , Jiacheng Chen1 , Hongshu Guo1 , Yue-Jiao Gong1,∗
 1
   South China University of Technology
 {scut.crazynicolas, jackchan9345, guohongshu369,
 gongyuejiao}@gmail.com



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Recent research in Meta-Black-Box Optimization (MetaBBO) have shown that
             meta-trained neural networks can effectively guide the design of black-box op-
             timizers, significantly reducing the need for expert tuning and delivering robust
             performance across complex problem distributions. Despite their success, a paradox
             remains: MetaBBO still rely on human-crafted Exploratory Landscape Analysis
             features to inform the meta-level agent about the low-level optimization progress.
             To address the gap, this paper proposes Neural Exploratory Landscape Analy-
             sis (NeurELA), a novel framework that dynamically profiles landscape features
             through a two-stage, attention-based neural network, executed in an entirely end-to-
             end fashion. NeurELA is pre-trained over a variety of MetaBBO algorithms using
             a multi-task neuroevolution strategy. Extensive experiments show that NeurELA
             achieves consistently superior performance when integrated into different and even
             unseen MetaBBO tasks and can be efficiently fine-tuned for further performance
             boost. This advancement marks a pivotal step in making MetaBBO algorithms
             more autonomous and broadly applicable. The source code of NeurELA can be
             accessed at https://github.com/GMC-DRL/Neur-ELA.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Black-Box Optimization (BBO) is a discipline in mathematical optimization characterized by the
absence of both the closed-form expression of the target objective function and its derivative during
the optimization process. Traditional BBO methods, such as Genetic Algorithm (Holland, 1975),
Evolutionary Strategy (Hansen & Ostermeier, 2001a), and Bayesian Optimization (Shahriari et al.,
2015), have been extensively studied in the past half century. They are applied to address a broad
range of black-box scenarios, including automated machine learning (Akiba et al., 2019), bioinfor-
matics (Tsaban et al., 2022), prompt tuning in large language models (Guo et al., 2024b). However,
these methods often require manual tuning with deep expertise to ensure the optimal performance on
unseen tasks. Recent advances in Meta-Black-Box Optimization (MetaBBO) (Xue et al., 2022; Lange
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024a; Lange et al., 2024) leverage meta-learning (Finn
et al., 2017) to streamline the traditional labour-intensive tuning process across different problem
distributions. This effort not only reduces the need for expert-level knowledge, but also enhances
generalization towards unseen problems. As depicted on the left side of Figure 1, MetaBBO generally
employs a bi-level optimization paradigm (Ma et al., 2023). In the meta level, a control policy (often
implemented as a neural network) is maintained to dictate timely algorithm configuration for the
low-level BBO optimizer according to the low-level optimization status. Once obtained the algorithm
configuration, the low-level BBO optimizer optimizes the target BBO problem by that configuration
and returns a feedback to the meta-level policy the performance gain feedback. The meta-objective
of MetaBBO is to meta-learn an optimal control policy which could achieve maximum accumulated
performance gain across a problem distribution.
One of the core challenges to ensure the generalization performance of MetaBBO algorithms is
to design an information-rich profiling system for the low-level optimization status (highlighted
in yellow box on the left side of the Figure 1). Firstly, the optimization status must include the
    ∗
        Yue-Jiao Gong is the corresponding author.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


identification features to differentiate various optimization problems. This design is crucial to enable
the meta-level neural policy to be aware of what is the target optimization problem. Secondly, the
optimization status should align with the low-level optimization dynamics, which helps to inform
the meta-level neural policy about where the low-level optimization progress has reached. Existing


Figure 1: Left: The general workflow of MetaBBO algorithms, which follows a bi-level optimization
paradigm. The landscape analyser timely profiles the low-level optimization progress, informing
the meta-level neural policy to dynamically output desired configuration for the low-level BBO
method. Right: The average optimization performance (larger is better) of integrating our pre-
trained landscape analyser into diverse MetaBBO tasks (red line). The blue line denotes the original
performance of the MetaBBO algorithms, while the green line denotes the performance of integrating
the traditional exploratory landscape analysis features into the MetaBBO algorithms.

MetaBBO algorithms widely adopt Exploratory Landscape Analysis (ELA) (Wright et al., 1932;
Mersmann et al., 2011) to profile the low-level optimization status. While the approaches provide
a comprehensive understanding of problem and algorithm characteristics, they still face several
limitations. 1) Many features derived from ELA are highly correlated with each other (Renau
et al., 2019) and exhibit strong sensitivity to random sampling strategies (Renau et al., 2020). This
necessitates an additional step of feature selection for the given MetaBBO scenario, requiring a
certain level of expert knowledge. 2) The landscape features given by ELA are more like an
“offline” portray of the target optimization problem. This is somewhat incompatible with the dynamic
nature of MetaBBO paradigm, which requires both the “offline” problem properties and the “online”
optimization progress. 3) Computing some of these features, particularly those related to convexity
and local optimum properties, consume additional function evaluations (FEs). The consumption of
the computational resource, initially reserved for the low-level optimization, ultimately degrades the
final performance of the MetaBBO algorithms.
To address the above limitations, we propose Neural Exploratory Landscape Analysis (NeurELA), a
novel, learnable framework designed to dynamically profile optimization status for the MetaBBO
algorithms in an end-to-end manner. Our NeurELA encounters certain challenges: on the one hand,
we need to carefully design a universal neural network-based landscape analyser that is compatible
with a variety of MetaBBO algorithms. On the other hand, it is crucial to enable effective learning
within this analyser to ensure it robustly generalizes not only to unseen optimization problems but
also to previously unencountered MetaBBO algorithms. We address the challenges as follows.
1) Our research begins by designing a comprehensive operating space, Ω, within which our landscape
analyser Λ functions. This space encompasses a collection of MetaBBO tasks, each designated as
T := {A, D}. Here, A specifies a particular MetaBBO algorithm, and D represents the associated set
of optimization problems to meta-train and test the algorithm. The primary objective is to optimize Λ
such that it enhances the performance of various A across their respective problem sets in Ω. Our
introduction of Λ within the comprehensive operating space Ω marks a significant advancement in
MetaBBO methodologies. Unlike traditional approaches that treat each optimization algorithm and
problem in isolation, Λ leverages a holistic view, enhancing performance across a diverse set of tasks.
2) We instantiate the landscape analyser Λ through a neural network model parameterized by θ.
Specifically, Λθ is implemented using a two-stage attention-based neural network. Our design enables
flexible integration with most existing MetaBBO algorithms as an effective replacement for their
traditional hand-crafted landscape analysis mechanisms. Given the non-differential nature of our
objective in BBO, we adopt an Evolution Strategy (Hansen & Ostermeier, 2001b; Li et al., 2018) to


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


train Λθ . This training is carried out within a multitask neuroevolution (Miikkulainen et al., 2024)
paradigm, aiming to optimize θ to maximize the expected performance across MetaBBO tasks.
3) We propose using the trained Λθ in two distinct ways. First, having been trained on a diverse range
of tasks, Λθ is capable of being directly applied to new, unseen MetaBBO algorithms, achieving zero-
shot generalization. Second, Λθ also supports fine-tuning in conjunction with the meta-training of
new MetaBBO algorithms, allowing it to adapt its performance for specific optimization challenges.
Through extensive experiments, we validate the effectiveness of NeurELA, as illustrated on the right
side of Figure 1. These results demonstrate that it is possible to pre-train a universal neural landscape
analyser Λθ over a group of MetaBBO tasks and then generalize it to unseen ones. Our work pioneers
the integration of automatic feature extraction in MetaBBO, transforming these methods into fully
end-to-end systems. This advancement significantly streamlines optimization processes, enhancing
efficiency and adaptability across related fields, and reducing the need for manual expertise.


2    R ELATED W ORKS

Meta-Black-Box Optimization. Existing MetaBBO paradigms can be classified into following
categories with respect to role they play at the low-level optimization process: 1) Hyper-parameters
configurator: this line of works meta-trained neural network-based policy to dynamically configure
the hyper-parameters of the backend BBO optimizer, e.g., the scale factor (F ) and crossover rate (Cr)
in Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm (Sun et al., 2021; Tan et al., 2022). Initial researches (e.g.,
RLPSO (Wu & Wang, 2022)) employed simple MLP structures to parameterize the meta-level
policy, which was enhanced by the latest works such as GLEET (Ma et al., 2024), which facilitated
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) architecture to boost the sequential decision making along the
low-level optimization. 2) Update rule selector: works in this line flexibly select desired update rules
for the low-level optimization process. Several initial works learns to select one mutation operator
from a pre-defined DE mutation operator pool to attain diverse optimization behaviours (Sharma
et al., 2019; Tan & Li, 2021; Tan et al., 2022). Then the research scope extends to the refinement
of the operators pool for optimizing more complex problems (Lian et al., 2024), and dynamically
selecting the entire algorithm(Guo et al., 2024a). 3) Complete optimizer generator: works in this line
aims to meta-learning the neural network-based policy as a complete optimizer. Lange et al. (Lange
et al., 2023; 2024) proposed meta-training several attention blocks as the complete updating process
of CMAES (Hansen et al., 2003) , which was followed by Song et al. (Song et al., 2024), proposing
meta-training Transformer-based language model as an entire BBO method. Such end-to-end deep
learning systems encountered interpretability issue. To this end, SYMBOL (Chen et al., 2024)
proposed generating symbolic update rules for the low-level optimization process, promoting the
interpretable and automatic discovery of black-box method. GLHF (Li et al., 2024) carefully design
a Transformer-based neural network that imitates the evolutionary operators in DE algorithm. As
for the designs of optimization status extraction, a great majority of existing MetaBBO algorithms
borrow the idea from well-known landscape analysis researches (Wright et al., 1932; Mersmann
et al., 2011). To make those landscape features compatible with the MetaBBO paradigm, existing
MetaBBO algorithms more or less facilitated feature selection and feature aggregation procedure.
Take a recent work GLEET (Ma et al., 2024) as an example, it aggregates the representative ELA
features (Mersmann et al., 2011) into a 9-dimensional high-level profiling features, which helps
reduce the training complexity and enhance the overall optimization performance. However, we have
to note that such hand-crafted feature processing requires deep expertise in optimization.
Landscape Analysis. Landscape Analysis originates from the emergence of Automated Algorithm
Selection (AAS) (Rice, 1976; Kerschke et al., 2019), which selects an optimal algorithm out of a
collection of algorithms for any given optimization problem. Generally, Landscape analysis is formu-
lated as a function: Λ : (X, y) → s, that maps the sampled candidates X and their corresponding
objective values y to a feature vector s, each dimension of which indicates some problem-specific
properties of the target optimization problem. The feature vector s can be subsequently fed into
machine learning algorithms (e.g., Support Vector Machines (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995) and Ran-
dom Forests (Breiman, 2001)) to address some specific algorithmic tasks (Kerschke & Trautmann,
2019a). Over the years, a wide range of Landscape Analysis feature groups have been developed, and
structurally summarized in (Wright et al., 1932; Pitzer & Affenzeller, 2012; Malan & Engelbrecht,
2013; Kerschke & Trautmann, 2019b), of which the mostly utilized ones are: 1) Fitness Distance


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Correlation (Jones et al., 1995) includes six features profiling the distances of the sampled candidates
both in decision space and the objective space, as well as the correlation in-between the two spaces.
2) Dispersion (Lunacek & Whitley, 2006) features describe the degree of dispersity for the best
quantiles of the sampled candidates. 3) Classical ELA (Mersmann et al., 2011) proposed using six
groups of low-level metrics such as local search, skewness of objective space and approximated
curvature in (second) first-order as a comprehensive abstract of basic landscape properties (e.g.,
global structure, multimodality, separability). Generally, classic ELA requires adequate samples and
enormous computational efforts to conclude all of its fifty low-level feature values. 4) Information
Content (Muñoz et al., 2014) comprises five features about the smoothness, ruggedness and neu-
trality of an optimization problem. It first applies random walk sampling (e.g., Metropolis Random
Walk (Hastings, 1970)) for each of the sampled candidates, then calculates its features by statistic
metrics. 5) Nearest Better Clustering (Kerschke et al., 2015) is a collection of features that describe
the distribution of the nearest better neighbors and the nearest neighbors of the sampled candidates.
While these hand-crafted landscape analysis features provide a systematic understanding of op-
timization problems, they inevitably hold high computing complexity hence consume additional
computational resources. Besides, the intricate correlations in-between these feature groups (Renau
et al., 2019) and their sensitivities to the random sampling strategy (Renau et al., 2020) necessitate
the expert-level feature selection and feature aggregation procedures. To address these issues, several
early-stage studies have recently proposed learning neural networks (e.g., convolutional neural net-
work (Prager et al., 2021a) and point cloud transformer (Seiler et al., 2022a)) as the feature mapping
function. Prager et al. (2021b) first proposed using Deep-CNN to extract landscape features from
fitness map of moderate initial sample points. The neural network is trained to correctly predict
algorithm configuration of modular CMA-ES algorithms. However, solely feeding the fitness map
might introduce information loss. To address such issue, Seiler et al. (2022b) propose a novel
point cloud transformer (PCT) based approach, which embeds sample points information and the
fitness map together as the input. This work generally achieves superior landscape feature prediction
accuracy. Another technical bottleneck of (Prager et al., 2021b) is the supervised training, which
might leads the learned landscape representation overfit to a certain AAS/AAC task. To refine this
issue, van Stein et al. (2023) propose self-supervised learning through AutoEncoder, which adopted
fitness map as the target to be reconstructed. More recently, Seiler et al. (2024) propose DeepELA to
adrress both the infomation loss and the supervised trainng issues. It introduces MHA and trains it
by a contrastive learning loss (InfoNCE) to ensure aligned representation across different sampling
strategies. In this paper, our NeurELA presents several novel contributions compared with the above
learning-based ELA frameworks: a) NeurELA is designed for dynamic MetaBBO tasks, enabling
dynamic algorithm configuration and selection, whereas previous studies focus on static profiling of
a given problem. b) NeurELA introduces a scalable embedding strategy that removes dimensional
constraints in DeepELA and employs a two-stage attention mechanism for extracting features across
sample points and problem dimensions, making it more generic and versatile for various MetaBBO
tasks. For more detailed differences, please refer to Appendix B.2.

3     N EURAL E XPLORATORY L ANDSCAPE A NALYSIS

3.1   F RAMEWORK

We introduce a multi-task operating space, denoted as Ω, which serves as the foundational basis for
our landscape analyser, Λ. The space Ω is mathematically defined as:
                              Ω = {Tk = (Ak , Dk ) | k = 1, 2, . . . , K}                           (1)
where each Tk represents a task configuration consisting of a MetaBBO algorithm Ak and a cor-
responding set of optimization problems Dk . This structured collection of tasks is meticulously
designed to optimize our proposed landscape analyser Λθ over a variety of algorithms and problems.
In accordance with the MetaBBO protocol, each algorithm Ak is composed of three fundamental
elements: the meta-level neural policy Πϕ , the low-level optimizer Γ, and the initial landscape feature
analyser, denoted as Λ0 . As illustrated in Figure 1, the meta-training of Ak adheres to a bi-level
optimization paradigm. Given a problem instance f sampled from Dk , at each optimization step t,
the low-level BBO method Γ interacts with f to attain a raw observation {Xit , yit }m i=1 of the current
population of candidates solutions, denoted as ot , where m is the population size in population-based


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Left: The architecture of the basic attention block (Attn). Right: The computation graph
of the two-stage attention mechanism (Ts-Attn).


search methods Storn & Price (1997); Kennedy & Eberhart (1995); Holland (1975). Subsequently,
the observation ot is further processed by the original landscape analyser, Λ0 , to extract optimization
status features st = Λ0 (ot ). Based on these features, the meta-level neural policy Πϕ dictates a
design choice ct from the configuration space C conditioned on the current optimization status:
ct = Πϕ (st ). Then, the low-level BBO method Γ loads ct to optimize f for next time step t + 1. The
meta-performance rt is calculated by evaluating the performance gain achieved by implementing
ct . The ultimate goal of the meta-training phase is to maximize the overall meta-objective FmetaBBO ,
defined as:                                                  " T     #
                                                              X
                                                                   t
                                 maxFmetaBBO = Ef ∼Dk ,Πϕ         r ,                                 (2)
                                  ϕ
                                                               t=0
where the expectation is over all problem instances from Dk and spans the total length T of the
low-level optimization horizon.
In our NeurELA, we parameterize a neural network-based landscape analyser Λθ (where θ denote
the learnable parameters), which substitutes the original landscape analyser Λ0 , to produce the
optimization status features as st = Λθ (ot ). Our aim is to develop a universal Λθ for diverse
MetaBBO algorithms that perform comparably to, or better than, the original hand-crafted Λ0 in
the corresponding MetaBBO tasks. To objectively measure the performance of Λθ , we define an
evaluation metric Υ(Λθ |Tk ) as the relative performance of Λθ against Λ0 in the context of MetaBBO
task Tk = (Ak , Dk ). Concretely, we first meta-train two versions of the MetaBBO algorithms on Dk :
Ak (Πϕ , Γ, Λ0 ) and A′k (Πϕ , Γ, Λθ ), and then evaluate Υ(Λθ |Tk ) as:
                                        P   Q                         ∗
                                   1 XX                              fp,q − µp
                  Υ (Λθ | Tk ) =               Zp,q , where Zp,q = −                                 (3)
                                 P × Q p=1 q=1                           σp

where P = |Dtest | is the number of test problems (the dataset Dk is divided into two distinct subsets:
Dtrain for training and Dtest for testing), Q = 50 represents the number of independent runs to obtain
                          ∗
average performance, fp,q     denotes the objective value achieved by testing A′k on the p-th problem
instance and q-th run, and µp and σp are the mean and standard deviation of the objective values
obtained by testing Ak on the p-th problem over 50 independent runs. Note that we follow the Z-score
normalization design in Ma et al. (2023) to evaluate the performance gain Zp,q .
The meta-objective of our NeurELA framework is defined as maximizing the expected relative
performance of the neural network-based landscape analyser, Λθ , across all MetaBBO tasks defined
within the multi-task space Ω. Mathematically, this is expressed as:
                                                                     K
                                                                1 X
                    maxFmetaELA = ETk ∼Ω [Υ (Λθ | Tk )] =           Υ (Λθ | Tk )                     (4)
                      θ                                         K
                                                                     k=1


3.2   A RCHITECTURE OF Λθ

Our architecture is designed for compatibility with various MetaBBO algorithms. We introduce a
                                                                                                m
Population Information Embedding (PIE) module that preprocesses observations ot = {Xit , yit }i=1 ,
allowing Λθ to adapt to different search ranges and objective scales. Additionally, a two-stage
attention-based encoder (Ts-Attn) enhances Λθ ’s information extraction capabilities and scalability.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Pseudo code of training NeurELA
 1: Input: The MetaBBO task space Ω, Evolution Strategy ES, optimization horizon maxGen.
 2: Output: Optimal neural landscape analyser Λθ∗
 3: Initialize a group of {Λθi }Ni=1 by ES.init();
 4: for generation = 1 to maxGen do
 5:    for each Λθi do
 6:       for each MetaBBO task Tk ∈ Ω do
 7:           Construct Ak (Πϕ , Γ, Λ0 ) and A′k (Πϕ , Γ, Λθ );
 8:           Meta-train Ak and A′k on Dtrain ;
 9:           Test meta-trained Ak and A′k on Dtest ;
10:        end for
11:        Evaluate the fitness fi of Λθi by FmetaELA in Eq. (4);
12:    end for
13:    Set Λθ∗ as the one with the highest fitness so far;
14:    Update the distributional parameters in ES by ES.update({Λθi }N          N
                                                                     i=1 , {fi }i=1 );
                                            N
15:    Sample a new generation of {Λθi }i=1 by ES.sample();
16: end for



PIE. PIE normalizes observation ot using two min-max normalization operations: first on the
candidate solutions {Xit }m                                                                          t m
                             i=1 against the search range, and second on the objective values {yi }i=1
using the extremum values at time step t. This ensures unified representation and generalization by
scaling all values to [0, 1]. For a d-dimensional optimization problem, the normalized observations ot
                                                           t
are then reorganized into per-dimensional tuples {{(Xi,j     , yit )}m    d
                                                                     i=1 }j=1 , with a shape of d × m × 2.
These tuples undergo a linear transformation via a mapping matrix Wemb ∈ R2×h , producing the
population information encoding E t , which has the shape d × m × h. Here, h represents the hidden
dimension used in the subsequent two-stage attention module.
Ts-Attn. The computation graph of the Ts-Attn is illustrated on the right side of Figure 2, with a
basic component being the attention block (Attn) of hidden dimension h. As illustrated in the left
side of Figure 2, the Attn block follows the design of the original Transformer Vaswani et al. (2017),
except that the layer normalization Ba et al. (2016) is used instead of batch normalization Ioffe &
Szegedy (2015). Ts-Attn receives E t and then advances the information sharing at both cross-solution
and cross-dimension levels. 1) Cross-solution attention: We utilize an Attn block to enable same
dimensions shared by different candidate solutions within the population to exchange information.
2) Cross-dimension attention: A second Attn block is implemented to further promote the sharing
of information across different dimensions within each candidate. To achieve this, the output from the
cross-solution phase must be transposed into the shape m × d × h and augmented with cosine/sine
positional encodings to maintain the dimensional order within a candidate. After these two phases of
information processing, the resulting output st provides comprehensive optimization status features,
suitable for different MetaBBO algorithms. This highly parallelizable, attention-based architecture
significantly boosts the scalability of NeurELA as the number of candidates m or dimensions d
increases. Additional technical details about the architecture of Λθ can be found in Appendix A.1.


3.3   T RAINING M ETHOD

Neuroevolution of Λθ . The meta-objective of our NeurELA, as defined in Eq. (4), is non-
differentiable, since the evaluation of the relative performance Υ (Λθ | Tk ) in Eq. (3) is not directly
derived from the parameter θ of Λθ . We in turn employ an Evolution Strategy, denoted as ES, to
neuroevolve Λθ towards maximizing its expected relative performance for multiple MetaBBO tasks
in Ω. The pseudo code of the training is presented in Algorithm 1. The ES first initializes a group of
N landscape analysers, then iteratively searches for θ∗ through maxGen generations of optimiza-
tion (lines 4 to 16). Note that the meta-training of the K MetaBBO tasks, which involves training
their neural-policies over the training problem set, is nested within the optimization loop (lines 5 to
12) and is extremely time-consuming. We hence employ Ray (Moritz et al., 2018), an open-source
framework for parallel processing in machine learning applications, to distribute the meta-training
pipelines to multiple CPUs. This parallelization significantly enhances the overall efficiency of
training NeurELA.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zero-shot Generalization. The pre-trained Λθ∗ demonstrates robust performance boosts across K
representative MetaBBO tasks, enabling seamless integration into unseen MetaBBO tasks. Specif-
ically, Λθ∗ can replace the original Λ0 in an unseen MetaBBO algorithm, Aunseen . This enables
Aunseen to concentrate on refining its meta-level neural policy Πϕ during training on the designated
problem set, utilizing the capabilities of Λθ∗ without requiring any adaptation.
Fine-tuning Adaptation. If Λθ∗ does not perform well in zero-shot generalization, we provide a
flexible alternative: fine-tuning it for unseen MetaBBO tasks. In this case, Λθ∗ is integrated into
Aunseen and co-trained with its Πϕ during its meta-training process. This method adjusts Λθ∗ to better
align with the specific characteristics of Tunseen .


4     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

In this section, we discuss the following research questions: RQ1: Can NeurELA generalize the pre-
trained landscape analyser Λθ∗ to unseen MetaBBO tasks? RQ2: If the zero-shot performance is not
as expected, is it possible to efficiently fine-tune NeurELA for the underperforming MetaBBO task?
RQ3: What does NeurELA have learned? RQ4: How efficient is the pre-trained landscape analyser
in computing landscape features? RQ5: How to choose the Evolutionary Strategy for training our
NeurELA? RQ6: What is the relationship between the model complexity and the generalization
performance? Below, we first introduce the experimental settings and then address RQ1 ∼ RQ6.
Training Setup. The operating space Ω comprises K = 3 MetaBBO tasks. In specific, we first select
three representative MetaBBO algorithms LDE Sun et al. (2021), RLEPSO Yin et al. (2021)and
RL-DAS Guo et al. (2024a) from existing MetaBBO literature. Then we set the associated problem
set Dk for these MetaBBO algorithms as the BBOB testsuites in COCO Hansen et al. (2021), which
includes a variety of optimization problems with diverse landscape properties. We have to note that
the selected algorithms cover diverse MetaBBO scenarios such as auto-configuration for control
parameters and auto-selection for evolutionary operators, hence ensuring the generalization of our
NeurELA. We follow the original settings of these MetaBBO algorithms during their meta-training,
as suugested in their papers. For the settings about the neural network, we set the hidden dimension
h = 16 for the neural network modules in the landscape analyser Λθ . With a single-head attention
in Attn, Λθ possess a total number of 3296 learnable parameters. We adopt Fast CMA-ES Li
et al. (2018) as ES for its searching efficiency and robust optimization performance. During the
training, we employ a population of N = 10 Λθ s within a generation and optimize the population
for maxGen = 50 generations. For each generation, we parallel the N × K = 30 meta-training
pipelines across 30 independent CPU cores using Ray Moritz et al. (2018). For each low-level
optimization process, we set the maximum function evaluations as 20000. The experiments are run
on a computation node of a Slurm CPU cluster, with two Intel Sapphire Rapids 6458Q CPUs and
256 GB memories. Due to the limitation of the space, we present more technical details such as the
train-test split {Dtrain , Dtest }, the control parameters of Fast CMAES and the use of open-sourced
software in Appendix A.2 ∼ A.5.
Baselines. We consider three baselines for comparison: 1) Original, which denotes the original
hand-crafted landscape analyser functions (Λ0 ) in the MetaBBO algorithms. 2) ELA, which denotes
the traditional ELA feature groups summarized in Section 2 and defined in (Mersmann et al., 2011),
which we implement by the open-sourced Pflacco package (Kerschke & Trautmann, 2019b). 3)
DeepELA (Seiler et al., 2024), which is a recent work which trains an attention-based neural network
as an alternative of traditional ELA features through self-supervised contrastive learning.

4.1   Z ERO - SHOT P ERFORMANCE (RQ1)

Recall that a MetaBBO task is composed of an MetaBBO algorithm and an associated optimization
problem set (i.e., Tk = (Ak , Dk )). We hence generalize the pre-trained landscape analyser Λθ∗
towards three zero-shot cases: 1) five unseen MetaBBO algorithms DEDDQN Sharma et al. (2019),
RLPSO Wu & Wang (2022), GLEET Ma et al. (2024), MelBA (Chaybouti et al., 2022) and GLHF (Li
et al., 2024); 2) two unseen problem set BBOB-Noisy Hansen et al. (2021) and Protein-Docking
benchmark Hwang et al. (2010); 3) both the unseen MetaBBO algorithms and problem sets. Those
tested MetaBBO tasks cover a wide range of meta-learned black-box optimizers. Besides, the problem
sets include challenging realistic application, e.g., Protein-Docking. We evaluate the performance of


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                    %%2%
                                                                                                                                                                             3.03

                                                                     0HWD%%2 WDVNV  WUDLQLQJ                                                   8QVHHQ 0HWD%%2 WDVNV  DOJRULWKPV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.12


            3HUIRUPDQFH

                                                                                              1.53            1.68                                1.49
                                                                   1.25                    1.05                                                                  1.251.42                                                                                     1.27
                                                    1.0         0.96    1.0                        1.0 0.910.79    1.0                     0.77            1.0                           1.0                          1.0 0.940.94                  1.0 0.89
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.580.610.64                                                0.71
                                                          0.3                        0.22                                               0.38

                                                                                                                                            %%2% 12,6<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.37
                                                           8QVHHQ 0HWD%%2 WDVNV  SUREOHP VHWV                         8QVHHQ 0HWD%%2 WDVNV  DOJRULWKPV 	 SUREOHP VHWV
            3HUIRUPDQFH
                                                                1.69                            1.7                                                                         1.73
                                                          1.431.54                                                                                                                             1.261.4 1.43                                                    1.43
                                                                                                                            1.19                                 1.221.13
                                                    1.0                        1.0 1.121.07                  1.0         0.96    1.0       0.951.1         1.0                           1.0                          1.0 1.071.0                   1.0 0.951.16

                                                                                                                                        0.49
                                                                                                                   0.25

                                                                                                                                        3527(,1 '2&.,1*
                                                                                                                         4.43
                                                                                                                  3.46
            3HUIRUPDQFH


                                                                                                                      2.87
                                                          2.44 2.15                                                                                              2.15
                                                            1.52                          1.34 1.0                                                                              1.51                         1.37
                                                    1.0                        1.0      0.96                                         1.0 0.960.870.97 1.0 0.851.16    1.0 0.790.96    1.0 0.861.24 1.0 1.050.88
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.55
                                                                                     0.18


                                                          /'(                  5/(362                   5/ '$6          5/362             '(''41                    */((7                  0(/%$                        */+)

                                                                                                              2ULJLQDO           (/$                      'HHS (/$                         1HXU(/$


 Figure 3: Zero-shot performance of NeurELA on unseen MetaBBO algorithms and problem sets.
                     LDE on BBOB       RLPSO on Protein-Docking GLEET on BBOB
                                          2.0                                                                            1.5                                                                     1.5
          Performance


                                          1.5                                                                                                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                         1.0
                                          1.0                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                          0.5                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                0         20           40 60                       80           100              0    20          40 60                     80          100              0            20            40 60                       80     100
                                                                        Epoch                                                                      Epoch                                                                             Epoch
                                                                                                          Original                          Fine-tune                                      Zero-shot

      Figure 4: Performance gain curves of fine-tuning NeurELA for a specific MetaBBO task.

the ELA, DeepELA and our NeurELA by calculating the relative optimization performance (Eq. (3))
against the Original baseline in the given MetaBBO tasks. Since the performance of Original baseline
would be 0 within this setting, we report the exponential of the calculated relative performances
in Figure 3, where the bars denote the average relative performance, the error bars denote the 95%
bootstrapped confidence interval, for 10 runs of meta-training. For BBOB-Noisy set, we set the
maximum function evaluations as 20000, while for Protein-Docking set, we set it to 1000. The
three zero-shot cases are split by the dashed lines. The results in Figure 3 show that: 1) Over all
of the three zero-shot cases, NeurELA generally achieves superior performance against original
feature extraction designs (Original) in these MetaBBO algorithms, as well as the traditional landscape
analysis features (ELA) and DeepELA. 2) The results of integrating ELA into the evaluated MetaBBO
tasks are quite noisy, which might be due to the intricate correlations in-between the feature groups.
Such strong correlations might challenge the information processing ability of the neural policies Πϕ
in some MetaBBO algorithms. 3) We observe that our NeurELA significantly boosts the performance
of Original baseline on unseen MetaBBO algorithms & problem sets case, which not only validates
the effectiveness of our design, but also indicates that the specific feature extraction designs (Origin)
in existing MetaBBO algorithms might overfits to the problem set it is meta-trained on. 4) Compared
with traditional ELA, DeepELA show similar performance, which is in accordance with its the
training objective to serve as automated alternative of traditional ELA features. 5) Our NeurELA
consistently outperforms the traditional ELA features and DeepELA on the BBOB-Noisy testsuites
and Protein-Docking benchmark, which comprises a wide range of optimization problems with either
different noise models and levels (e.g., Gaussian noise and Cauchy noise Hansen et al. (2009)) or
intricate realistic problem features. It indicates that NeurELA shows robust generalization ability to
unseen MetaBBO tasks, which involve unseen MetaBBO algorithm & realistic problems.

4.2   F INE - TUNING P ERFORMANCE (RQ2)

We select three representative MetaBBO task from the zero-shot performance analysis (Figure 3) to
validate fine-tuning adaption efficiency of our NeurELA. The selected MetaBBO tasks includes: 1)


                                                                                                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LDE on BBOB problem set, where NeurELA surpasses the Original baseline in LDE. 2) RLPSO
on Protein-Docking problem set, where NeurELA equally performs against the Original baseline in
RLPSO. 3) GLEET on BBOB problem set, where NeurELA does not achieves the expected zero-
shot performance. Concretely, we integrate the pre-trained Λθ∗ into the corresponding MetaBBO
algorithm, then fine-tune it in conjunction with the meta-training over the given problem set. We
depict the performance gain curves during the meta-training in Figure 4. We additionally plot the
performance gain curves of the meta-training during the zero-shot generalization for comparison. The
results showcase the flexible adaption potential of our NeurELA: 1) fine-tuning NeurELA on specific
MetaBBO tasks where our NeurELA outperforms, equally performs or underperforms Original
baseline would consistently introduce significant performance boosts. 2) the fine-tuning strategy
is efficient in adapting NeurELA for new MetaBBO dynamics and problem structures, which only
requires less than 20% meta-training epochs to achieve the similar zero-shot performance.

4.3    W HAT HAS N EUR ELA LEARNED ? (RQ3)
                                                                                                 ELA
In this section, we presents the advantage of the landscape fea-            1.0
                                                                                                           Exploitation
                                                                            0.8                            Exploration
tures learned by NeurELA against traditional ELA features under the         0.6
MetaBBO settings. Concretely, we take LDE (Sun et al., 2021) as a           0.4
showcase. In LDE, the meta-level policy (a LSTM-based RL agent)             0.2
                                                                            0.0
outputs the mutation strength factor F t ∈ (0, 1) for the low-level         0.2
                                 t
DE per optimization step t. F indicates the exploration-exploitation            2.0  1.5   1.0    0.5
                                                                                               NeurELA
                                                                                                       0.0   0.5        1.0
                                                                           0.20
tradeoff during the optimization (larger value indicates exploration, 0.15
vice versa). We first record the per step populations during the opti- 0.100.05
mization process of LDE (10 runs on 10-D Rastrigin in CoCo-BBOB 0.00       0.05
testsuites). We then simply classify the recorded populations as explo- 0.10
ration population (F t > 0.5) and exploitation population (F t ≤ 0.5). 0.150.20
                                                                                0.10 0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
We now illustrate the low-rank visualization of the ELA feature and our
NeurELA feature for the recorded populations in Figure 5. The data
points denoted the 2-dimensional features obtained by first feeding the Figure 5: Low-level opti-
populations into ELA/NeurELA and then using PCA (Shlens, 2014) mization features obtained
transformation on the output landscape features. Red points and blue by traditional ELA and our
points represent the features for the exploration and exploitation popu- NeurELA, through PCA di-
lation respectively. The results validate that NeurELA is more sensitive mension reduction.
than traditional ELA features on low-level optimization dynamics. Tra-
ditional ELA is mainly used for describing a problem, it might falls short in providing informative
low-level optimization status for MetaBBO methods. This explains the consistent superior perfor-
mance of our NeurELA (see Figure 3). Notably, our NeurELA can be meta-trained on MetaBBO
tasks to provide sensitive and accurate low-level optimization status for the meta-level policy. We
also provide a further interpretation analysis which reveals the correlation of features learned by
NeurELA and traditional ELA features, refer to Appendix B.3 for detailed discussion.

4.4    I N - DEPTH S TUDY (RQ4 ∼ RQ6)

Computational Efficiency Comparison (RQ4). We compare the computational efficiency of our
NeurELA with Original and ELA as either the amount of candidate samples m or the dimension of
the optimization problem d scales. We report the average wall-time required by each baseline and our
NeurELA to produce the landscape features (for 1000 runs). The results show that: 1) Our NeurELA
achieves comparative computational efficiency with the specific hand-crafted designs in existing
MetaBBO algorithms, while introducing significant performance boosts; 2) When the sample size m
increases, our NeurELA becomes more time-efficient than the original feature extraction designs in
existing MetaBBO algorithms. This is primarily owning to the two-stage attention architecture in our
NeurELA, which can be efficiently computed on CPUs in parallel. 3) The traditional ELA features
encounters the curse of dimensionality, which makes itself impractical for MetaBBO algorithms to
solve high-dimensional optimization problems.
Evolution Strategy Selection (RQ5). Within this paper, we employ a neuroevolution process to
optimize the parameters of the landscape analyzer Λθ , which presents a large-scale optimization
challenge as Λθ comprises 3296 learnable parameters. To identify an effective ES, we implement
several candidate evolution strategy variants: Fast CMAES Li et al. (2018), SEP-CMAES Ros &


                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: The average wall time (in                                                                                                                                                                                               N                           N


                                                                                                                                                              =HUR VKRW 3HUIRUPDQFH


                                             =HUR VKRW 3HUIRUPDQFH
seconds) for computing features.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0/3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 h   SDUD
                        m = 100                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N                                               1HXU(/$
             d = 10     d = 100   d = 1000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       h  L   SDUD
 Original   4.99E-03   5.61E-03   6.38E-03                                                                                                                                                                              N           N

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N
   ELA      1.49E-01   1.48E+01   3.00E+02                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N
 NeurELA    5.42E-03   6.24E-03   7.11E-03                                                               $(6       $(6  (6   50(
                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                 &0$
                                                                                                                                                       (6
                         d = 10                                                                    )&0 6(3 &0 5                                                                                                                             :DOO 7LPH
            m = 100    m = 500    m = 1000   Figure 6: Zero-shot perfor- Figure 7: The influence of
 Original   4.99E-03   2.53E-02   5.16E-02
   ELA      1.49E-01   1.69E-01   2.02E-01   mance when using different model complexity on the zero-
 NeurELA    5.42E-03   7.97E-03   9.38E-03   evolution strategies.       shot performance.


Hansen (2008), R1ES, RMES Li & Zhang (2017), and the original CMAES Hansen & Ostermeier
(2001b), and report the overall zero-shot performance (unseen algorithms & unseen problem sets)
achieved by training our NeurELA with these candidate strategies for 10 runs in Figure 6. The results
reveal that Fast CMAES dominates the other candidates, and is hence selected as the neural network
optimizer ES for our NeurELA. The convergence of these ES baselines are shown in Appendix B.1.
Model Complexity (RQ6). We discuss the relationship between the model complexity and the
zero-shot performance (unseen MetaBBO algorithm & problem sets) of our NeurELA. Concretely,
We pre-train NeurELA under 6 different model complexities, with various hidden dimensions, i.e.,
h = (16, 64), and the number of the Ts-Attn module, i.e., l = (1, 3, 5). We additionally pre-train
three MLP baselines, which substitute the Ts-Attn module in NeurELA with a linear feed-forward
layer, which holds a shape of h × h, h = (16, 64, 128). We report both the zero-shot performance (y-
axis) and the computational efficiency (x-axis, presented as the consumed wall time for computing
the landscape features) in Figure 7, where the dashed lines denotes the performance and wall-time
of the Original baseline. #para denotes the number of the learnable parameters. The results show
that: 1) a significant performance gap is observed between the MLP baselines and our Ts-Attn
module (h = 16, l = 1). It validates the effectiveness of our Ts-Attn design, which enhance the
feature extraction of our NeurELA by encouraging the information sharing at both the cross-solution
and cross-dimension levels; 2) As the model complexity increases, the performance of the Ts-Attn
module drops rapidly. It reveals that the increased number of learnable parameters challenges the
optimization ability of the backend ES. Given the limited computational resources, it is difficult to
identify the optimal parameters θ∗ .
Limitations. As a pioneer work on using deep neural network for landscape analysis in MetaBBO,
our NeurELA show possibility of learning an universal landscape analyser with minimal expertise
requirement and appealing optimization performance. However, a major limitation is that the training
efficiency of NeurELA is not very satisfactory. As discussed in the Model Complexity part, the
zero-shot performance drops rapidly when the model complexity increases. This is due to the
relatively limited large-scale optimization ability of existing evolution strategies. Unfortunately, the
meta-objective of NeurELA (Eq. (4)) is not differentiable hence cannot benefit from back propagation
methods. We denote this limitation as an important future work to address.


5   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduce NeurELA to complement the last mile in making the MetaBBO paradigms
entirely end-to-end: the automatic extraction of optimization status features. To this end, we
propose a landscape analyser parameterized by a two-stage attention-based neural network. The
analyser enables flexible replacement for the original hand-crafted landscape analysis mechanisms in
existing MetaBBO algorithms. We employ a neuroevolution paradigm to optimize it by maximizing
performance over a multi-task MetaBBO operating space. The experimental results showcase that
our NeurELA serves two key functions: 1) it can be seamlessly integrated into unseen MetaBBO
algorithms for impressive zero-shot performance, and 2) it can also be fine-tuned together with
new MetaBBO algorithms to adapt its performance for specific optimization challenges. While it
possesses certain limitation (e.g., low training efficiency), our work represents a significant step
toward realizing a fully automatic MetaBBO algorithm—a paradigm that learns to optimize without
the need for manual expertise.


                                                                                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China No. 62276100,
in part by the Guangdong Provincial Natural Science Foundation for Outstanding Youth Team Project
No. 2024B1515040010, in part by the Guangdong Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young
Scholars No. 2022B1515020049, and in part by the TCL Young Scholars Program.

R EFERENCES
Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna: A next-
  generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In International Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery & Data mining, 2019.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Leo Breiman. Random forests. Machine Learning, 2001.
Sofian Chaybouti, Ludovic Dos Santos, Cedric Malherbe, and Aladin Virmaux. Meta-learning of
  black-box solvers using deep reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS 2022, MetaLearn Workshop,
  2022.
Jiacheng Chen, Zeyuan Ma, Hongshu Guo, Yining Ma, Jie Zhang, and Yue-Jiao Gong. SYMBOL:
   Generating flexible black-box optimizers through symbolic equation learning. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. Support-vector networks. Machine Learning, 1995.
Qiqi Duan, Guochen Zhou, Chang Shao, Zhuowei Wang, Mingyang Feng, Yijun Yang, Qi Zhao, and
  Yuhui Shi. Pypop7: A pure-python library for population-based black-box optimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2212.05652, 2022.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Hongshu Guo, Yining Ma, Zeyuan Ma, Jiacheng Chen, Xinglin Zhang, Zhiguang Cao, Jun Zhang, and
 Yue-Jiao Gong. Deep reinforcement learning for dynamic algorithm selection: A proof-of-principle
  study on differential evolution. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems,
  2024a.
Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian,
  and Yujiu Yang. Connecting large language models with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful
  prompt optimizers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024b.
Nikolaus Hansen and Andreas Ostermeier. Completely derandomized self-adaptation in evolution
  strategies. Evolutionary Computation, 2001a.
Nikolaus Hansen and Andreas Ostermeier. Completely derandomized self-adaptation in evolution
  strategies. Evolutionary Computation, 2001b.
Nikolaus Hansen, Sibylle D Müller, and Petros Koumoutsakos. Reducing the time complexity of
  the derandomized evolution strategy with covariance matrix adaptation (cma-es). Evolutionary
  Computation, 2003.
Nikolaus Hansen, Steffen Finck, Raymond Ros, and Anne Auger. Real-parameter black-box opti-
  mization benchmarking 2009: Noiseless functions definitions. PhD thesis, INRIA, 2009.
Nikolaus Hansen, Anne Auger, Raymond Ros, Olaf Mersmann, Tea Tušar, and Dimo Brockhoff.
  Coco: A platform for comparing continuous optimizers in a black-box setting. Optimization
  Methods and Software, 2021.
W Keith Hastings. Monte carlo sampling methods using markov chains and their applications. 1970.
John H Holland. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. 1975.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Howook Hwang, Thom Vreven, Joël Janin, and Zhiping Weng. Protein–protein docking benchmark
  version 4.0. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics, 2010.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.
Terry Jones, Stephanie Forrest, et al. Fitness distance correlation as a measure of problem difficulty
  for genetic algorithms. In ICGA, 1995.
James Kennedy and Russell Eberhart. Particle swarm optimization. In Proceedings of the Interna-
  tional Conference on Neural Networks, 1995.
Pascal Kerschke and Heike Trautmann. Automated algorithm selection on continuous black-box
  problems by combining exploratory landscape analysis and machine learning. Evolutionary
  Computation, 2019a.
Pascal Kerschke and Heike Trautmann. Comprehensive feature-based landscape analysis of continu-
  ous and constrained optimization problems using the r-package flacco. Applications in Statistical
  Computing, 2019b.
Pascal Kerschke, Mike Preuss, Simon Wessing, and Heike Trautmann. Detecting funnel structures
  by means of exploratory landscape analysis. In Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary
  Computation, 2015.
Pascal Kerschke, Holger H Hoos, Frank Neumann, and Heike Trautmann. Automated algorithm
  selection: Survey and perspectives. Evolutionary Computation, 2019.
Jakub Kudela. A critical problem in benchmarking and analysis of evolutionary computation methods.
  Nature Machine Intelligence, 2022.
Robert Lange, Tom Schaul, Yutian Chen, Tom Zahavy, Valentin Dalibard, Chris Lu, Satinder Singh,
  and Sebastian Flennerhag. Discovering evolution strategies via meta-black-box optimization. In
  Companion Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, 2023.
Robert Tjarko Lange, Yingtao Tian, and Yujin Tang. Evolution transformer: In-context evolutionary
  optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02985, 2024.
Xiaobin Li, Kai Wu, Yujian Betterest Li, Xiaoyu Zhang, Handing Wang, and Jing Liu. Glhf: General
  learned evolutionary algorithm via hyper functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03728, 2024.
Zhenhua Li and Qingfu Zhang. A simple yet efficient evolution strategy for large-scale black-box
  optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 2017.
Zhenhua Li, Qingfu Zhang, Xi Lin, and Hui-Ling Zhen. Fast covariance matrix adaptation for
  large-scale black-box optimization. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, 2018.
Hongqiao Lian, Zeyuan Ma, Hongshu Guo, Ting Huang, and Yue-Jiao Gong. Rlemmo: Evolutionary
  multimodal optimization assisted by deep reinforcement learning. In Genetic and Evolutionary
  Computation Conference Companion, 2024.
Monte Lunacek and Darrell Whitley. The dispersion metric and the cma evolution strategy. In Annual
 Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, 2006.
Zeyuan Ma, Hongshu Guo, Jiacheng Chen, Zhenrui Li, Guojun Peng, Yue-Jiao Gong, Yining Ma,
  and Zhiguang Cao. Metabox: A benchmark platform for meta-black-box optimization with
  reinforcement learning. In Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets
  and Benchmarks Track, 2023.
Zeyuan Ma, Jiacheng Chen, Hongshu Guo, Yining Ma, and Yue-Jiao Gong. Auto-configuring
  exploration-exploitation tradeoff in evolutionary computation via deep reinforcement learning. In
  Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion, 2024.
Katherine M Malan and Andries P Engelbrecht. A survey of techniques for characterising fitness
  landscapes and some possible ways forward. Information Sciences, 2013.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Olaf Mersmann, Bernd Bischl, Heike Trautmann, Mike Preuss, Claus Weihs, and Günter Rudolph.
  Exploratory landscape analysis. In Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation,
  2011.

Risto Miikkulainen, Jason Liang, Elliot Meyerson, Aditya Rawal, Dan Fink, Olivier Francon, Bala
  Raju, Hormoz Shahrzad, Arshak Navruzyan, Nigel Duffy, et al. Evolving deep neural networks. In
  Artificial Intelligence in the Age of Neural Networks and Brain Computing. 2024.

Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang, Alexey Tumanov, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang,
  Melih Elibol, Zongheng Yang, William Paul, Michael I Jordan, et al. Ray: A distributed framework
  for emerging ai applications. In Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation,
  2018.

Mario A Muñoz, Michael Kirley, and Saman K Halgamuge. Exploratory landscape analysis of contin-
 uous space optimization problems using information content. IEEE transactions on evolutionary
 computation, 2014.

Erik Pitzer and Michael Affenzeller. A comprehensive survey on fitness landscape analysis. Recent
  Advances in Intelligent Engineering Systems, 2012.

Raphael Patrick Prager, Moritz Vinzent Seiler, Heike Trautmann, and Pascal Kerschke. Towards
  feature-free automated algorithm selection for single-objective continuous black-box optimization.
  In IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence, 2021a.

Raphael Patrick Prager, Moritz Vinzent Seiler, Heike Trautmann, and Pascal Kerschke. Towards
  feature-free automated algorithm selection for single-objective continuous black-box optimization.
  In 2021 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), pp. 1–8, 2021b. doi:
  10.1109/SSCI50451.2021.9660174.

Quentin Renau, Johann Dreo, Carola Doerr, and Benjamin Doerr. Expressiveness and robustness of
  landscape features. In Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion, 2019.

Quentin Renau, Carola Doerr, Johann Dreo, and Benjamin Doerr. Exploratory landscape analysis
  is strongly sensitive to the sampling strategy. In International Conference on Parallel Problem
 Solving from Nature, 2020.

John R Rice. The algorithm selection problem. In Advances in Computers. 1976.

Raymond Ros and Nikolaus Hansen. A simple modification in cma-es achieving linear time and
  space complexity. In International Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature, 2008.

Moritz Vinzent Seiler, Raphael Patrick Prager, Pascal Kerschke, and Heike Trautmann. A collection
 of deep learning-based feature-free approaches for characterizing single-objective continuous
 fitness landscapes. In Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion, 2022a.

Moritz Vinzent Seiler, Raphael Patrick Prager, Pascal Kerschke, and Heike Trautmann. A collection
 of deep learning-based feature-free approaches for characterizing single-objective continuous
 fitness landscapes. In Proceedings of the Companion Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary
 Computation, 2022b.

Moritz Vinzent Seiler, Pascal Kerschke, and Heike Trautmann. Deep-ela: Deep exploratory landscape
 analysis with self-supervised pretrained transformers for single-and multi-objective continuous
 optimization problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01192, 2024.

Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P Adams, and Nando De Freitas. Taking the
  human out of the loop: A review of bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2015.

Mudita Sharma, Alexandros Komninos, Manuel López-Ibáñez, and Dimitar Kazakov. Deep rein-
 forcement learning based parameter control in differential evolution. In Proceedings of the Genetic
 and Evolutionary Computation Conference, 2019.

Jonathon Shlens. A tutorial on principal component analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1404.1100, 2014.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lei Song, Chenxiao Gao, Ke Xue, Chenyang Wu, Dong Li, Jianye Hao, Zongzhang Zhang, and Chao
  Qian. Reinforced in-context black-box optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17423, 2024.
Rainer Storn and Kenneth Price. Differential evolution-a simple and efficient heuristic for global
  optimization over continuous spaces. Journal of Global Optimization, 1997.
Jianyong Sun, Xin Liu, Thomas Bäck, and Zongben Xu. Learning adaptive differential evolution
   algorithm from optimization experiences by policy gradient. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
   Computation, 2021.
Zhiping Tan and Kangshun Li. Differential evolution with mixed mutation strategy based on deep
  reinforcement learning. Applied Soft Computing, 2021.
Zhiping Tan, Yu Tang, Kangshun Li, Huasheng Huang, and Shaoming Luo. Differential evolution
  with hybrid parameters and mutation strategies based on reinforcement learning. Swarm and
  Evolutionary Computation, 2022.
Tomer Tsaban, Julia K Varga, Orly Avraham, Ziv Ben-Aharon, Alisa Khramushin, and Ora Schueler-
  Furman. Harnessing protein folding neural networks for peptide–protein docking. Nature Commu-
  nications, 2022.
Bas van Stein, Fu Xing Long, Moritz Frenzel, Peter Krause, Markus Gitterle, and Thomas Bäck.
  Doe2vec: Deep-learning based features for exploratory landscape analysis. In Proceedings of
  the Companion Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, GECCO ’23 Companion,
  2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2017.
Sewall Wright et al. The roles of mutation, inbreeding, crossbreeding, and selection in evolution.
  1932.
Di Wu and G Gary Wang. Employing reinforcement learning to enhance particle swarm optimization
  methods. Engineering Optimization, 2022.
Ke Xue, Jiacheng Xu, Lei Yuan, Miqing Li, Chao Qian, Zongzhang Zhang, and Yang Yu. Multi-agent
  dynamic algorithm configuration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Shiyuan Yin, Yi Liu, GuoLiang Gong, Huaxiang Lu, and Wenchang Li. Rlepso: Reinforcement
  learning based ensemble particle swarm optimizer. In International Conference on Algorithms,
  Computing and Artificial Intelligence, 2021.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     T ECHNICAL D ETAILS

A.1    T ECHNICAL D ETAILS OF Λθ

Within this paper, the aim of the landscape analysis is to profile the dynamic optimization status
of the current optimization process. That is, given a d-dimensional target optimization problem
f , at any time step t, the optimization process maintains a population of m candidate solutions
{Xit ∈ Rd }m                                                    t       t m
              i=1 , and their corresponding objective values {yi = f (Xi )}i=1 . We consider an end-to-
end neural network structure that receives the candidates population and their corresponding objective
values as input, and then outputs h-dimensional dynamic optimization status sti for each Xit . This
optimization status feature aggregates the information of the optimization problem and the current
candidate population, hence can be used for dynamic landscape analysis in MetaBBO algorithms.
We have to note that the core challenges in designing such a neural landscape analyser locate at: 1)
generalizability: it should be able to handle optimization problems with different searching ranges
and objective value scales; 2) scalability: it should be capable of computing the dynamic optimization
status efficiently as the amount of the sampled candidates or the dimensions of the problem scales. We
address the above two challenges by designing a two-stage attention based neural network structure as
the landscape analyser (Λθ ) in NeurELA. We now introduce the architecture of the Λθ and establish
its overall computation graph step by step. For the convenience of writing, we omit superfix for time
step t.
Pre-processing Module. To make NeurELA generalizable across different problems with various
searching ranges and objective value scales, we apply min-max normalization over the searching
space and the objective value space. Concretely, for a specific d-dimensional optimization problem
f (suppose a minimization problem), we acquire its searching range {[lbj , ubj ]}dj=1 , where lbj and
ubj represent the lower bound and the upper bound at j-th dimension. Then we normalize each Xi in
                                     X j −lbj
the candidate population by Xij = ubij −lbj , where Xij denotes the j-th dimension of Xi . After the
min-max normalization over the searching space, we min-max normalize the objective values within
                         yi −ymin
this time step, yi = ymax    −ymin , where ymin and ymax denotes the lowest and highest achieved
objective values in this time step. We have to note that by normalizing the Xi and yi within the
range of [0, 1], we attain universal representation for different optimization problems, ensuring the
generalizability of the subsequent neural network modules. The normalized {Xi }m                      m
                                                                                         i=1 and {yi }i=1
                                                          j
are then re-organized as a collection of meta data {{(Xi , yi )}m     d
                                                                i=1 }j=1 with the shape of d × m × 2.
                                                                  2×h
We then embed the meta data with a linear mapping Wemb ∈ R              as the final input encoding s, of
which the shape is d × m × h. h denotes the hidden dimension of the subsequent two-stage attention
module.
Two-stage Attention Block. We construct a two-stage attention block (Ts-Attn) to aggregate
optimization status information across candidate solutions and across each dimension of the decision
variables. The overall computation graph of the Ts-Attn is illustrated in the right of Figure 2 in the
main body, of which a basic component is the attention block (Attn). As illustrated in the left of Figure
2 in the main body, the Attn block mainly follows designs of the original Transformer Vaswani et al.
(2017), except that the layer normalization Ba et al. (2016) is used instead of batch normalization Ioffe
& Szegedy (2015). Given a group of L input encoding vectors Xin ∈ RL×h , Eq. (5) details the
computation of the Attn block.

                                    g = LN(Xin + MHSA(Xin ))
                                    v = FF(2) (ReLU(FF(1) (g)))                                      (5)
                                    o = LN(g + v)

where MHSA, LN and FF denote the multi-head self-attention Vaswani et al. (2017) (with the hidden
dimension of h), layer normalization Ba et al. (2016) and linear feed forward layer respectively. The
output o holds identical shape with the input Xin . In our Ts-Attn block, we employ an Attn block
Attninter for the first cross-solution information sharing stage, and the other Attn block Attnintra
for the second cross-dimension information sharing stage (illustrated in the right of Figure 2 in the
main body. The Ts-Attn receives the input encoding s of the current candidate population, and then
advances the information sharing in both cross-solution and cross-dimension level. The computation


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is detailed in Eq. (6).
                              H = Attninter (S)
                              H = Transpose(H, d × m × h → m × d × h) + PE
                           Hout = Attnintra (H)                                                     (6)
                          Findiv = MeanPooling(Hout , m × d × h → m × h)
                           Fpop = MeanPooling(Findiv ), m × h → h)
At the first stage, we let the input encoding s (attained from the pre-processing module) pass through
Attninter . Since we group the encodings of the same dimension of all candidates in s, the Attninter
promotes the optimization information sharing across candidates in current population. From the first
stage, we obtain a group of hidden features H with the shape of d × m × h. At the second stage,
we first transpose H into the shape of m × d × h to regroup all dimensions of a candidate together.
We then add cos/sin positional encoding (PE) over the transposed H to inform the order of different
dimensions in a candidate. We then let H pass through Attnintra to advance the information sharing
among the different dimensions within the same candidate. The output of Attnintra holds the shape
of m × d × h. At last, we apply MeanPooling on Hout to get the landscape feature for each candidate
Findiv in the population, and apply a second MeanPooling on Findiv to get the landscape feature for
the whole candidate population Fpop . We have to note that we calculate both Findiv and Fpop to make
our NeurELA compatible with diverse MetaBBO algorithms, which either require the landscape
feature of the whole population (e.g., Wu & Wang (2022)) or require a separate landscape feature
for each candidate (e.g., Sun et al. (2021)). The highly parallelizable attention-based neural-network
architecture ensure the scalability of our method as the amount of the sampled candidates or the
dimensions of the problem increases.
Now we summarize the end-to-end workflow of the neural landscape analyser (Λθ ) in our NeurELA.
At any time-step t within the optimization process, the pre-processing module transforms the infor-
mation of the candidate population (i.e., {Xit }m         t m
                                                i=1 and {yi }i=1 ) into the input encoding s. Then the
                                                                       t            t
Ts-Attn module transforms s into the dynamic landscape features Finidiv       and Fpop .

A.2    T RAIN - TEST SPLIT OF BBOB TESTSUITES

BBOB contains 24 synthetic problems owning various landscape properties Mersmann et al. (2011)
(e.g. multi-modality, global structure, separability and etc.). Table 2 list all of the 24 problems
according to their category. Due to the diversity of properties, how to split these problems into
train-test set becomes a key issue to ensure the training performance and its generalization ability.
Our fundamental principle to split is to maximize the inclusion of representative landscape properties
as possible. Specifically we visualize these 24 problems under 2D setting, and then select 12
representative problems into train set. We also provide contour map of problems in train set in
Figure 8 and test set in Figure 9. Moreover, to avoid possible issue Kudela (2022) coming from fixed
optima which is often located in [0, ..., 0] in current benchmark problems (this might facilitate model
to overfit to this fixed point), we thus add random offset O into each problems, that is to convert
y = f (x) into y = f (x − O). This operation is inserted into both train set Dtrain and test set Dtest .

A.3    T RAIN - TEST SPLIT OF BBOB-N OISY AND P ROTEIN -D OCKING TESTSUITES

We summarize some key characteristic of this two testsuits as follows.

       • BBOB-Noisy: this testsuits contains 30 noisy problems from COCO Hansen et al. (2021).
         They are obtained by further inserting noise with different models and levels into problems
         in BBOB testsuits. BBOB-Noisy is characterized by its noisy nature and often used to
         examine robustness of certain optimizers.
       • Protein-Docking: this testsuits contains 280 instances of different protein-protein com-
         plexes Hwang et al. (2010). These problems are characterized by rugged objective landscapes
         and are computationally expensive to evaluate.

We follow train-test split for these two testsuites defined in MetaBox Ma et al. (2023). Under easy
mode in MetaBox, 75% of instances are allocated into training and the remaining 25% are used in


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                              Table 2: Overview of the BBOB testsuits.
                                                                                                                                                                             No. Functions
                                                                                                                                                                              1    Sphere Function
                                                                                                                                                                              2    Ellipsoidal Function
                                                                             Separable functions                                                                              3    Rastrigin Function
                                                                                                                                                                              4    Buche-Rastrigin Function
                                                                                                                                                                              5    Linear Slope
                                                                                                                                                                              6    Attractive Sector Function
                                                                               Functions
                                                                                                                                                                              7    Step Ellipsoidal Function
                                                                         with low or moderate
                                                                                                                                                                              8    Rosenbrock Function, original
                                                                             conditioning
                                                                                                                                                                              9    Rosenbrock Function, rotated
                                                                                                                                                                             10 Ellipsoidal Function
                                                                                  Functions with                                                                             11 Discus Function
                                                                                 high conditioning                                                                           12 Bent Cigar Function
                                                                                   and unimodal                                                                              13 Sharp Ridge Function
                                                                                                                                                                             14 Different Powers Function
                                                                                                                                                                             15 Rastrigin Function (non-separable counterpart of F3)
                                                                                          Multi-modal
                                                                                                                                                                             16 Weierstrass Function
                                                                                            functions
                                                                                                                                                                             17 Schaffers F7 Function
                                                                                          with adequate
                                                                                                                                                                             18 Schaffers F7 Function, moderately ill-conditioned
                                                                                         global structure
                                                                                                                                                                             19 Composite Griewank-Rosenbrock Function F8F2
                                                                                                                                                                             20 Schwefel Function
                                                                                          Multi-modal
                                                                                                                                                                             21 Gallagher’s Gaussian 101-me Peaks Function
                                                                                            functions
                                                                                                                                                                             22 Gallagher’s Gaussian 21-hi Peaks Function
                                                                                            with weak
                                                                                                                                                                             23 Katsuura Function
                                                                                         global structure
                                                                                                                                                                             24 Lunacek bi-Rastrigin Function
                                                                                                                                                                                Default search range: [-5, 5]D



testing. Training or further fine-tuning on these two testsuites in our experiments are executed in the
train set, and then validate performance of corresponding MetaBBO algorithms in the test set Dtest .


                                           50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1400
                                                                                                                                                 1e7


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             100                                                                                        3500                                                                               1200                                                                                     500
                                           40                                                                                              4                                                                                                                                                                                                            3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 80                                                                                                                                                                        1000                                                                                     400
                                           30                                                                                              3                                                                                                                                                                                                           2500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             60                                                                                        2000                                                                                800                                                                                     300
                                           20                                                                                              2                                                                                                                                                                                                           1500                                                                                600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1000                                                                                400
                                          10                                                                                               1                                                                                                                 20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       500                                                                                 200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                      4                                                                                           4                                                                                                                  4                                                                                         4                                                                                       4                                                                                      4
                                  2                                                                                       2                                                                                                                  2                                                                                         2                                                                                       2                                                                                      2
  4                           0                          4                                                        0                                      4                                                                           0                                         4                                                   0                               4                                                       0                              4                                                   0
      2                   2                                      2                                        2                                                          2                                                       2                                                         2                                       2                                           2                                       2                                              2                                       2
          0                                                              0                                                                                                       0                                                                                                             0                                                                                   0                                                                                      0
              2       4                                                          2                4                                                                                          2                       4                                                                                 2               4                                                                   2               4                                                                      2               4
                  4                                                                       4                                                                                                              4                                                                                                     4                                                                                   4                                                                                      4


(a) Function 1                                         (b) Function 2                                                                                  (c) Function 5                                                                                                        (d) Function 7                                                                      (e) Function 13                                                                    (f) Function 16


                                           700                                                                                             6000                                                                                                                    60                                                                                       80                                                                                70                                                                                   100
                                           600                                                                                             5000                                                                                                                    50                                                                                       70                                                                                60
                                           500                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60                                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                                                                                                           4000                                                                                                                   40                                                                                        50                                                                                50
                                          400                                                                                             3000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30                                                                                       40
                                          300                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30                                                                                30                                                                                    40
                                          200                                                                                             2000                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20                                                                                20
                                          100                                                                                             1000                                                                                                                    10                                                                                       10                                                                                10                                                                                    20


                                      4                                                                                               4                                                                                                                      4                                                                                         4                                                                               4                                                                                      4
                                  2                                                                                           2                                                                                                                      2                                                                                         2                                                                                   2                                                                                  2
  4                           0                              4                                                        0                                          4                                                                           0                                     4                                                   0                               4                                                   0                              4                                                   0
      2                   2                                          2                                        2                                                              2                                                       2                                                     2                                       2                                           2                                       2                                          2                                       2
          0                                                                  0                                                                                                           0                                                                                                         0                                                                                   0                                                                                  0
              2       4                                                              2                4                                                                                              2                       4                                                                             2               4                                                                   2               4                                                                  2               4
                  4                                                                           4                                                                                                                  4                                                                                                 4                                                                                   4                                                                                  4


(g) Function 17                                        (h) Function 18                                                                                 (i) Function 21                                                                                                       (j) Function 22                                                                     (k) Function 23                                                                    (l) Function 24

              Figure 8: Fitness landscapes of functions in BBOB train set when dimension is set to 2.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       160000                                                                              120000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1e7


                                           3000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                          4000                                                                                                                   200                                                                                   140000
                                           2500                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            100000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       120000                                                                                                                                                                        4
                                          2000                                                                                            3000                                                                                                                   150                                                                                   100000                                                                               80000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80000                                                                               60000                                                                                     3
                                          1500                                                                                            2000                                                                                                                   100
                                          1000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60000                                                                               40000                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                          1000                                                                                                                   50                                                                                    40000
                                          500                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20000                                                                               20000                                                                                     1


                                      4                                                                                           4                                                                                                                      4                                                                                         4                                                                                   4                                                                                       4
                                  2                                                                                       2                                                                                                                      2                                                                                         2                                                                                       2                                                                                  2
  4                           0                          4                                                        0                                          4                                                                           0                                     4                                                   0                                   4                                                   0                              4                                                   0
      2                   2                                      2                                        2                                                              2                                                       2                                                     2                                       2                                               2                                       2                                          2                                       2
          0                                                              0                                                                                                           0                                                                                                         0                                                                                       0                                                                                  0
              2       4                                                          2                4                                                                                              2                       4                                                                             2               4                                                                       2               4                                                                  2               4
                  4                                                                       4                                                                                                                  4                                                                                                 4                                                                                       4                                                                                  4


 (a) Function 3                                        (b) Function 4                                                                                  (c) Function 6                                                                                                        (d) Function 8                                                                       (e) Function 9                                                                    (f) Function 10
                                                 1e7


                                                                                                                                               1e9


                                            5                                                                                              5                                                                                                              300                                                                                           500                                                                                 350
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              200000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          250                                                                                                                                                                               300                                                                               175000
                                            4                                                                                              4                                                                                                                                                                                                           400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           250                                                                                150000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         200                                                                                           300                                                                                                                                                                    125000
                                           3                                                                                              3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         150                                                                                                                                                                               150                                                                                100000
                                           2                                                                                              2                                                                                                                                                                                                            200                                                                                                                                                                    75000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         100                                                                                                                                                                               100
                                           1                                                                                              1                                                                                                                                                                                                            100                                                                                                                                                                    50000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50                                                                                                                                                                                50                                                                                 25000

                                      4                                                                                           4                                                                                                                  4                                                                                         4                                                                                   4                                                                                      4
                                  2                                                                                       2                                                                                                                  2                                                                                         2                                                                                       2                                                                                  2
  4                           0                          4                                                        0                                      4                                                                       0                                             4                                                   0                               4                                                   0                              4                                                   0
      2                   2                                      2                                        2                                                          2                                                       2                                                         2                                   2                                               2                                       2                                          2                                       2
          0                                                              0                                                                                                       0                                                                                                             0                                                                                   0                                                                                  0
              2       4                                                          2                4                                                                                          2                       4                                                                                 2               4                                                                   2               4                                                                  2               4
                  4                                                                       4                                                                                                              4                                                                                                     4                                                                                   4                                                                                  4


(g) Function 11                                        (h) Function 12                                                                                 (i) Function 14                                                                                                       (j) Function 15                                                                     (k) Function 19                                                                    (l) Function 20

                  Figure 9: Fitness landscapes of functions in BBOB test set when dimension is set to 2.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4     L ICENSE OF U SED O PEN - SOURCED A SSETS

Our codebase can be accessed at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
Neur-ELA-303C. In Table 3 we listed several open-sourced assets used in our work and
their corresponding licenses.

                               Table 3: Used open-sourced tools and their licenses.

           Used scenario                                                  Asset                                           License
         Top-level optimizer                                      PyPop7 Duan et al. (2022)                            GPL-3.0 license
  MetaBBO algorithms implementation
                                                                  MetaBox Ma et al. (2023)                         BSD-3-Clause license
     Low-level train-test workflow
         Parallel processing                                     Ray Moritz et al. (2018)                            Apache-2.0 license
       ELA feature calculation                           pflacco Kerschke & Trautmann (2019b)                          MIT license


A.5     C ONTROL - PARAMETERS OF ES

Fast CMAES We grid-search three key hyper-parameters in Fast CMAES, including the mean value
µ and sigma value σ of the initial Gaussian distribution used for sampling, learning rate of evolution
path update c. We list the grid search options in Table 4 and choose the best setting according to
training performance on BBOB. Besides, for other control-parameters of the Fast CMAES, we follow
the default settings listed in its original paper Li et al. (2018).

                          Table 4: Grid-search of control-parameters of Fast CMAES.

                         Control-parameters                        Grid options              Selected setting
                         Initial mean value µ                        [0D , RD ]                    RD
                         Initial sigma value σ                       [0.1, 0.3]                    0.3
               Learning rate of evolution path update c [2.0/(D + 5.0), 6.0/(D + 5.0)]        2.0/(D + 5.0)
               Note:
                     D represents the searching dimension of Fast CMAES. More specifically, as the top-level
                 optimizer to neural-evolve our neural landscape analyser Λθ , D specifies the dimension of Λθ
                 which is 3296 under default settings in our main experiment.

Other candidate evolution strategy variants We follows the default settings as implementations
in PyPop7 Duan et al. (2022) for other candidate top-level optimizers. We made a comparision
study among SEP-CMAES Ros & Hansen (2008), R1ES, RMES Li & Zhang (2017), original
CMAES Hansen & Ostermeier (2001b) and Fast CMAES under their default settings and finally
select Fast CMAES as the default top-level optimizer of this work.

B      A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSION
B.1     T RAINING C ONVERGENCE

In NeurELA, the meta-objective as defined in Eq. (4), is                                                          )&0$(6
non-differentiable. Hence, we train the neural network in                                                            6(3 &0$(6
                                                                                                                  5 (6
NeurELA through neuroevolution. Such paradigm requires
                                                                                                                     50(6
                                                                                                                     &0$(6
effective evolutionary optimizers which maintain a population
                                                                                     /RVV


of neural networks and reproduce elite offsprings iteratively
according to the training objective of the neural networks.
In NeurELA, we adopt Evolution Strategy (ES) since it is
claimed to be more effective then other optimizers. There
are many modern variants of ES method, of which we select
five: Fast CMAES (Li et al., 2018), Sep-CMAES (Ros &                                      7UDLQLQJ 6WHS
Hansen, 2008), R1ES (Li & Zhang, 2017), RMES (Li &
Zhang, 2017) and CMAES (Hansen & Ostermeier, 2001b) as Figure 10: Training curves of dif-
candidates. We present the training curves of all five optional ferent ES baselines when training
ES baselines under our training settings in Figure 10. The NeurELA
results demonstrate that the Fast CMAES we adopted for


                                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


training NeurELA converges and achieves superior training
effectiveness to other ES baselines.


B.2   D IFFERENCE BETWEEN N EUR ELA AND D EEP -ELA

Although a previous work Deep-ELA (Seiler et al., 2024) also proposed using attention-based
architecture for landscape analysis, there are significant differences between our NeurELA and
Deep-ELA, which we listed as below:
1. Target scenario. NeurELA is explicitly designed for MetaBBO tasks, where dynamic optimization
status is critical for providing timely and accurate decision-making at the meta level. In contrast,
Deep-ELA serves as a static profiling tool for global optimization problem properties and is not
tailored for dynamic scenarios. NeurELA supports dynamic algorithm configuration, algorithm
selection, and operator selection. In contrast, Deep-ELA’s features are restricted to static algorithm
selection and configuration, limiting its adaptability in dynamic MetaBBO workflows.
2. Feature extraction workflow. First, NeurELA addresses the limited scalability of Deep-ELA for
high dimensional problem. Concretely, the embedding in Deep-ELA is dependent on the problem
dimension and hence the authors of Deep-ELA pre-defined a maximum dimension (50 in the original
paper). To address this, NeurELA proposes a novel embedding strategy which re-organizes the sample
points and their objective values to make the last dimension of the input tensor is 2 (Section 3.2).
This embedding format has a significant advantage: the neural network of NeurELA is hence capable
of processing any dimensional problem and any number of sample points. NeurELA enhances the
information extraction through its two-stage attention-based neural network. Specifically, when
processing the embedded data, Deep-ELA leverages its self-attention layers for information sharing
across sample points only. In contrast, NeurELA incorporates a two-stage attention mechanism,
enabling the neural network to first extract comprehensive and useful features across sample points
(cross-solution attention) and then across problem dimensions (cross-dimension attention). This
design helps mitigate computational bias and improve feature representation.
3. Training method. The training objective and training methodology in NeurELA and Deep-
ELA are fundamentally different. Deep-ELA aims to learn a neural network that could serve as an
alternative of traditional ELA. Its training objective is to minimize the contrastive loss (InfoNCE)
between the outputs of its two prediction heads (termed as student head and teacher head) by gradient
descent, in order to achieve invariance across different landscape augmentation on the same problem
instance. In contrast, the training objective of NeurELA is to learn a neural network that could provide
dynamic landscape features for various MetaBBO tasks. Specifically, its objective is to maximize the
expected relative performance improvement when integrated into different MetaBBO methods. Since
such relative performance improvement is not differentiable, NeurELA employs neuroevolution as its
training methodology. Neuroevolution is recognized as an effective alternative to gradient descent,
offering robust global optimization capabilities.
In summary, NeurELA and Deep-ELA are two totally different works with different target operating
scenarios, algorithm design tasks, neural network designs and workflows, and training methodologies.


B.3   F URTHER I NTERPRETATION A NALYSIS

To further interpret what features have been learned by our NeurELA, we have conducted following
experimental analysis to further interpret the relationship between NeurELA features and traditional
ELA features, where we uses Pearson Correlation analysis to quantify the correlation between each
NeurELA feature and each traditional ELA feature.Below, we explain our experimental methodology
step by step:
1. We select three MetaBBO methods (LDE, RLEPSO and RL-DAS) from our training task set
and employ their pre-trained models to optimize the 24 problem instances in CoCo BBOB-10D
suite. Each MetaBBO method performed 10 independent runs per problem instance, with each run
consisting of 500 optimization steps. Now we obtain 3*24*10 = 720 optimization trajectories, each
with length 500, and the data at each step of a trajectory is the population and the corresponding
objective values {Xs, Y s}.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  ela_meta.lin_simple.adj_r2
               ela_meta.lin_simple.intercept                                                             0.8
                ela_meta.lin_simple.coef.min
               ela_meta.lin_simple.coef.max
      ela_meta.lin_simple.coef.max_by_min                                                                0.6
              ela_meta.lin_w_interact.adj_r2
               ela_meta.quad_simple.adj_r2
                 ela_meta.quad_simple.cond
           ela_meta.quad_w_interact.adj_r2                                                               0.4
                          ela_conv.conv_prob
                             ela_conv.lin_prob
                        ela_conv.lin_dev_orig
                        ela_conv.lin_dev_abs                                                             0.2
                      ela_level.mmce_lda_25
                     ela_level.mmce_qda_25
                         ela_level.lda_qda_25                                                            0.0
ELA


                      ela_level.mmce_lda_50
                     ela_level.mmce_qda_50
                         ela_level.lda_qda_50
                      ela_level.mmce_lda_75                                                               0.2
                     ela_level.mmce_qda_75
                         ela_level.lda_qda_75
                      ela_local.n_loc_opt.abs
                       ela_local.n_loc_opt.rel                                                            0.4
             ela_local.best2mean_contr.orig
            ela_local.best2mean_contr.ratio
              ela_local.basin_sizes.avg_best                                                              0.6
         ela_local.basin_sizes.avg_non_best
             ela_local.basin_sizes.avg_worst
                           ela_distr.skewness
                             ela_distr.kurtosis                                                           0.8
                  ela_distr.number_of_peaks
                                                  F1 F2 F3 F4 F5 F6 F7 F8 F9 F10F11F12F13F14F15F16
                                                                    NeurELA
             Figure 11: Correlation score of NeurELA features and traditional ELA features



2. Based on the obtained trajectories, we use the pre-trained NeurELA model (outputs 16 features)
and the traditional ELA (we choose 32 ELA features from the traditional ELA including the Meta-
model group, Convexity group, Level-Set group, Local landscape group and Distribution group)
to calculate landscape features for each optimization step. After the computation, we obtain 720
landscape features time series for NeurELA and traditional ELA respectively.
3. For each pair of landscape features time series, we measure the relationship between the i-th
feature in NeurELA features and the j-th feature in traditional ELA features by computing the Pearson
                                                                         N eurELA        N eurELA
Correlation Coefficient ri,j of the time series of these two features: {Fi,1      . . . Fi,500    } and
   ELA       ELA
{Fj,1 . . . Fj,500 }.
4. We obtain the final correlation scores of each feature pair between NeurELA and traditional ELA by
averaging ri,j of this feature pair over the 720 time series data, i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 16}, j ∈ {1, 2, . . . 32}.
Finally we obtain a correlation matrix with 32 rows and 16 columns. We illustrate this correlation
matrix by the heatmap in Figure 11. The x-axis denote 16 NeurELA features and y-axis denote 32
ELA features, a larger value denotes the two features are closely related.
From the correlation results in that Figure, we could find some relationship patterns between our
NeurELA features and the traditional ELA features: a) four NeurELA features F1, F4, F8 and F16
are novel features learned by NeurELA which show weak correlation (< 0.6) with all ELA features.
b) some NeurELA features show strong correlation with one particular feature group in traditional


                                                             20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ELA, such as F3 with the Meta-model group. c) some NeurELA features show strong correlation
with multiple feature groups in traditional ELA, such as F10 with Distribution group and Meta-model
group. d) all NeurELA features show weak correlation with the Convexity group and Local landscape
group, which might reveals these two group features are less useful for addressing MetaBBO tasks.


                                                21
