Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A G RAPH E NHANCED S YMBOLIC D ISCOVERY F RAME -
WORK FOR E FFICIENT L OGIC O PTIMIZATION

  Yinqi Bai1∗, Jie Wang1†, Lei Chen2 , Zhihai Wang1 , Yufei Kuang1 , Mingxuan Yuan2 ,
 JianYe Hao2,3 , Feng Wu1
 1
   MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
 University of Science and Technology of China
 2
   Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
 3
   College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University



                                               A BSTRACT

             The efficiency of Logic Optimization (LO) has become one of the key bottlenecks
             in chip design. To prompt efficient LO, previous studies propose using a key scor-
             ing function to predict and prune a large number of ineffective nodes of the LO
             heuristics. However, the existing scoring functions struggle to balance inference
             efficiency, interpretability, and generalization performance, which severely hin-
             ders their application to modern LO tools. To address this challenge, we propose
             a novel data-driven circuit symbolic learning framework, namely CMO, to learn
             lightweight, interpretable, and generalizable scoring functions. The major chal-
             lenge of developing CMO is to discover symbolic functions that can well general-
             ize to unseen circuits, i.e., the circuit symbolic generalization problem. Thus, the
             major technical contribution of CMO is the novel Graph Enhanced Symbolic Dis-
             covery framework, which distills dark knowledge from a well-designed graph neu-
             ral network (GNN) to enhance the generalization capability of the learned sym-
             bolic functions. To the best of our knowledge, CMO is the first graph-enhanced
             approach for discovering lightweight and interpretable symbolic functions that can
             well generalize to unseen circuits in LO. Experiments on three challenging cir-
             cuit benchmarks show that the interpretable symbolic functions learned by CMO
             outperform previous state-of-the-art (SOTA) GPU-based and human-designed ap-
             proaches in terms of inference efficiency and generalization capability. Moreover,
             we integrate CMO with the Mfs2 heuristic—one of the most time-consuming LO
             heuristics. The empirical results demonstrate that CMO significantly improves its
             efficiency while keeping comparable optimization performance when executed on
             a CPU-based machine, achieving up to 2.5× faster runtime.


1       I NTRODUCTION

The modern chip design workflow has incorporated multiple Electronic Design Automation (EDA)
tools to synthesize, simulate, test, and verify different circuit designs efficiently and reliably (Huang
et al., 2021). Logic Optimization (LO) is one of the most important EDA tools in the front-end work-
flow (Berndt et al., 2022; Pasandi et al., 2023). A key task in LO is Circuit Optimization, which aims
to optimize circuits—modeled by directed acyclic graphs—with functionality-equivalent transfor-
mations and reduced size and/or depth. It is crucial to well tackle the LO task as it can significantly
improve the Quality of Results (QoR), i.e., various metrics that evaluate the quality of designed
chips, such as size, level, and edge (De Abreu et al., 2021; Bertacco et al., 1997). However, the
LO task can be extremely hard to tackle as it is a N P-hard problem (Micheli, 1994; Farrahi & Sar-
rafzadeh, 1994). To approximately tackle the LO task, many effective LO heuristics such as Mfs2
(Mishchenko et al., 2011), Resub (Brayton, 2006), and Rewrite (Bertacco et al., 1997) have been
developed. Specifically, these heuristics usually apply transformations to subgraphs rooted at each
node—that is, the node-level transformations—sequentially for all nodes on the input circuit.
    ∗
        This work was done when Yinqi Bai was an intern at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
    †
        Corresponding author. Email: jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The efficiency of LO heuristics in LO tools has become one of the key bottlenecks in chip design,
thus significantly impacting the final circuit performance, power, area (PPA), and Time-to-Market,
i.e., the overall duration for developing and commercializing new chips (Neto et al., 2021; Sab-
bavarapu et al., 2014; Reddy et al., 2014). However, executing LO heuristics can be highly time-
consuming due to a large number of ineffective and redundant transformations. To prompt efficient
LO, previous works propose a prediction and prune framework, which applies a key scoring function
to reduce a large number of ineffective node-level transformations (Li et al., 2023; Wang et al.).
However, the existing scoring functions struggle to balance inference efficiency, interpretability, and
generalization performance, which severely hinders their application to modern LO tools. First,
(Wang et al.) proposes using a well-designed graph neural network (GNN) model (Kipf & Welling,
2017; Shi et al., 2023) as the scoring function, which offers a promising approach to well tackle the
LO task. However, the limited inference efficiency of deep learning models leads to higher runtime
costs for LO heuristics, as most current industrial LO tools are purely CPU-based. Moreover, the
’black-box’ nature of deep learning methods raises concerns among researchers about the reliability
of deploying such models in practical applications. In contrast, (Li et al., 2023) proposes a human-
designed hard-coded mathematical expression as the scoring function, which aligns with human
intuition and is thus regarded to be reliable. However, designing and developing these functions
is extremely challenging as it requires extensive expert knowledge. Moreover, this function can-
not achieve high generalization performance due to the lack of adoption of machine learning from
existing data , which could significantly degrade the QoR of the optimized circuits.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose a novel data-driven circuit symbolic learning
framework, namely CMO, which learns a symbolic scoring function that combines the advantages of
the two paradigms. An appealing feature of the CMO is its greater potential to discover lightweight
and interpretable symbolic functions from a decomposed symbolic space. However, we found that
the learned symbolic functions cannot generalize well to unseen circuits, i.e., the circuit symbolic
generalization problem. The poor generalization performance could significantly degrade the op-
timization performance compared to default heuristics. Thus, the major challenge of developing
CMO is how to learn symbolic functions that can well generalize to unseen circuits.
To enhance generalization, the major technical contribution of CMO is the novel Graph Enhanced
Symbolic Discovery (GESD) framework, which leverages a well-designed GNN to guide the gen-
eration of symbolic trees. Specifically, GESD establishes a teacher-student framework in which
the GNN functions as the teacher while a Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) based symbolic learn-
ing model serves as the student. The core idea of GESD is to utilize the teacher GNN’s output,
which encapsulates domain-invariant information crucial for circuit generalization (Wang et al.), to
strategically guide the generation of the student symbolic trees. Consequently, GESD is adept at
discovering symbolic functions with strong generalization capabilities. Experiments on the open-
source and industrial benchmarks show that the symbolic functions learned by CMO outperform
previous state-of-the-art (SOTA) GPU-based and human-designed approaches in terms of inference
efficiency and generalization capability. Moreover, we incorporate CMO with the Mfs2 heuristic—
the most time-consuming one among commonly used LO heuristics. The empirical results on very
large-scale circuits demonstrate that CMO achieves up to 2.5× faster runtime compared with the de-
fault Mfs2 heuristic while keeping comparable optimization performance. Furthermore, our GESD
learned symbolic functions are all concise expressions that exhibit good interpretability.
We summarize our major contributions as follows: (1) we propose a novel circuit symbolic learn-
ing framework, namely CMO, to learn efficient, interpretable, and generalizable symbolic functions
that are reliable and simple to deploy in modern LO tools. (2) The major technical contribution of
CMO is the novel graph-enhanced symbolic discovery framework which employs a well-designed
GNN to enhance the generalization capability of the learned symbolic functions. (3) To the best
of our knowledge, CMO is the first graph-enhanced approach for discovering lightweight and in-
terpretable symbolic functions that can well generalize to unseen circuits in LO. (4) Experiments
demonstrate that the interpretable learned symbolic functions outperform previous SOTA GPU-
based and human-designed approaches in terms of inference efficiency and generalization capability.
Moreover, it significantly improves the efficiency of the Mfs2 heuristic with comparable optimiza-
tion performance on a purely CPU-based machine, achieving up to 2.5× faster runtime.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2   BACKGROUND

                     Inference Time Comparision                    Generalization performance comparison                        100 Motivations for Feature Decomposition
                                                                      100


                                                       275.32
           COG                                                            90                                                               92.31                            91.93
                                                                                                                                                             90.90
                                                                                                                                    90


                                                                                                                     Accuracy (%)
                                                           Accuracy (%)
                                                                          80
         Effisyn   1.80                                                   70

                                                                          60                                                        80
                                                                                                         COG
     GDSR(Ours)                                                                                          Effisyn
                   1.00



                                                                          50                             SPL
                                                                                                         DSR
               0          50   100   150   200   250                      40                                                        70   Structural        Semantic        Default
                                                                           Top 40%        Top 50%          Top 60%
                     Normalized Inference Time                                       The Top x% Metric                                                Feature Categories

                               (a)                                                         (b)                                                            (c)

Figure 1: (a) The inference time of the GNN model is significantly larger than other approaches
when executed on CPU-based machines. (b) The human-designed approach and existing SOTA
symbolic learning approaches cannot generalize well to unseen circuits, i.e., the circuit symbolic
generalization problem, while the GNN model exhibits good generalization capability. (c) The
circuit node features exhibit separability without compromising the predictive performance.
The prediction and prune framework for LO Heuristics Many effective LO heuristics have been
developed to tackle the LO task. These LO heuristics follow the same paradigm as shown in Figure
5. Specifically, they apply transformations to subgraphs rooted at each node (i.e., the node-level
transformations) sequentially for all nodes on an input circuit. Note that the major differences among
these heuristics lie in the node-level transformation mechanism. Recently, (Wang et al.) found that
a large number of node-level transformations in many LO heuristics are ineffective, which makes
applying these heuristics highly time-consuming. To address this challenge, (Wang et al.) proposes
a prediction and prune framework that incorporates a scoring function to select those nodes with
top k scores as predicted effective samples and avoid applying transformations on those ineffective
samples to improve the efficiency of LO heuristics. However, the scoring function could significantly
degrade the optimization performance compared to default heuristics when inaccurately classifying
effective nodes in unseen circuits. Therefore, it is essential for the scoring function to achieve high
generalization performance for comparable optimization performance.
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) MCTS is an effective method for sequential decision-making
problems (Świechowski et al., 2023; Geng et al., 2024). It builds a search tree of possible states and
uses stochastic simulations to assess node values, allowing efficient exploration of complex decision
spaces. The MCTS algorithm follows four steps: (a) Selection: The agent navigates through the
search tree based on a policy until it reaches an expandable or terminal node. (b) Expansion: At an
expandable node, a new child node is added to the tree. (c) Simulation: The agent runs simulations
from the current node to a terminal state. (d) Backpropagation: The results are used to update the
statistics of nodes along the path to the root. To balance exploration and exploitation, MCTS always
selects the action based on the Upper Confidence Bound for Trees (UCT) (Kocsis & Szepesvári,
2006): U CT (s, a) = Q(s, a) + c ln[N     (s)]
                                      N (s,a) . where Q(s, a) is the average reward for action a in state
s, N (s) is the visit count of s, and N (s, a) is the count for choosing a in s.

3   M OTIVATING R ESULTS
Problem Challenge: Limitations For Existing Scoring Functions To learn a scoring function that
can accurately identify ineffective transformations for efficient LO, (Wang et al.) proposes a well-
designed graph neural network, i.e., COG. However, we observe two limitations that severely limit
their wide application to modern LO tools:
        • Limited inference efficiency on CPUs. We compare the inference time of COG, the human-
          designed approach Effisyn (Li et al., 2023), and our symbolic discovery method GESD on
          a CPU-based machine. The results in Figure1a support the observation above.
        • The ’black nature’ of the learned scoring function. Deep learning models like GNN are of-
          ten considered uninterpretable, which hinders a deeper understanding of the learned func-
          tions and raises safety concerns among researchers.


                                                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To alleviate the two aforementioned limitations, a one-step further idea is to employ lighter mod-
els. (Li et al., 2023) proposes a human-designed nonlinear scoring function to replace the time-
consuming GNNs. However, this method faces a significant limitation:
       • The poor generalization performance. The results in Figure1b demonstrate that the human-
         designed approach struggles to achieve high generalization performance on the open-source
         and industrial benchmarks, which significantly degrades the QoR of the optimized circuits.
Therefore, how to find a lightweight, interpretable, and generalizable scoring function is the key
problem for efficient LO.
Technical Challenge: The Circuit Symbolic Generalization Problem in LO In this subsection,
we first illustrate the motivation for symbolic discovery. Then we provide a detailed description of
the circuit symbolic generalization problem in LO.
Firstly, we found that lightweight and high-performance symbolic functions exist in the circuit data.
Specifically, we employ a state-of-the-art (SOTA) symbolic learning approach (Sun et al., 2023) on
a widely-used benchmark. The results in Figure 6 demonstrate that among all of the 15 circuits,
the prediction recall of 14 circuits exceeds 99%, which further demonstrates the existence of high-
performance symbolic functions. Moreover, the results in Figure 1a show that the learned symbolic
functions are very efficient. Therefore, there exist lightweight and high-performance symbolic func-
tions in our LO task, which motivate our circuit symbolic learning framework.
However, we found it challenging to learn a symbolic function that can well generalize to unseen
circuits from the training dataset. Specifically, we evaluate a well-designed GNN (Wang et al.) and
two SOTA symbolic learning methods, i.e., SPL (Sun et al., 2023) and DSR (Petersen et al., 2020)
on the open-source and industrial benchmarks under the same generalization evaluation strategy (see
Section 5). The results in Figure 1b show that the predictive performance of the learned symbolic
functions is significantly lower than that of the GNN, demonstrating the poor generalization capa-
bilities of existing symbolic learning approaches. Thus, the major challenge of developing CMO is
to learn symbolic functions that can well tackle the circuit symbolic generalization problem.

4     M ETHOD
In this section, we first provide a detailed description of the novel data-driven circuit symbolic
learning framework (CMO) (see Figure 2). Then, we present our graph enhanced symbolic discovery
(GESD) framework that can enhance the generalization ability of the learned symbolic functions via
graph distillation (see Figure 3). Finally, we demonstrate how we deploy the learned lightweight
and interpretable symbolic functions in modern LO tools.

4.1   T HE DATA - DRIVEN C IRCUIT S YMBOLIC L EARNING F RAMEWORK

As shown in Figure 1a and Figure 1b, we found that existing GNN-based and human-designed ap-
proaches struggle to balance inference efficiency, interpretability, and generalization performance.
To address this problem, we propose a novel data-driven circuit symbolic learning framework,
namely CMO, to discover symbolic functions that combine the advantages of the two paradigms.
Data Collection To generate the circuit dataset, we apply a LO heuristic to optimize the circuit,
which applies various node-level transformations to each node in the input circuit. For each node
in the circuit, we generate a data pair (xi , yi ), where xi ∈ Rd denotes the i-th node feature and
yi ∈ R denotes the corresponding label. Specifically, if the node-level transformation is effective
at the node xi , then we set yi = 1. Otherwise, yi = 0. Given the LO heuristic and N samples, we
generate a dataset D = {xi , yi }N
                                 i=1 and aim to find a lightweight and interpretable symbolic function
from this dataset that can well generalize to unseen circuits.
Structural-Semantic Feature Decomposition Given an input circuit, we choose the node features
that contain as much as possible information about the LO task. Therefore, we use the feature vec-
tor employed in (Wang et al.), which contains abundant structural and semantic (i.e., functionality)
information of the circuit nodes (see Appendix E.4). However, the high dimensionality of the ap-
plied features increases the search space and makes it challenging to discover lightweight symbolic
functions that effectively capture information from the circuit data. To address this challenge, we
propose a structural-semantic feature decomposition mechanism, which separates the node features


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 optimized node         CS      node label             node labels      node features          node labels
                                      Heuristic


                                                node feature                                                         node
                                                                       node       semantic      structural
                                                                      labels      features       features           labels


       1. Data Collection for Symbolic Discovery

                   𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑚                  𝑓𝑠𝑡𝑟   structural            GESD for semantic          GESD for structural
      semantic
       feature                                   feature               function learning          function learning
                    𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑚      score𝑠𝑡𝑟

                            ADD
                                                                               𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑚                          𝑓𝑠𝑡𝑟
                          scorenode

             3. Feature Information Fusion                         2. Structural-Semantic Feature Decomposition

          Figure 2: Illustration of the novel data-driven circuit symbolic learning Framework.

xi into structural (xstr
                     i ) and semantic (xi
                                           sem
                                               ) components for symbolic discovery. The rationale
behind this feature decomposition is based on a key observation—the circuit features exhibit separa-
bility without compromising the predictive performance of the scoring model as shown in Figure 1c.
Specifically, we decompose the node features into structural and semantic components to train the
GNN model, and the results show that the GNN trained on decomposed features could achieve com-
parable prediction performance to that trained on default features. By applying this decomposition,
the original sixty-nine feature variables are reduced to five structural features, thereby significantly
shrinking the symbolic search space and enabling lightweight symbolic function discovery.
GESD for Symbolic Function Learning After decomposing the init feature into structural and se-
mantic components, we collect structural data Dstr = {xstr          N
                                                            i , yi }i=1 and semantic data Dsem =
   sem     N             str                                    sem
{xi , yi }i=1 , where xi refers to structural node feature and xi refers to semantic node feature.
To capture structural information, we employ our Graph Enhanced Symbolic Discovery (GESD)
framework to learn a mathematical symbolic function f str : Rd → R (see Section 4.2), as the
values of structural features can be approximated as continuous data, making them suitable for con-
tinuous mathematical symbolic regression. In contrast, learning mathematical functions for semantic
information is challenging due to the discrete and binary nature of both feature values and labels.
Thus, to capture semantic information, we formulate the semantic function as a Boolean symbolic
learning problem, i.e., employing our GESD framework to learn a boolean function f sem : Bd → B
that can accurately identify the effective nodes, where B = {0, 1} denotes the boolean domain.
Feature Information Fusion After discovering the structural and functional symbolic functions, we
get the score si for a node in an unseen circuit using the following equation:
                                         si = f str (xstr
                                                      i )+w∗f
                                                              sem sem
                                                                 (xi )                                                       (1)
w is a weight value in the range [0, 1] that balances the two types of information. Due to limited
space, please refer to Algorithm 3 for a detailed explanation of the derivation process of si .

4.2     G RAPH E NHANCED S YMBOLIC D ISCOVERY F RAMEWORK
To address the circuit symbolic generalization problem (shown in Figure 1b), we introduce the
Graph Enhanced Symbolic Discovery (GESD) framework (see Figure 3) which incorporates the
strong generalization capability of a well-designed GNN model into our symbolic tree searching
process. Note that both the structural and semantic functions follow the same symbolic discovery
framework, differing only in training details. Therefore, we provide the implementation details of
the semantic symbolic learning process in Appendix E.3.
Symbolic Operators In our task, we use an expression tree to express the symbolic functions. The
mathematical operators used to generate the expression tree are {+, −, ×, ÷, log, exp, sin, cos}.
We didn’t employ placeholders to generate constants while introducing an inner optimization loop
generally requires higher training costs (Sun et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024). Moreover, we found that
some complex operators like exp, sin, cos could achieve high prediction performance for the five
dimension structural features. Therefore, we use the aforementioned operators.


                                                               5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                       Repeat
                        Selection                                   Expansion                      Simulation                       Propagation
                                        Q = 0.4                                                                                                       Q = 0.5
                                        N = 50                                +                               +                               +       N = 60
                              +
                        ×               ?                             ×            𝑠𝑖𝑛              ×                 𝑠𝑖𝑛             ×           𝑠𝑖𝑛

                   𝑥          𝑥                                 𝑥         𝑥                    𝑥          𝑥                     𝑥         𝑥
          Q = 0.1           Max             Q = 0.3           Randomly                       Randomly                                                     Q = 0.4
          N = 10            UCT             N = 20              Pick                           Pick                                                       N = 30
                +                               +                         +                               +                                   +
           ×            𝑙𝑜𝑔             ×            𝑠𝑖𝑛              ×            𝑠𝑖𝑛              ×                 𝑠𝑖𝑛            ×            𝑠𝑖𝑛

      𝑥        𝑥                  𝑥         𝑥                   𝑥         𝑥            −       𝑥         𝑥            −         𝑥         𝑥           −

                                       GNN Teacher                                           Simulation
                                                                 𝑧𝑣               𝑦𝑣                         +
                                                                                                    ×                 𝑠𝑖𝑛
                                                                                                                                                              Q = 0.1
                                                                    Distillation               𝑥          𝑥           −                                       N = 10
                                      Expression Tree
                                                                     Loss (L)                                                       10 simulations
                                            +                                                                     𝑥         y        Reward = 0.1
                                        ×           𝑠𝑖𝑛         𝑦′𝑣
                                                                                                          𝜌𝑛
                                  𝑥         𝑥       −                                      𝑅𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑 =
           structural                                                                                   (1 − 𝐿)
            features                            𝑥         y                                                                          +    −       ×       ÷
           L = λ 𝑳𝒍𝒂𝒃𝒆𝒍 (ෝ
                         𝒚𝒗 , 𝒚𝒗 )+(1-λ)𝑳𝒕𝒆𝒂𝒄𝒉𝒆𝒓 (ෝ
                                                  𝒚𝒗 , 𝒛𝒗 )                                                                         𝑠𝑖𝑛 𝑐𝑜𝑠 𝑒𝑥𝑝 𝑙𝑜𝑔

     Enhance the symbolic function via graph distillation                                                                       symbolic operators

Figure 3: Overview of GESD. GESD employs a Monte Carlo Tree Search algorithm to search in
the large and discrete symbolic space. The major novelty of GESD is that we distill dark knowledge
from a well-designed GNN into the symbolic tree searching process, thus enhancing the generaliza-
tion capability of the learned symbolic functions.
Generator of the Symbolic Tree Motivated by the strengths of Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) in
efficiently exploring large and complex symbolic spaces (Sun et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024), we em-
ploy MCTS to generate symbolic trees. We define the state s as the pre-order traversal of the current
expression tree and action a as the symbolic operators or variables added to the state. Specifically,
our MCTS includes four steps: selection, expansion, simulation, and propagation. (1) Selection.
In the selection phase, our MCTS agent traverses the current expression tree and selects an action
with the maximum UCT. To ensure the legalization of generated expressions, at the current state
st = [a1 , a2 , . . . , at ], the MCTS agent masks out the invalid action for the current non-terminal
node and on that basis selects a valid action as action at+1 . (2) Expansion. Once the selection
phase reaches an expandable node—a node that not all of its children have been visited—our MCTS
agent expands it by randomly selecting one of its unvisited valid children. (3) Simulation. Given
the current state and the expanded node, we perform simulations by randomly selecting the next
node until the expression tree is completed. Specifically, we perform 10 simulations and return the
maximum simulated reward rather than the average reward for Q(s, a) to find the unique optimal
symbolic solution, which is a greedy search heuristic different from traditional MCTS algorithm
(Świechowski et al., 2023). (4) Backpropogation After the simulation, we update the maximum
rewards Q and visited time of nodes N along the path from the current node to the root. The search
algorithm repeatedly cycles through the aforementioned steps until the stopping criterion is met.
Reward Function To evaluate the symbolic function projected from an expression tree in the sim-
ulation phase, we define a reward r based on the function and circuit data. Specifically, we define
                     ηn
the reward as r = (1−L)   . Here, L is the loss function shown in eq 2. To maintain the conciseness of
the learned symbolic functions for high efficiency and good interpretability, we follow (Sun et al.,
2023) to incorporate a penalty factor into the reward. Specifically, η denotes the penalty constant
range in (0, 1) and n is the length of the pre-order traversal of the current expression tree.
Enhancing the symbolic function via graph distillation Previous studies (Wang et al.) proposed a
carefully designed, complex GNN model that effectively addresses the challenge of poor generaliza-
tion caused by large distribution shifts in circuit domains. However, we found it hard for a symbolic
function to capture this crucial generalization information, i.e., the circuit symbolic generalization
problem (shown in Figure 1b). The main reason is that, to maintain the simplicity of the learned
symbolic functions, we use node features as input instead of subgraphs, which inherently contain


                                                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


less domain-invariant information. To address this challenge, we establish a teacher-student frame-
work that distills the dark knowledge, i.e., the generalization information, from the teacher GNN’s
output to strategically guide the student symbolic tree generation. Specifically, we first train a GNN
on the training dataset and then employ the prediction output (ŷ), the output of GNN (z), and true
labels (y) to evaluate every complete expression tree. The evaluation metric is defined as
                               L = λLlabel (ŷ, y) + (1 − λ)Lteacher (ŷ, z)                         (2)
Llabel is introduced to incorporate label information, while Lteacher is used to bring in teacher
knowledge, providing additional guidance for symbolic function learning. Different from previ-
ous works which use KL-divergence for Lteacher (Zhang et al., 2022) to learn the distribution of the
teacher’s output, we employ the mean squared error (MSE) to directly learn the generalization in-
formation from the GNN. The key motivation lies in the discovery of a simple nonlinear mapping
between circuit features and the GNN’s output, which achieves a generalization performance com-
parable to that of the GNN itself (see Figure 8). Moreover, note that the number of effective nodes
is far fewer than ineffective nodes, which brings a severe imbalance between positive and negative
samples in the circuit data. Therefore, we follow (Wang et al.) to leverage the focal loss (Lin et al.,
2017) as the Lstudent . Due to limited space, please refer to Appendix E.5 for more implementation
details of our graph distillation approach.
4.3 T HE DEPLOYMENT TO MODERN LO T OOLS
After the training process, we obtain a pair of symbolic functions that score and prune the effective
transformations. Intuitively, this symbolic function can be regarded as a data-driven version of the
human-designed function (Effisyn) in modern LO tools. Moreover, our learned symbolic functions
are concise one-line functions that are easy and reliable for deployment. Thus, similar to Effisyn (Li
et al., 2023), we directly compile the learned policy to a lightweight shared object using a simple
script and then integrate it into the LO tools package.

5   E XPERIMENT
We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate CMO, which have four main parts: Experiment 1.
To demonstrate the superior performance of our CMO in terms of generalization performance and
efficiency. Experiment 2. To demonstrate that our approach can not only prompt the efficiency of
the Mfs2 heuristic but also improve the Quality of Results (QoR). Experiment 3. Perform carefully
designed ablation studies to provide further insight into CMO. Experiment 4. To show the appealing
features of CMO in terms of online inference efficiency and interpretability.
Benchmarks We evaluate CMO on two widely-used public benchmarks, EPFL (Amarú et al., 2015)
and IWLS (Albrecht, 2005), and one industrial benchmark from an anonymous semiconductor com-
pany. These benchmarks consist of 69 circuits in total, including very large-scale circuits with up to
twenty million nodes. Due to limited space, we defer more details to Appendix D.1.
Experimental setup Throughout all experiments, we use ABC (Brayton et al., 2010) as the backend
LO framework. ABC is a state-of-the-art open-source LO framework and is widely used in research
of machine learning for LO (Pasandi et al., 2023). Moreover, we choose the Mfs2 (Mishchenko et al.,
2011)—one of the most time-consuming LO heuristics—as the backend heuristic to optimize. The
teacher graph learning model for symbolic distillation is a well-designed 2-layer graph convolutional
neural network (GCNN) (Wang et al.). Experiments are performed on a single machine that contains
32 Intel XeonR E5-2667 v4 CPUs. More details are provided in Appendix E.1.
Evaluation Metrics and Evaluated Methods Throughout all experiments, we evaluate our method
in two separate phases, i.e., the offline and online phases. In the offline phase, we evaluate the
prediction recall of the effective nodes. We empirically show that the QoR improves with increased
prediction recall in Appendix C.2. Thus, it is important to achieve high recall for comparable QoR
with the default heuristics. Specifically, we present details as follows. (1) Evaluation metrics Under
the prediction and prune framework (see Figure 5), we view the prediction task as a scoring task and
predict nodes with top k scores to be positive. Under this prediction, we define a top k accuracy
metric by the fraction of true positive nodes that are predicted to be positive, i.e., prediction recall.
We defer details on this metric to Appendix E.1.2. (2) Evaluated methods In the offline phase, we
evaluate the well-designed GNN approach COG (Wang et al.), the human-designed approach Effisyn
(Li et al., 2023), and our CMO. COG is a well-designed 2-layer graph convolutional neural network.
Effisyn is a human-designed nonlinear function with key parameters manually derived from circuit

                                                    7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Table 1: Our CMO achieves comparable prediction recall with the well-designed GNN, i.e. COG,
 and significantly outperforms the human-designed approach, i.e., Effisyn.

                       Open-source
                                                   Hyp       Multiplier       Square        DesPerf         Ethernet         Conmax
                        Circuits
                         Method               Recall ↑        Recall ↑        Recall ↑      Recall ↑        Recall ↑         Recall ↑
                          COG                      0.99         0.97           1.00              0.74        0.68             0.92
                         Effisyn                   0.94         0.44           0.46              0.51        0.32             0.68
                       CMO (Ours)                  0.99         0.97           0.98              0.80        0.72             0.85
                Very Large-scale &
                                                  Sixteen      Twenty           Ci1              Ci2          Ci3              Ci4
                Industrial Circuits
                         Method               Recall ↑        Recall ↑        Recall ↑      Recall ↑        Recall ↑         Recall ↑
                          COG                      0.86         0.90           0.89              0.85        1.00             0.94
                         Effisyn                    0.1          0.1           0.79              0.91        0.98             0.82
                       CMO (Ours)                  0.86         0.85           1.00              1.00        0.99             0.96


                 1.0             Online Evaluation on Open-source and Industiral Benchmarks
                 0.9
                 0.8
                 0.7
Normalized Runtime


                 0.6
                 0.5
                 0.4
                 0.3
                 0.2
                 0.1                        CMO-Mfs2 (Ours)                   COG-Mfs2                  Effisyn-Mfs2
                 0.0    Hyp   Multiplier Square     Desperf Ethernet Conmax   Sixteen   Twenty      Ci1      Ci2       Ci3       Ci4
 Figure 4: We compare our CMO with the COG and Effisyn on online runtime. The results demon-
 strate that our approach achieves significant runtime improvement with the baselines.

 features. CMO is our proposed graph enhanced symbolic discovery framework. Moreover, we
 compare our CMO with the other five lightweight baselines. The baselines include two state-of-the-
 art (SOTA) searching-based SR approaches, two traditional lightweight ML models, and a Random
 approach. Please refer to Appendix E.2 for the implementation details of these baselines. In the
 Online phase, we evaluate the efficiency and QoR of CMO. Specifically, we present details as
 follows. (1) Evaluation metrics In terms of the efficiency of the heuristics, we use the runtime
 metric. In terms of QoR, we mainly use the optimized node, i.e., the number of the optimized
 circuit nodes, which has a significant impact on the final chip area. Moreover, we also use the depth
 (i.e., level) of the optimized circuits, which is a proxy metric for the delay of the designed chip.
 (2) Evaluated methods In the online phase, we introduce a new heuristic called X-Mfs2, which
 integrates the learned scoring function ”X” into the default Mfs2 heuristic. In our experiments, ”X”
 refers to the COG, Effisyn, the five lightewight baselines and our CMO.
 Evaluation Strategy In real industrial scenarios, we hope that the trained model can generalize to
 many unseen circuits. Inspired by the leave-one-domain-out cross-validation strategy commonly
 used in previous literature (Wang et al., 2022a), we design twelve leave-one-out datasets for evalu-
 ation. Specifically, given a benchmark, we construct a dataset by setting one circuit as the testing
 dataset, and the other circuits as the training dataset. Please refer to D.2 for more details.
 Experiment 1. Comparitive Evaluation In this subsection, we compare our CMO with state-of-
 the-art GPU-based (COG) and human-designed (Effisyn) methods in terms of generalization perfor-


                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: We compare the Default Mfs2 heuristic with our 2CMO-Mfs2 heuristic with the hyperpa-
rameter k set as 30%, 40% and 50% on open-source and industrial circuits. Optimized Nd denotes
the node number (size) of circuits, and Lev denotes the level (depth) of circuits. We define an
Improvement metric by M (Default)−M  (Ours)
                           M (Default)      , where M (·) denotes the Nd, Lev, or Time.

 Open-source Circuits                                      Hyp                                                           Desperf
                                              Improvement ↑                    Improvement ↑                      Improvement ↑                  Improvement ↑
        Method                  Lev ↓                             Time (s) ↓                   Optimized Nd ↓                       Time (s) ↓
                                                (Lev, %)                         (Time, %)                      (Optimized Nd, %)                  (Time, %)
     Default (Mfs2)            8259.00              NA             319.33            NA          30853.00              NA             36.76           NA
  CMO-Mfs (0.5, Ours)          8259.00               0             158.49           50.37        30910.00             -0.18           26.40          28.19
 2CMO-Mfs (0.3, Ours)          5762.00             30.23           127.51           60.07        29392.00              2.31           30.16          17.96
 2CMO-Mfs (0.4, Ours)          5762.00             30.23           170.45           46.62        29175.67              2.50           38.20          -3.92
very Large-scale Circuits                               Sixteen                                                            Twenty
                                               Improvement ↑                   Improvement ↑                      Improvement ↑                  Improvement ↑
        Method              Optimized Nd ↓                        Time (s) ↓                   Optimized Nd ↓                       Time (s) ↓
                                             (Optimized Nd, %)                   (Time, %)                      (Optimized Nd, %)                  (Time, %)
    Default (Mfs2)           6017631.00             NA            78784.04           NA         7693089.00             NA           108735.49         NA
 CMO-Mfs2 (0.5, Ours)        6018729.00           -0.001          32001.27          59.38       7694455.00           -0.002         56965.94         47.61
 2CMO-Mfs2 (0.3, Ours)       5434092.00            9.70           36425.15          53.77       6877483.00            10.60          59786.55        45.02
 2CMO-Mfs2 (0.4, Ours)       5433745.00            9.70           46572.91          40.80       6877158.00            10.61          75956.18        30.15
   Industrial Circuits                                     Ci1                                                                Ci2
                                              Improvement ↑                    Improvement ↑                      Improvement ↑                  Improvement ↑
        Method                  Lev ↓                             Time (s) ↓                   Optimized Nd ↓                       Time (s) ↓
                                                (Lev, %)                         (Time, %)                      (Optimized Nd, %)                  (Time, %)
    Default (Mfs2)              47.00              NA              180.35            NA          99245.00             NA              78.07           NA
 CMO-Mfs2 (0.5, Ours)           47.00              0.00            113.08           37.30        99245.00             0.00            45.61          41.58
 2CMO-Mfs2 (0.3, Ours)          45.00              4.26            142.96           20.73        94240.00             5.04            64.37          17.55
 2CMO-Mfs2 (0.4, Ours)          45.00              4.26            177.04            1.84        93184.00             6.11            81.07          -3.84



mance. The evaluation follows the proposed generalization strategy and is conducted on two widely
used open-source benchmarks and one industrial benchmark. We use the offline prediction recall
as the evaluation metrix. Results in Table 1 shows that our CMO outperforms the GNN on half of
the circuits in terms of the prediction recall, demonstrating the strong generalization capability of
our CMO. Moreover, our CMO achieves an average improvement of 36% in prediction recall when
compared to Effisyn. Additionally, CMO achieves a prediction recall exceeding 85% across most
test circuits, indicating it can maintain applying most of the effective transformations. In the online
phase, we mainly focus on the efficiency of the X-Mfs2 heuristics. To ensure a fair comparison
for efficiency, we maintain comparable optimization performance across all comparison methods.
However, due to the significant prediction shift between Effisyn and our CMO as shown in Table 1,
we have to adjust a higher k for Effisyn to achieve comparable optimization performance (see Ap-
pendix C.3 for the optimization results). Thus, we maintain the top 50% accuracy for our CMO and
COG and apply the top 70% for Effisyn. The results in Figure 4 show that our CMO-Mfs2 signifi-
cantly outperforms the baselines in terms of efficiency. Specifically, our CMO achieves an average
improvement of 21.05% and 15.07% over the COG and Effisyn on the open-source and industrial
benchmarks. Overall, the offline and online results demonstrate that our CMO can not only achieve
comparable prediction performance to the well-designed teacher GNN but also outperform all of the
baselines in terms of heuristic efficiency. Due to limited space, we provide the online optimization
results and more comparison results with other lightweight baselines in Appendix C.3.
Experiment 2. Improving Efficiency and QoR of the LO heuristic In this subsection, we con-
duct experiments on six challenging circuits to demonstrate that our method can not only reduce
runtime but also improve QoR, such as the sizes and depths of optimized circuits. The size and
depth are critical metrics in chip design, as they are proxies for the final area and delay of chips. We
first show that our CMO could improve the efficiency of the Mfs2 heuristic with comparable opti-
mization performance. Specifically, the results in Table 2 demonstrate that our CMO significantly
achieves an average runtime improvement of 44.07% with marginal node degradation. In particu-
lar, our CMO achieves 2.5× faster runtime on the very large-scale circuit Sixteen (about 13 hours).
Then, we can sequentially apply CMO-Mfs2 multiple times rather than once to improve the QoR
(i.e., 2CMO-Mfs2), as the runtime of CMO-Mfs2 is significantly shorter than that of Default Mfs2
heuristic. To achieve faster runtime, we set the hyperparameter k as 30% and 40% rather than 50%
to achieve faster runtime. Table 2 shows that 2CMO-Mfs2 significantly reduces the size and depth of
optimized circuits while achieving faster runtime compared with the Default Mfs2 heuristic. Specif-
ically, 2CMO-Mfs2 with k = 40% reduces the size/depth by 10.57% on average while reducing
the runtime by 18.60% on the test circuits. Furthermore, suppose we want to achieve faster runtime
in certain real-world scenarios, then we can set k as a smaller value such as 30%. Table 2 shows
that 2CMO-Mfs2 with k = 30% reduces the size/depth by 10.36% on average with 35.85% runtime
reduction on the open-source and industrial circuits. In particular, our method achieves a significant
reduction over the depth on Hyp, improving the level by 30.23%. Overall, the results suggest that


                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


our efficient CMO-Mfs2 can significantly improve the QoR while achieving faster runtime, yielding
a substantial economic value in chip design. Please refer to Appendix C.4 for more results.
Experiment 3. Ablation Study In this subsection,           Table 3: The ablation study results.
we conduct an ablation study to understand the indi-             Circuit         Multiplier  Square   Hyp
vidual contribution of each component of our CMO.                Method          Recall ↑   Recall ↑ Recall ↑
                                                                 CMO               0.96       0.98    0.99
To this end, we compare our CMO with its variants,        CMO without GESD         0.91       0.96    0.67
i.e., CMO without GESD and CMO without SFD              CMO without SFD and GESD   0.52       0.72    0.93

on two widely-used open-source benchmarks. The                   Circuit         DesPerf    Ethernet Conmax
                                                                 Method          Recall ↑   Recall ↑ Recall ↑
results in Table 3 suggest the following two con-
                                                                 CMO               0.80       0.72    0.84
clusions. First, CMO without GESD significantly           CMO without GESD         0.80       0.44    0.76
outperforms CMO without GESD and SFD in terms           CMO without SFD and GESD   0.60       0.42    0.45

of offline prediction recall, demonstrating the impor-
tance of structural-semantic symbolic learning formulation. Second, CMO also significantly outper-
forms CMO without GESD. This demonstrates that GESD can effectively distill a high-performance
symbolic function from the teacher GNN. We defer detailed results in Appendix C.5.
Experiment 4. Strengths for Deployment In this subsection, we conduct extensive experiments
to demonstrate the appealing features of our CMO on high optimization performance, inference
efficiency, and interpretability. Specifically, we present a detailed analysis as follows.
Inference Efficiency We compare the model
inference time of our CMO with the GNN ap- Table 4: The model inference results show that
proach and human-designed approach on open- our CMO are extremely efficient for inference
source circuits and industrial circuits. Results compared to the other approaches when executed
in Table 4 demonstrate that CMO learned scor- on CPU-based LO tools.
ing functions are extremely efficient on purely                 Hyp     DesPerf   Sixteen  Twenty       Ci1       Ci2
CPU-based machines, achieving a speedup            Method    Time(s) ↓ Time(s) ↓ Time(s) ↓ Time(s) ↓ Time(s) ↓ Time(s) ↓
                                                     COG       28.28     6.24     1377.66  1787.07     30.00     18.23
of several hundred times compared to GNN.           Effisyn    0.15      0.06      9.67    12.19       0.48      0.22
                                                  CMO (Ours)   0.06      0.05      4.16    4.96        0.17      0.06
The efficiency comes from both the graph-
independency inference and the concise sym-
bolic functions. Moreover, while the human-designed scoring function demonstrates notable infer-
ence efficiency, our method achieves superior speed as we learn a simpler scoring function.
Interpretability Compared to GNN, CMO generates a concise symbolic function with better inter-
pretability, enhancing simplicity and reliability for employment. We report the learned structural
functions and boolean semantic functions in Table 16. We observed that x2 , which represents the
node level, is approximately positively correlated with the node scores, indicating its significance in
ineffective node prediction. Furthermore, some critical hyperparameters in the traditional human-
designed scoring function heavily rely on the node level (Li et al., 2023). The intuition behind the
design of this scoring function is highly similar to the learned symbolic policies in Table 16. Thus,
we believe our CMO can help researchers further understand and design effective scoring functions.

6    C ONCLUSION
To enable efficient Logic Optimization (LO), previous studies propose to use scoring functions to
predict and prune ineffective nodes in LO heuristics. However, existing functions struggle to balance
inference efficiency, interpretability, and generalization performance. To address this, we propose
CMO, a novel Circuit Symbolic Learning Framework that learns efficient, interpretable, and high-
performance symbolic functions. The key contribution of CMO is a graph-enhanced symbolic learn-
ing framework that distills dark knowledge from a well-designed GNN to improve the generalization
of learned functions. Extensive experiments on three challenging benchmarks show that the inter-
pretable learned functions outperform previous SOTA GPU-based and human-designed methods in
terms of efficiency and generalization. Moreover, CMO significantly improves the Mfs2 heuristic’s
efficiency with comparable optimization performance on a CPU-based machine, achieving up to
2.5× faster runtime.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
In this study, to ensure the reproducibility of our approach, we provide key information from the
main text and Appendix as follows.


                                                          10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     1. Algorithm. We provide the architecture and pseudocode of our approach in Section 4 and
        Appendix E.5. Moreover, we will make our source code publicly available once the paper
        is accepted for publication.
     2. Source Code. To facilitate the evaluation process and support a thorough review, we have
        released our source code at the following link: https://gitee.com/yinqi-bai/
        cmo.git.
     3. Experimental Details. We provide experiment settings in Section 5 and Appendix E.1.

7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank all the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and valu-
able suggestions. This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China under con-
tract 2022ZD0119801 and the National Nature Science Foundations of China grants U23A20388,
62021001 and 623B1022.

R EFERENCES
Christoph Albrecht. Iwls 2005 benchmarks. 2005.
Luca Amarú et al. The epfl combinational benchmark suite. (CONF), 2015.
Augusto André Souza Berndt et al. A review of machine learning in logic synthesis. Journal of
  Integrated Circuits and Systems, 17(3):1–12, 2022.
Valeria Bertacco et al. The disjunctive decomposition of logic functions. In iccad, volume 97, pp.
  78–82, 1997.
Luca Biggio, Tommaso Bendinelli, Alexander Neitz, Aurelien Lucchi, and Giambattista Parascan-
  dolo. Neural symbolic regression that scales. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 936–945. Pmlr, 2021.
Alan Mishchenko Robert Brayton. Scalable logic synthesis using a simple circuit structure. 6:15–22,
  2006.
Alan Mishchenko Satrajit Chatterjee Robert Brayton and Xinning Wang Timothy Kam. Technology
  mapping with boolean matching, supergates and choices.
Robert Brayton et al. Abc: An academic industrial-strength verification tool. In Computer Aided
  Verification: 22nd International Conference, CAV 2010, Edinburgh, UK, July 15-19, 2010. Pro-
  ceedings 22, pp. 24–40. Springer, 2010.
Robert K Brayton. The decomposition and factorization of boolean expressions. ISCA-82, pp.
  49–54, 1982.
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the
  22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 785–794,
  2016.
William J Cook, William H Cunningham, William R Pulleyblank, and Alexander Schrijver. Combi-
 natorial optimization. Unpublished manuscript, 10:75–93, 1994.
Miles Cranmer, Alvaro Sanchez Gonzalez, Peter Battaglia, Rui Xu, Kyle Cranmer, David Spergel,
 and Shirley Ho. Discovering symbolic models from deep learning with inductive biases. Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 33:17429–17442, 2020a.
Miles D. Cranmer, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Peter W. Battaglia, Rui Xu, Kyle Cranmer, David N.
 Spergel, and Shirley Ho. Discovering symbolic models from deep learning with inductive biases.
 CoRR, abs/2006.11287, 2020b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11287.
Stéphane d’Ascoli, Samy Bengio, Josh Susskind, and Emmanuel Abbé. Boolformer: Symbolic
   regression of logic functions with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12207, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Brunno A De Abreu, Augusto Berndt, Isac S Campos, Cristina Meinhardt, Jonata T Carvalho, Ma-
  teus Grellert, and Sergio Bampi. Fast logic optimization using decision trees. In 2021 IEEE
  International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2021.

Amir H Farrahi and Majid Sarrafzadeh. Complexity of the lookup-table minimization problem for
 fpga technology mapping. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits
 and Systems, 13(11):1319–1332, 1994.

Zijie Geng, Xijun Li, Jie Wang, Xiao Li, Yongdong Zhang, and Feng Wu. A deep instance genera-
  tive framework for milp solvers under limited data availability. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36:26025–26047, 2023a.

Zijie Geng, Shufang Xie, Yingce Xia, Lijun Wu, Tao Qin, Jie Wang, Yongdong Zhang, Feng Wu, and
  Tie-Yan Liu. De novo molecular generation via connection-aware motif mining. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.01129, 2023b.

Zijie Geng, Jie Wang, Ziyan Liu, Siyuan Xu, Zhentao Tang, Mingxuan Yuan, HAO Jianye, Yong-
  dong Zhang, and Feng Wu. Reinforcement learning within tree search for fast macro placement.
  In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Zijie Geng, Jie Wang, Xijun Li, Fangzhou Zhu, Jianye Hao, Bin Li, and Feng Wu. Differentiable
  integer linear programming. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2025a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=FPfCUJTsCn.

Zijie Geng, Jie Wang, Ziyan Liu, Siyuan Xu, Zhentao Tang, Shixiong Kai, Mingxuan Yuan, Jianye
  Hao, and Feng Wu. LaMPlace: Learning to optimize cross-stage metrics in macro placement.
  In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025b. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=YLIsIzC74j.

Jianping Gou, Baosheng Yu, Stephen J Maybank, and Dacheng Tao. Knowledge distillation: A
   survey. International Journal of Computer Vision, 129(6):1789–1819, 2021.

Arthur E Hoerl and Robert W Kennard. Ridge regression: applications to nonorthogonal problems.
  Technometrics, 12(1):69–82, 1970.

Abdelrahman Hosny, Soheil Hashemi, Mohamed Shalan, and Sherief Reda. Drills: Deep rein-
  forcement learning for logic synthesis. In 2020 25th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation
  Conference (ASP-DAC), pp. 581–586. IEEE, 2020.

Guyue Huang et al. Machine learning for electronic design automation: A survey. ACM Transactions
  on Design Automation of Electronic Systems (TODAES), 26(5):1–46, 2021.

Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Stéphane d’Ascoli, Guillaume Lample, and François Charton. End-to-
  end symbolic regression with transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:10269–10281, 2022.

Brucek Khailany. Accelerating chip design with machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2020
  ACM/IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD, pp. 33–33, 2020.

Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=SJU4ayYgl.

Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In European conference
  on machine learning, pp. 282–293. Springer, 2006.

Bernhard H Korte, Jens Vygen, B Korte, and J Vygen. Combinatorial optimization, volume 1.
  Springer, 2011.

Yufei Kuang, Jie Wang, Yuyan Zhou, Xijun Li, Fangzhou Zhu, HAO Jianye, and Feng Wu. Towards
  general algorithm discovery for combinatorial optimization: Learning symbolic branching policy
  from bipartite graph. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yufei Kuang, Jie Wang, Haoyang Liu, Fangzhou Zhu, Xijun Li, Jia Zeng, HAO Jianye, Bin Li,
  and Feng Wu. Rethinking branching on exact combinatorial optimization solver: The first deep
  symbolic discovery framework. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2024.
Xijun Li, Fangzhou Zhu, Hui-Ling Zhen, Weilin Luo, Meng Lu, Yimin Huang, Zhenan Fan, Zirui
  Zhou, Yufei Kuang, Zhihai Wang, Zijie Geng, Yang Li, Haoyang Liu, Zhiwu An, Muming Yang,
  Jianshu Li, Jie Wang, Junchi Yan, Defeng Sun, Tao Zhong, Yong Zhang, Jia Zeng, Mingxuan
  Yuan, Jianye Hao, Jun Yao, and Kun Mao. Machine learning insides optverse ai solver: Design
  principles and applications, 2024.
Xing Li, Chen Lei, et al. Effisyn: Efficient logic synthesis with dynamic scoring and pruning. In
  IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD). IEEE, 2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense
  object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  2980–2988, 2017.
Haotian Ling, Zhihai Wang, and Jie Wang. Learning to stop cut generation for efficient mixed-
  integer linear programming. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 38, pp. 20759–20767, 2024.
Haoyang Liu, Jie Wang, Wanbo Zhang, Zijie Geng, Yufei Kuang, Xijun Li, Bin Li, Yongdong
  Zhang, and Feng Wu. MILP-studio: MILP instance generation via block structure decomposition.
  In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=W433RI0VU4.
Haoyang Liu, Jie Wang, Zijie Geng, Xijun Li, Yuxuan Zong, Fangzhou Zhu, Jianye HAO, and Feng
  Wu. Apollo-MILP: An alternating prediction-correction neural solving framework for mixed-
  integer linear programming. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=mFY0tPDWK8.
Hongyu Liu, Haoyang Liu, Yufei Kuang, Jie Wang, and Bin Li. Deep symbolic optimization for
  combinatorial optimization: Accelerating node selection by discovering potential heuristics. In
  Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion, pp. 2067–
  2075, 2024b.
Daniela Sánchez Lopera, Lorenzo Servadei, Gamze Naz Kiprit, Souvik Hazra, Robert Wille, and
  Wolfgang Ecker. A survey of graph neural networks for electronic design automation. In 2021
  ACM/IEEE 3rd Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD (MLCAD), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2021.
Giovanni De Micheli. Synthesis and optimization of digital circuits. McGraw-Hill Higher Education,
  1994.
Azalia Mirhoseini, Anna Goldie, Mustafa Yazgan, Joe Wenjie Jiang, Ebrahim Songhori, Shen Wang,
  Young-Joon Lee, Eric Johnson, Omkar Pathak, Azade Nazi, et al. A graph placement methodol-
  ogy for fast chip design. Nature, 594(7862):207–212, 2021.
Alan Mishchenko, Sungmin Cho, Satrajit Chatterjee, and Robert Brayton. Combinational and se-
  quential mapping with priority cuts. In 2007 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-
  Aided Design, pp. 354–361. IEEE, 2007.
Alan Mishchenko, Robert Brayton, Jie-Hong R Jiang, and Stephen Jang. Scalable don’t-care-based
  logic optimization and resynthesis. ACM Transactions on Reconfigurable Technology and Systems
  (TRETS), 4(4):1–23, 2011.
Walter Lau Neto, Matheus Trevisan Moreira, Luca Amaru, Cunxi Yu, and Pierre-Emmanuel Gaillar-
 don. Read your circuit: leveraging word embedding to guide logic optimization. In Proceedings
 of the 26th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference, pp. 530–535, 2021.
Michael O’Neill. Riccardo poli, william b. langdon, nicholas f. mcphee: A field guide to genetic
 programming: Lulu. com, 2008, 250 pp, isbn 978-1-4092-0073-4, 2009.

                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ghasem Pasandi, Sreedhar Pratty, and James Forsyth. Aisyn: Ai-driven reinforcement learning-
  based logic synthesis framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06415, 2023.
Brenden K Petersen, Mikel Landajuela Larma, Terrell N Mundhenk, Claudio Prata Santiago,
  Soo Kyung Kim, and Joanne Taery Kim. Deep symbolic regression: Recovering mathematical
  expressions from data via risk-seeking policy gradients. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020.
Shubham Rai, Walter Lau Neto, Yukio Miyasaka, Xinpei Zhang, Mingfei Yu, Qingyang Yi,
  Masahiro Fujita, Guilherme B Manske, Matheus F Pontes, Leomar S da Rosa, et al. Logic syn-
  thesis meets machine learning: Trading exactness for generalization. In 2021 Design, Automation
  & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), pp. 1026–1031. IEEE, 2021.
Basireddy Karunakar Reddy, Srinivas Sabbavarapu, and Amit Acharyya. A new vlsi ic design
  automation methodology with reduced nre costs and time-to-market using the npn class represen-
  tation and functional symmetry. In 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems
  (ISCAS), pp. 177–180. IEEE, 2014.
Haoxing Ren and Jiang Hu. Machine Learning Applications in Electronic Design Automation.
  Springer Nature, 2023.
Srinivas Sabbavarapu, Karunakar Reddy Basireddy, and Amit Acharyya. A new dynamic library
  based ic design automation methodology using functional symmetry with npn class representation
  approach to reduce nre costs and time-to-market. In 2014 Fifth International Symposium on
  Electronic System Design, pp. 115–119. IEEE, 2014.
Zhihao Shi, Xize Liang, and Jie Wang. Lmc: Fast training of gnns via subgraph sampling with
  provable convergence. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=5VBBA91N6n.
Zhihao Shi, Jie Wang, Fanghua Lu, Hanzhu Chen, Defu Lian, Zheng Wang, Jieping Ye, and Feng
  Wu. Label deconvolution for node representation learning on large-scale attributed graphs against
  learning bias. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 46(12):11273–
  11286, 2024. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3459408.
Zhihao Shi, Jie Wang, Zhiwei Zhuang, Xize Liang, Bin Li, and Feng Wu. Accurate and scal-
  able graph neural networks via message invariance. In The Thirteenth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  UqrFPhcmFp.
Fangzheng Sun, Yang Liu, Jian-Xun Wang, and Hao Sun. Symbolic physics learner: Discov-
  ering governing equations via monte carlo tree search. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  ZTK3SefE8_Z.
Maciej Świechowski, Konrad Godlewski, Bartosz Sawicki, and Jacek Mańdziuk. Monte carlo tree
 search: A review of recent modifications and applications. Artificial Intelligence Review, 56(3):
 2497–2562, 2023.
Yijun Tian, Chuxu Zhang, Zhichun Guo, Xiangliang Zhang, and Nitesh Chawla. NOSMOG: Learn-
  ing noise-robust and structure-aware MLPs on graphs. In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop: New Frontiers
  in Graph Learning, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=nT897hw-hHD.
Jie Wang, Zhihai Wang, Xijun Li, Yufei Kuang, Zhihao Shi, Fangzhou Zhu, Mingxuan Yuan, Jia
   Zeng, Yongdong Zhang, and Feng Wu. Learning to cut via hierarchical sequence/set model for
   efficient mixed-integer programming. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel-
   ligence, pp. 1–17, 2024a. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3432716.
Jindong Wang, Cuiling Lan, et al. Generalizing to unseen domains: A survey on domain general-
   ization. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2022a.
Zhihai Wang, Lei Chen, Jie Wang, Yinqi Bai, Xing Li, Xijun Li, Mingxuan Yuan, HAO Jianye,
  Yongdong Zhang, and Feng Wu. A circuit domain generalization framework for efficient logic
  synthesis in chip design. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning.

                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhihai Wang, Jie Wang, Qi Zhou, Bin Li, and Houqiang Li. Sample-efficient reinforcement
  learning via conservative model-based actor-critic. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, 36(8):8612–8620, Jun. 2022b. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v36i8.20839. URL
  https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/20839.
Zhihai Wang, Xijun Li, Jie Wang, Yufei Kuang, Mingxuan Yuan, Jia Zeng, Yongdong Zhang, and
  Feng Wu. Learning cut selection for mixed-integer linear programming via hierarchical sequence
  model. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=Zob4P9bRNcK.
Zhihai Wang, Taoxing Pan, Qi Zhou, and Jie Wang. Efficient exploration in resource-restricted
  reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 37(8):
  10279–10287, Jun. 2023b. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v37i8.26224. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/
  index.php/AAAI/article/view/26224.
Zhihai Wang, Zijie Geng, Zhaojie Tu, Jie Wang, Yuxi Qian, Zhexuan Xu, Ziyan Liu, Siyuan Xu,
  Zhentao Tang, Shixiong Kai, et al. Benchmarking end-to-end performance of ai-based chip place-
  ment algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15026, 2024b.
Zhihai Wang, Jie Wang, Qingyue Yang, Yinqi Bai, Xing Li, Lei Chen, Jianye HAO, Mingxuan
  Yuan, Bin Li, Yongdong Zhang, and Feng Wu. Towards next-generation logic synthesis: A
  scalable neural circuit generation framework. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2024c. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  ZYNYhh3ocW.
Zhihai Wang, Jie Wang, Dongsheng Zuo, Yunjie Ji, Xinli Xia, Yuzhe Ma, Jianye Hao, Mingxuan
  Yuan, Yongdong Zhang, and Feng Wu. A hierarchical adaptive multi-task reinforcement learn-
  ing framework for multiplier circuit design. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
  Learning. PMLR, 2024d.
Zhihai Wang, Jie Wang, Xilin Xia, Dongsheng Zuo, Lei Chen, Yuzhe Ma, Jianye HAO, Mingxuan
  Yuan, and Feng Wu. Computing circuits optimization via model-based circuit genetic evolution.
  In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=KWH4UIoQKS.
Nan Wu, Yingjie Li, et al. Gamora: Graph learning based symbolic reasoning for large-scale boolean
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08256, 2023.
Yilong Xu, Yang Liu, and Hao Sun. Reinforcement symbolic regression machine. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=PJVUWpPnZC.
Shichang Zhang, Yozen Liu, Yizhou Sun, and Neil Shah. Graph-less neural networks: Teaching
  old MLPs new tricks via distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=4p6_5HBWPCw.


A    R ELATED W ORK
Learning-based Methods for Symbolic Discovery Several recent approaches utilize deep learn-
ing for symbolic discovery. These methods generally fall into three categories—Evolutionary, Pre-
trained, and Searching-based. Genetic programming (GP) (O’Neill, 2009) is one of the classic
evolutionary symbolic regression methods, operating by maintaining a population of expression
“individuals” that evolve using evolutionary operations such as selection, crossover, and mutation.
While GP can be effective, it tends to struggle with scalability for larger problems. In recent years,
pre-trained symbolic regression methods have shown advantages in fast inference and have success-
fully discovered large input (with up to twelve) symbolic functions (d’Ascoli et al., 2023; Biggio
et al., 2021; Kamienny et al., 2022). However, these methods are limited by high training costs and
data generalization challenges. Unlike the methods mentioned above, the searching-based method
explores the discrete symbolic operator space and finds the best function that maximizes the fitness
of the given dataset. The mainstream symbolic regression frameworks are based on Monte Carlo


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tree search (Sun et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024) and sequence prediction models such as RNN (Petersen
et al., 2020). These methods have achieved state-of-the-art performance on multiple benchmarks.
Symbolic Distillation from the Trained GNNs Motivated by the high expressive capacity but
opaque nature of GNNs, previous studies have sought to distill interpretable symbolic functions
from GNNs to approximate their mapping functions. First, (Cranmer et al., 2020a) introduces a
framework that distills interpretable symbolic functions from trained GNNs for scientific discovery.
This approach initially trains the neural network models and then utilizes a symbolic learning model
to iteratively approximate both the message-passing and aggregation functions with symbolic repre-
sentations. However, (Kuang et al.) found that distilling trained GNNs layer by layer often results
in suboptimal performance. To address this, they propose learning interpretable symbolic policies
directly from the general bipartite graph representation in an end-to-end manner. Nonetheless, the
symbolic functions produced in this way can become complex, as they must map the relationships
between graph inputs and outputs. In contrast, our work focuses on using only the node features as
input to enhance inference efficiency and ensure better interpretability.
Machine Learning for Combinatorial Optimization Logic optimization, a critical component of
logic synthesis in electronic design automation (EDA), fundamentally constitutes a combinatorial
optimization problem. In recent years, the application of machine learning techniques to address
combinatorial optimization challenges has emerged as a prominent and actively researched area of
interest, particularly in the EDA domain (Korte et al., 2011; Cook et al., 1994; Wang et al., 2023a;
2024a; 2022b; 2023b; Li et al., 2024; Ling et al., 2024; Geng et al., 2023a; 2025a;b). This paradigm
shift is driven by the increasing complexity of modern integrated circuits and the limitations of tradi-
tional heuristic-based approaches. Machine learning offers promising solutions through its ability to
learn complex patterns from large-scale design data, enabling more efficient exploration of the solu-
tion space and potentially leading to better quality-of-results (QoR) in terms of power, performance,
and area (PPA) optimization. Recent advancements in deep reinforcement learning and graph neu-
ral networks have shown particular promise in tackling the intricate dependencies and constraints
inherent in logic optimization problems (Geng et al., 2023b).


B    M ORE DETAILS ON THE BACKGROUND

                                                                 Start

                             Default LS heuristics                                 Prediction and Prune
                                                        Input: Original Circuit     Node features extraction
                                  Collect all nodes

                                                                                       Scoring function
                                                         Extract node id set N
                                  Full node id set N
                                                                                     Effective node id set N
                                                                i=N[0]

                             Optimization For Loop
                                                                i=|N|?                  i+=1

                                                                    N                       N
                                                  Y
                                                            Trans node N[i]           Gain>0?

                                                                                            Y

                                                                                    Update circuit


                                                       Output: Optimized Circuit



                                                                 End

                           Figure 5: The Prediction and Prune framework.

Logic Optimization (LO) Driven by Moore’s law, the complexity of chip design has grown ex-
ponentially (Khailany, 2020; Lopera et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2021; Mirhoseini et al., 2021; Ren
& Hu, 2023; Wang et al., 2025; 2024c). To manage this complexity, chip design workflows have
incorporated multiple Electronic Design Automation (EDA) tools to synthesize, simulate, test, and
verify different circuit designs efficiently and reliably. Among these tools, A LO tool–which aims
to optimize the circuit represented by a Boolean network–is one of the most important modules
in the EDA tools. LO typically involves two stages: pre-mapping optimization and post-mapping
optimization (Hosny et al., 2020; Ren & Hu, 2023; Wang et al., 2024d). During the pre-mapping
optimization phase, LO heuristics such as Rewrite (Bertacco et al., 1997), Resub (Brayton, 2006),
and Refactor (Brayton, 1982) are used to improve the input circuit. Following this, in the technol-
ogy mapping phase, the optimized logic circuit is mapped to the available technology library, e.g., a
standard-cell netlist (Brayton & Kam) or k-input lookup tables (Mishchenko et al., 2007). Finally,


                                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the post-mapping optimization phase applies LO heuristics like Mfs2 (Mishchenko et al., 2011) to
further refine and enhance the mapped circuit.
Logic Optimization heuristics To tackle the LO task, many researchers have developed a rich set of
LO heuristics. For instance, researchers have developed Rewrite (Bertacco et al., 1997) and Resub
(Brayton, 2006) for pre-mapping optimization, while Mfs2 (Mishchenko et al., 2011) is designed
for post-mapping optimization. These LO heuristics follow the paradigm as shown in Figure 5.
Specifically, these heuristics traverse the Boolean network in a topological order from PIs to POs
and apply transformations to subgraphs rooted at each node sequentially for all nodes. However,
previous literature(Wang et al.) found that these heuristics can be highly time-consuming due to a
large number of ineffective transformations. To address this problem, we follow the new heuristics
paradigm proposed by (Wang et al.) that can significantly improve the efficiency of LO heuristics
by learning a classifier to predict nodes with ineffective transformations and avoid applying trans-
formations on these nodes. In this paper, we focus on optimizing the post-mapping operator Mfs2
(Mishchenko et al., 2011), which stands out as the most time-consuming one among all commonly
used LO heuristics.
Circuit Representation In the LO stage, a circuit is usually modeled by a Boolean network (Wang
et al., 2024b). In this paper, we use the terms Boolean network and circuit interchangeably. A
Boolean network is a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where nodes correspond to Boolean functions
and directed edges correspond to wires connecting these functions. A Boolean function takes the
form f : Bn → B, where B = {0, 1} denotes the Boolean domain. Given a node, its fanins are
nodes connected by incoming edges of this node, and its fanouts are nodes connected by outgoing
edges of this node. The primary inputs (PIs) are nodes with no fanin, and the primary outputs (POs)
are nodes with no fanout. The size of a circuit denotes the number of nodes in the DAG. The depth
(level) of a circuit denotes the maximal length of a path from a PI to a PO in the DAG. The size and
depth of a circuit are proxy metrics for the area and delay of the circuit, respectively.
Symbolic Expression Tree for Learning Symbolic Functions Given a dataset D, symbolic learn-
ing approaches aim to learn a symbolic function f that best fits the dataset. To this end, symbolic
functions are often represented by an algebraic expression tree, where internal nodes are operators
and terminal nodes are input variables and/or constants (Sun et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024b; Kuang
et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025; 2024a). We assume τ = [τ1 , . . . , τn ] is a pre-order traversal of such
an expression tree. Each τi is an operator, input variable, or constant selected from a library of pos-
sible tokens and there is a one-to-one correspondence between an expression tree and its pre-order
traversal. An expression tree is also used to express mathematical functions with operators such as
[+, −, ×, ÷, sin].
Graph Neural Network (GNN) Recently, many researchers have achieved remarkable success in
applying Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to extract abundant node information from circuit graphs
(Wu et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2025; 2024). As far as we are aware, (Wang et al.) applies GNN to
predict nodes with ineffective transformations for the LO task. The input of GNN is a heuristic-
designed subgraph rooted as the node, and the output is a continuous score ranging from 0 to 1 for
the node. Based on the scores, nodes in circuits are ranked and the top k nodes are selected to be
positive. However, despite achieving a high accuracy on ineffective node prediction, GNN heavily
relies on a GPU for efficient inference while many EDA developers may not have access to high-end
GPUs, which thus severely limits its application into purely CPU-based LO tools.
Graph-based Knowledge Distillation Knowledge Distillation (KD) aims to transfer knowledge
from a large, complex teacher model to a smaller, more efficient student model (Gou et al., 2021).
The main idea is that the student model mimics the teacher model in order to obtain a competitive
or even superior performance. Recently, Graph-based Knowledge Distillation has emerged as a sig-
nificant research direction within KD research. This process involves distilling knowledge from a
Graph Neural Network (GNN), into a more lightweight student model, such as a Multilayer Per-
ceptron (MLP) (Zhang et al., 2022; Tian et al., 2022) or symbolic functions (Cranmer et al., 2020b;
Kuang et al.), which only relies on node features as input. By eliminating the graph dependency
during inference, this approach enables a more efficient and faster student model while retaining the
high predictive performance learned by the GNN.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

C.1   M ORE M OTIVATING R ESULTS

Existence of high-performance symbolic functions To ver-               Top 50% Accuracy Distribution
ify whether concise and high-performance symbolic func-
tions exist in our computational synthesis (LO) task, we                              6.7%
apply the symbolic tree search algorithm to all valid cir-
cuits—specifically, those with effective nodes—in the EPFL                                   Categories
                                                                                              Acc>=99%
benchmark. In this evaluation, we utilize the top 50% accu-                                   Acc>=85%

racy metric as the simulated rewards to gauge performance.                       93.3%
As shown in Figure 6, an impressive 93.3% of the circuits (14
out of 15) achieve a top 50% accuracy exceeding 99%. Fur-
thermore, our analysis indicates that all learned symbolic func-
                                                                 Figure 6: High-performance sym-
tions are not only short but also remarkably concise. This ob-
                                                                 bolic functions exist in the open-
servation suggests a strong potential for leveraging symbolic
                                                                 source benchmarks.
learning approaches in our LO task, indicating that such meth-
ods could efficiently enhance performance while maintaining
clarity and simplicity in the symbolic representations.

C.2   T HE I MPORTANCE OF THE P REDICTION R ECALL ON O PTIMIZATION P ERFORMANCE

To analyze the relationship between the prediction recall of effective nodes and the optimization
performance of heuristics, we evaluate the optimization performance of the Random method with
different values of the hyperparameter k. Note that Random is a baseline that randomly predicts a
score between [0, 1] for each node, and selects the top k nodes to apply node-level transformations.
Specifically, we report the recall and optimization performance (i.e., And Reduction) of Random
with different values of k in Table 5. The results indicate that the value of k is approximately linearly
positively correlated with the recall, and the recall is approximately linearly positively correlated
with the optimization performance as well. Therefore, to maintain the optimization performance of
heuristics, the prediction recall of our model should be as high as possible.

C.3   M ORE R ESULTS FOR C OMPARATIVE E VALUATION

Due to the significant Top 50% accuracy shift between Effisyn and our CMO shown in Table 1, we
have to adjust a higher k for the Effisyn to achieve comparable prediction recall and thus compara-
ble online optimization performance (shown in Table 5). Specifically, we choose k as 70% for the
Effisyn as too large k will bring higher time cost. Results shown in Table 6 demonstrate that our
CMO achieves an average improvement of 21.05% compared to COG while maintaining compara-
ble optimization performance (normalized And reduction is 0.92 versus 0.91). Additionally, when
compared to Effisyn, our CMO shows an average improvement of 15.07% while preserving similar
optimization performance across most circuits. Note that Effisyn exhibits very low optimization
performance on two very large-scale circuits, even with k set to 70%. For these circuits,k may need
to be adjusted to 90% or higher, which would result in significantly increased time costs. Moreover,
we compare our CMO with the other five lightweight baselines on open-source circuits. The re-
sults in Tables 8 and 9 demonstrate that our CMO significantly outperforms these baselines in both
generalization performance and efficiency.

C.4   M ORE I MPROVING EFFICIENCY AND Q O R RESULTS

In this subsection, we provide more results about the improving efficiency and QoR results in Table
18. We first show that our CMO could improve the efficiency of the Mfs2 heuristic with comparable
optimization performance. Specifically, the results in Table 2 demonstrate that our CMO signif-
icantly achieves an average runtime improvement of 44.54% with marginal node degradation. In
particular, our CMO achieves 2.5× faster runtime on the very large-scale circuit Sixteen (about 13
hours). Then, we can sequentially apply CMO-Mfs2 multiple times rather than once to improve the
QoR (i.e., 2CMO-Mfs2), as the runtime of CMO-Mfs2 is significantly shorter than that of Default
Mfs2 heuristic. To achieve faster runtime, we set the hyperparameter k as 30% and 40% rather than


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


50% to achieve faster runtime. Table 2 shows that 2CMO-Mfs2 significantly reduces the size and
depth of optimized circuits while achieving faster runtime compared with the Default Mfs2 heuris-
tic. Specifically, 2CMO-Mfs2 with k = 40% reduces the size/depth by 5.82% on average while
reducing the runtime by 7.99% on the test circuits. Furthermore, suppose we want to achieve faster
runtime in certain real-world scenarios, then we can set k as a smaller value such as 30%. Table 2
shows that 2CMO-Mfs2 with k = 30% reduces the size/depth by 5.60% on average with 26.16%
runtime reduction on the open-source and industrial circuits. In particular, our method achieves a
significant reduction over the depth on Hyp, improving the level by 30.23%. Overall, the results sug-
gest that our efficient CMO-Mfs2 can significantly improve the QoR while achieving faster runtime,
yielding a substantial economic value in chip design.

C.5   M ORE A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS

In this subsection, we provide more ablation combinations and corresponding results. Specifically,
CMO without structural-semantic feature decomposition denotes that we apply our graph distillation
module directly to the original high-dimensional circuit data. The results in Table 7 show that CMO
without SFD outperforms CMO without SFD and GSD in terms of the offline prediction recall,
indicating the robustness and ability of our graph distillation module.

C.6   M ORE RESULTS OF S TRENGTHS FOR D EPLOYMENT

In this subsection, we provide more results of our method’s deployment strengths in terms of opti-
mization performance and inference efficiency.
High Optimization Performance There are many lightweight and interpretable models suitable for
industrial deployment. Compared to these models, our symbolic discovery framework take advan-
tage in achieving higher optimization performance. We compare our CMO with five lightweight
baselines on all of the test circuits. The results in Table 8 demonstrate that our method significantly
outperforms all of the baselines in prediction recall. Specifically, it achieves an average improvement
of 24% and 21% to the state-of-the-art symbolic discovery approach SPL and a powerful traditional
machine learning approach XGBoost.
More results for inference efficiency We provide detailed model inference time results for all test
circuits. Table 10 demonstrates that the runtime of the GNN model for COG is hundreds of times
greater than that of CMO when executed on purely CPU-based machines. Additionally, results in
Table 11 show that the inference time of the GNN model accounts for up to 29% of the total end-to-
end heuristic execution time, which significantly impacts the efficiency of LO heuristics. Therefore,
while the graph-based machine learning model achieves optimization performance comparable to
that of CMO, these methods are limited to deployment in modern CPU-based LO tools due to the
high inference costs.


D     D ETAILS OF DATASETS U SED IN T HIS PAPER

D.1   D ESCRIPTION OF T HREE U SED B ENCHMARKS

We provide detailed statistics of the circuits from EPFL and IWLS in Tables 12 and 13, respectively.
Additionally, statistics for the very large-scale circuits and industrial circuits are shown in Tables 14
and 15. The industrial circuits consist of 27 circuits. In general, nodes correspond to logic gates
and edges represent the wires connecting them. The fanins of a node are the nodes supplying input
to it, while the fanouts are the nodes that it drives. Primary inputs (PIs) are nodes without fanins,
and primary outputs (POs) are a subset of the network’s nodes. Latches are specialized nodes in
sequential circuits, and cubes represent subsets of input variables in Boolean functions. Lev refers
to the depth of the DAG, measured by the maximum number of edges between PIs and POs.

D.2   DATASETS FOR E VALUATION ON O PEN -S OURCE B ENCHMARKS

For each circuit and a given X heuristic, we collect the circuit dataset by applying the X heuristic
to optimize the circuit and collecting the node features {xi }ni=1 and labels {yi }ni=1 . We found that


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


there are a small number of circuits with no effective nodes. We discard these circuits, as we can
directly avoid applying transformations to these circuits without learning a model.
Specifically, using the leave-one-out evaluation strategy with the EPFL benchmark, we construct
three datasets for evaluation. One of the three circuit datasets—collected from Hyp, Multiplier, and
Square—serves as the testing dataset, while the remaining datasets are used for training. Similarly,
under the leave-one-out evaluation strategy with the IWLS benchmark, we create three datasets,
selecting one of the four circuit datasets from Ethernet, Conmax, and Desperf as the testing dataset
and using the others for training. To foster the machine learning community in Logic Optimization,
we will release the datasets once the paper is accepted for publication.

D.3     DATASETS FOR E VALUATION ON I NDUSTRIAL C IRCUITS AND V ERY L ARGE -S CALE
        C IRCUITS

In terms of the industrial circuits, we report a statistical description of the training and testing circuits
in Table 15. As shown in Tables 15, 12, and 13, the industrial circuits consist of 27 industrial circuits,
where the circuit sizes range from 2, 775 to 788, 288, which are much larger in size than open-source
circuits. Using the leave-one-out evaluation strategy, we evaluate our method with 23 circuits for
training and 4 circuits for testing.
For very large-scale circuits (up to twenty million nodes), we provide a detailed description in Table
14. Given the limited number of very large-scale circuits, we utilize circuits from the EPFL dataset
outlined in Table 12 along with two additional very large-scale circuits to construct our datasets.
Specifically, we adopt the following approach: (1) The Sixteen circuit is designated as the testing
dataset, while the remaining circuits serve as the training dataset. (2) The Twenty circuit is set as the
testing dataset, with the rest used for training. To support the machine learning community in Logic
Optimization, we will release these datasets upon acceptance of the paper for publication.

D.4     V ISUALIZATION OF T HE C IRCUIT G RAPH

In the LO stage, a circuit is usually modeled by a DAG. Common types of DAGs for LO include
And-Inverter Graphs (AIGs) for pre-mapping optimization and K-Input Look-Up Tables (K-LUTs)
for post-mapping optimization. In the pre-mapping optimization phase, an AIG is a DAG containing
four types of nodes: the constant, PIs, POs, and two-input And (And2) nodes. A graph edge is either
complemented or not. A complemented edge indicates that the signal is complemented. In the
post-mapping optimization phase, a K-LUT is a DAG with nodes corresponding to Look-Up Tables
and directed edges corresponding to wires. A Look-Up Table in a K-LUT is a digital memory that
implements the Boolean function of the node. To further illustrate the circuit graph, we visualize
the AIG, K-LUT look-up table, and the circuit optimization process of a small circuit selected from
IWLS2020 (Rai et al., 2021) in Figure 7.

E     D ETAILS OF M ETHODS AND E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS
E.1     D ETAILS OF E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

E.1.1    O PTIMIZATION S EQUENCE F LOWS
Optimization Sequence Flows for Collecting Data and Evaluation In the industrial setting, we
usually apply a sequence of Logic Optimization (LO) heuristics to optimize an input circuit. Thus,
we follow the setting throughout all experiments unless mentioned otherwise. Specifically, in terms
of the Mfs2 heuristic, we apply the sequence of heuristics, i.e., strash; dch; if -C 12; mfs2 -W 4 -M
5000, to collect data and evaluate the performance of the Default Mfs2 heuristic and our CMO. Note
that the optimization sequence flow is a standard academic flow for evaluating the Default Mfs2
heuristic, which follows previous work (Mishchenko et al., 2011).
Optimization Sequence Flows for Evaluating 2CMO-Mfs2 To apply our CMO twice, we apply
the sequence of heuristics, i.e., strash; dch; if -C 12; mfs2 -W 4 -M 5000; strash; if -C 12; mfs2 -W
4 -M 5000, to evaluate the performance of 2CMO. Note that the mfs2 heuristic is a post-mapping
optimization heuristic, whose input DAG is a k-input look-up table graph (K-LUTs). Moreover, the
strash heuristic transforms the current circuit representation into an And-Inverter Graph (AIG) by


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Pre-mapping optimization phase


                           Node Number=24                     Node Number=18


                                                 Heuristics

                                                   Resub


                (a). Init AIG                                      (b). The optimized AIG
  Post-mapping optimization phase



                                                 Heuristics

                                                   Mfs2


                (c). Init K-Luts                                  (d). The optimized K-Luts

Figure 7: Visualization of the And-Inverter Graph (AIG) and K-Input Look-Up Tables (K-LUTs).
In the pre-mapping circuit optimization phase, LO heuristics such as resub, are applied to optimize
the AIG. In the post-mapping phase, LO heuristics such as mfs2, are used to optimize the K-LUTs.


one-level structural hashing. Then, the if (Mishchenko et al., 2007) heuristic maps an AIG into a
K-LUTs. Finally, the Mfs2 heuristic optimizes the input K-LUTs.

E.1.2   T OP K ACCURACY M ETRIC
The ineffective Node-Level Transformations problem in many LO heuristics—–that is, the number
of effective nodes is far fewer than ineffective nodes—–leads to an extreme class imbalance in the
training dataset. Therefore, the learned classifiers always suffer from negative bias and thus 0.5 is
an inappropriate threshold for evaluating whether a sample is positive. To tackle this problem, we
follow (Wang et al.) to view the prediction task as a scoring function. Specifically, we sort all the
nodes according to the prediction scores given by our learned symbolic functions and select the top
k nodes. That is, the top k nodes are predicted positive, and the other nodes are predicted negative.
Then, the top k accuracy metric is defined by the recall, i.e., the fraction of true positive nodes that
are predicted to be positive.

E.1.3   IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TRAINING DETAILS

In our implementation, we configured the weight factor λ between Lteacher and Lstudent as 0.5 to
balance the objective functions. We averaged the results over three different random seeds during
training. Additionally, a regularization factor ρ = 0.99 was employed to penalize excessive expres-
sion length, encouraging more compact and interpretable solutions. The training process utilized
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), running 10,000 episodes per iteration across 20 iterations. After
training, the best-performing model on the training set from all 20 iterations was selected, ensuring
both stability and optimal performance. After discovering structural and semantic functions from
the training dataset, we fuse their scores by setting the w as the median of the structural features’
outputs.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2   IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BASELINES


In this part, we present a detailed description of all the baselines used in this paper.
COG. COG is a well-designed 2-layer graph convolutional neural network that can achieve high
optimization performance (Wang et al.). Specifically, it constructs a bipartite graph as input and
learns domain-invariant representation to achieve high generalization capability.
Effisyn. Effisyn is a human-designed nonlinear symbolic function (Li et al., 2023). Specifically, in
human-designed symbolic scoring functions, experts manually design the structure of the function
and extract key parameters from training circuit data to form a complete symbolic scoring function.
This process involves identifying relevant characteristics of the circuit and carefully selecting or
engineering the symbolic terms that best capture the underlying behavior of the system. However,
designing and developing these functions is extremely challenging as it requires extensive expert
knowledge and manual tuning.
SPL. SPL (Sun et al., 2023) is a search-based symbolic regression method that employs a Monte
Carlo tree search (MCTS) agent to explore optimal expression trees based on measurement data.
SPL is one of the SOTA symbolic learning methods.
DSR. DSR (Petersen et al., 2020) is a leading deep learning-based symbolic learning method that
employs a gradient-based risk-seeking RL approach combined with a recurrent neural network
(RNN) to generate a probability distribution over expressions.
RidgeLR. RidgeLR (Hoerl & Kennard, 1970) is a regularized version of linear regression that adds
an L2 penalty to the loss function to prevent overfitting. This regularization term helps reduce the
model’s sensitivity to multicollinearity and large coefficients by shrinking them, making RidgeLR
effective for regression tasks, especially when dealing with high-dimensional or highly correlated
features. It is commonly used in regression problems where overfitting needs to be controlled.
XGBoost. XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016) is a machine learning algorithm that builds an ensem-
ble of decision trees using gradient boosting, optimizing accuracy by iteratively correcting errors
from previous trees. It includes regularization to prevent overfitting and is highly efficient, making it
well-suited for both regression and classification problems, especially with large-scale and complex
datasets.
Random. Random is a baseline that randomly predicts a score between [0, 1] for each node, and
selects the top k nodes as positive samples to apply node-level transformations.


E.3   IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SEMANTIC FUNCTION LEARNING PROCESS


Once decomposing the init feature into structural and semantic components, we collect structural
data Dstr = {xstr        N
                 i , yi }i=1 and semantic data Dsem = {xi
                                                          sem
                                                              , yi }N            str
                                                                    i=1 , where xi   refers to structural
                    sem
node feature and xi refers to semantic node feature. To capture structural information, we model
it as a mathematical symbolic learning problem, as the values of structural features can be approxi-
mated as continuous data, making them suitable for continuous mathematical symbolic regression.
In contrast, learning mathematical functions for semantic information is challenging due to the dis-
crete and binary nature of both feature values and labels. Thus, we formulate the semantic function
as a Boolean symbolic learning problem, i.e., learning a boolean function f sem : Bd → B that
can accurately identify the effective nodes, where B = {0, 1} denotes the boolean feature domain.
Given the binary outputs of Boolean functions, we can select 0.5 as the classification threshold and
model it directly as a classification problem. This significantly reduces the difficulty of symbolic
function learning compared to treating it as a function regression problem.
we have discussed the details of the structural function learning process in Section 4.2. Here we
give a detailed implementation of the semantic boolean function learning process. Specifically,
the semantic function follows the same symbolic tree search paradigm as the structural function
learning. However, the difference mainly lies in the symbolic operator and designed reward function.
The symbolic operators include three basic logic operators and, or, not, which are always used to
represent the mapping from binary values to binary values. Moreover, due to the binary nature
of the boolean function’s output, we can model it as a classification problem and use 0.5 as the


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


classification threshold. The loss function designed for the boolean function learning is:
                                          PN                                N
                    TP                           1(yi = 1 ∧ pi ≥ 0.5)      X
           L=               − λ ∗ F P = i=1PN                          −λ      1(pi ≥ 0.5)           (3)
                 FP + TP                           i=1 1(yi = 1)           i=1

The reason for the loss function is to let the scoring model identify more effective nodes. The term
λ ∗ F P is used as the regularization to prevent the boolean function predicts all of the nodes as pos-
itive. Once the boolean function accurately identifies all of the effective nodes, it could significantly
improve the predictive performance of the final fusion symbolic functions.


                                   Motivations for teacher loss
                     NN_10
         Method


                     NN_16
                  GNN_128
                               0          20            40         60       80        100
                                                      Recall(%)
Figure 8: We use two simple multilayer perceptrons (MLP) to fit the relationship between the node
features and the GNN’s output. The results demonstrate that the MLP achieves comparable gener-
alization performance to GNN.


E.4   M ORE DETAILS ABOUT THE NODE FEATURE DESIGNED

As shown in Table 17, the designed features for each node contain semantic information and struc-
tural information. Specifically, for the Mfs2 heuristic, the semantic features are designed with the
truth table of the node (i.e., a 6-input look-up table) (Wang et al.). Moreover, the structural feature
is a five-dimension vector that contains structural information of the circuit such as fanin/fanout
number and level of the node. Overall, the node feature for the Mfs2 heuristic is a 69-dimensional
vector.

E.5   M ORE D ETAILS ABOUT THE GRAPH DISTILLATION APPROACH

We use equation 2 to evaluate every expression tree. Specifically, we use mean squared error and
focal loss for the Lteacher and Lstudent . That is,
                                                        N
                                                    1 X
                                       Lteacher =         (zi − ŷi )2                               (4)
                                                    N i=1

and
                                   Lstudent = − αy(1 − ŷ)γ log(ŷ)
                                              − (1 − α)ŷ γ log(1 − ŷ),
ŷ denotes the prediction output, z denotes the soft output of GNN, and y is the true labels. The
motivation for the loss type of Lteacher mainly comes from an observation that there exists a simple
nonlinear mapping relationship from the circuit feature to the output of GNN that achieves compa-
rable generalization performance. Specifically, we found that we can use a simple MLP to greatly
fit the mapping relationship from the circuit feature to the output of GNN as shown in Figure 8.


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thus, we use MSE to directly learn information from the GNN outputs. Moreover, note that the
number of effective nodes is far fewer than ineffective nodes, which poses a substantial challenge to
the classification task. Therefore, we leverage the focal loss as the Lteacher , which has been shown
successful in addressing the class imbalance for object detection tasks.
Discussions on advantages From the perspective of distillation, our approach allows for the dis-
tillation of GNNs into simplified symbolic functions. This represents a more thorough form of
distillation compared to the conventional transformation from GNNs to MLPs. By reducing GNNs
to symbolic functions, we not only preserve the essential predictive capabilities but also enhance
interpretability and reduce computational complexity. From the viewpoint of symbolic learning, our
symbolic search method leverages the design of fitness measures to discover symbolic functions with
superior generalization capabilities. Unlike traditional machine learning models, which often strug-
gle with overfitting and lack of interpretability, symbolic functions are derived through our method.
offer a robust alternative. These functions are designed to effectively capture the underlying patterns
in data, leading to better generalization in various applications.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 The training process
Input: Training dataset D = {xi , yi }Ni=1 ;
Output: Semantic function f sem , Structural function f str ;
  Step 1: Separate the initial dataset D into structural data Dstr = {xstr     N
                                                                       i , yi }i=1 and semantic data
             sem     N
  Dsem = {xi , yi }i=1 ;
  Step 2: Apply GESD (Algorithm 2) to learn the structural function f str from Dstr ;
  Step 3: Apply GESD (Algorithm 2) to learn the semantic function f sem from Dsem ;


Algorithm 2 GESD
Input: Training dataset D = {xi , yi }Ni=1 , Trained GNN model fGN N ;
Output: Optimal function f ∗ ;
 1: for each episode do do
 2:   Selection: Initialize s0 = ∅, t = 0;
 3:   while st is expandable and t < tmax do
 4:      Choose at+1 = arg maxa UCT(st , a);
 5:      Take action at+1 , observe s′ , N T ;
 6:      st+1 ← s′ ; mark as visited, t ← t + 1;
 7:   end while
 8:   Expansion: Randomly take an unvisited path with action a, observe s′ ;
 9:   st+1 ← s′ ; mark as visited, t ← t + 1;
10:   Simulation: Fix the starting point st ;
11:   for each simulation do do
12:      while st is non-terminal and t < tmax do
13:         Randomly take an action a, observe s′ ;
14:         st+1 ← s′ ; t ← t + 1;
15:      end while
16:      if st+1 forms a complete expression tree then
17:         Project f ;
18:         Calculate the function prediction ŷ = f (x);
19:         Calculate the GNN prediction z = fGN N (x);
20:         Calculate the simulation reward:
                                                              ηn
                                rt+1 =
                                         1 − λLlabel (ŷ, y) − (1 − λ)Lteacher (ŷ, z)
21:      end if
22:   end for
23:   Backpropagate the maximum simulation results and visited count;
24: end for


Algorithm 3 The Inference process
Input: Test dataset Dtest = {xi , yi }N
                                      i=1 , structural function f
                                                                  str
                                                                      , semantic function f sem ;
Output: The scores s for all nodes in Dtest ;
  step 1: Separate the test dataset Dtest into structural data Dstr = {xstr        N
                                                                           i , yi }i=1 and semantic data
              sem     N
  Dsem = {xi , yi }i=1 ;
  step 2: Calculate the structural scores sstr with sstr
                                                       i  = f str (xstr
                                                                     i ) and semantic scores s
                                                                                                 sem
                                                                                                     with
   sem      sem sem
  si   =f       (xi );
  step 3: Calculate the weight w = M edian(sstr );
  step 4: Calculate the final scores s = sstr + w ∗ ssem for all nodes in Dtest ;


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: We report the recall and optimization performance of the Mfs2 heuristic incorporated with
Random models. And Reduction denotes the reduced number of nodes, i.e., optimization perfor-
mance. Percent denotes the hyperparameter k, i.e., the percent of nodes to apply transformations.

                      Hyp                                         Multiplier
  Percent    Recall     And Reduction (AR)        Percent    Recall     And Reduction (AR)
    0.10      0.11              33.33               0.10      0.10               3.00
    0.20      0.20              69.00               0.20      0.18               5.33
    0.30      0.30             111.33               0.30      0.28               6.67
    0.40      0.40             164.67               0.40      0.39               9.33
    0.50      0.50             225.33               0.50      0.44              10.00
    0.60      0.60             295.00               0.60      0.56              12.33
    0.70      0.70             374.33               0.70      0.67              14.00
    0.80      0.80             464.33               0.80      0.78              16.67
    0.90      0.90             561.33               0.90      0.89              19.00
    1.00      1.00             664.00               1.00      1.00              22.00
                     Desperf                                         Ethernet
  Percent    Recall     And Reduction (AR)        Percent    Recall     And Reduction (AR)
    0.10      0.10             114.67               0.10      0.11               6.00
    0.20      0.21             210.33               0.20      0.18               8.00
    0.30      0.31             318.33               0.30      0.29              10.00
    0.40      0.41             421.33               0.40      0.38              13.00
    0.50      0.50             529.67               0.50      0.47              15.00
    0.60      0.60             657.67               0.60      0.56              16.33
    0.70      0.70             790.00               0.70      0.67              21.00
    0.80      0.80             904.67               0.80      0.79              26.67
    0.90      0.90             1001.33              0.90      0.89              29.67
    1.00      1.00             1118.00              1.00      1.00              38.00
                     Conmax                                           Square
  Percent    Recall     And Reduction (AR)        Percent    Recall     And Reduction (AR)
    0.10      0.10              95.00               0.10      0.11              0.00
    0.20      0.20             188.00               0.20      0.19              0.00
    0.30      0.30             251.00               0.30      0.28              0.33
    0.40      0.40             330.67               0.40      0.38              1.33
    0.50      0.50             411.67               0.50      0.48              2.33
    0.60      0.59             493.33               0.60      0.56              3.00
    0.70      0.69             557.67               0.70      0.65              3.67
    0.80      0.78             625.00               0.80      0.75              4.33
    0.90      0.90             718.67               0.90      0.89              6.67
    1.00      1.00             782.00               1.00      1.00              8.00


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: We compare CMO with a well-designed GNN COG and the human-designed approach
Effisyn. Specifically, we set the hyperparameter k as 50% for COG and our CMO and 70% for
Effisyn. And Reduction (AR) denotes the reduced number of nodes, i.e., optimization performance.
Normalized AR denotes the ratio of the AR to that of the default heuristic.

                                Hyp                                                                    Multiplier
   Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑       Normalized AR ↑   Time (s) ↓      Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑        Normalized AR ↑   Time (s) ↓
    COG              661.33                    1.00          247.26         COG                21.00                     0.95           18.14
   Effisyn           662.00                    1.00          270.50        Effisyn             18.00                     0.82           16.17
 CMO (Ours)          661.00                    1.00          213.39      CMO (Ours)            20.00                     0.91           14.32
                               Square                                                                   Desperf
   Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑       Normalized AR ↑   Time (s) ↓      Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑        Normalized AR ↑   Time (s) ↓
    COG                8.00                    1.00           16.11         COG               890.67                     0.80           29.97
   Effisyn             1.00                    0.13           16.73        Effisyn            895.00                     0.80           26.59
 CMO (Ours)            7.33                    0.92           12.54      CMO (Ours)           983.00                     0.95           22.38
                               Ethernet                                                                 Conmax
   Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑       Normalized AR ↑   Time (s) ↓      Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑        Normalized AR ↑   Time (s) ↓
    COG               27.33                    0.72           20.01         COG               730.67                     0.93           19.03
   Effisyn            27.00                    0.71           32.85        Effisyn            704.00                     0.90           25.29
 CMO (Ours)           30.67                    0.82           16.25      CMO (Ours)           703.33                     0.90           15.27
                                 Ci1                                                                      Ci2
   Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑       Normalized AR ↑   Time (s) ↓      Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑        Normalized AR ↑   Time (s) ↓
    COG               9.67                     0.81          327.05         COG                15.50                     0.67           61.89
   Effisyn            9.00                     0.75          275.58        Effisyn             19.00                     0.83           59.14
 CMO (Ours)           12.00                    1.00          255.90      CMO (Ours)            23.00                     1.00           45.61
                                 Ci3                                                                      Ci4
   Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑       Normalized AR ↑   Time (s) ↓      Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑        Normalized AR ↑   Time (s) ↓
    COG              1040.00                   1.00          145.12         COG                98.00                     0.99          161.19
   Effisyn           1040.00                   1.00          126.31        Effisyn             99.00                     1.00           84.29
 CMO (Ours)          1040.00                   1.00          113.08      CMO (Ours)            96.00                     0.97          109.42
                               Sixteen                                                                  Twenty
   Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑       Normalized AR ↑   Time (s) ↓      Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑        Normalized AR ↑   Time (s) ↓
    COG              1031.00                   0.94         61905.96        COG               1291.00                    0.95         86112.80
   Effisyn             9.00                    0.01         47078.07       Effisyn              9.00                     0.01         73853.64
 CMO (Ours)          1000.00                   0.91         32001.27     CMO (Ours)           1251.00                    0.92         56965.94


              Table 7: We present more ablations study results on open-source benchmarks.

               Circuit                           Hyp         Multiplier          Square        DesPerf            Ethernet        Conmax
               Method                          Recall ↑        Recall ↑         Recall ↑       Recall ↑             Recall ↑      Recall ↑
          CMO                                    0.96             0.98               0.99         0.80                0.72            0.84
   CMO without GSD                               0.91             0.96               0.67         0.80                0.44            0.76
    CMO without SFD                              0.99             0.80               0.80         0.73                0.66            0.42
 CMO without SFD and GSD                         0.52             0.72               0.93         0.60                0.42            0.45


                                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: We compare our CMO with five lightweight baselines. The results demonstrate that our
approach outperforms all of the baselines in terms of generalization capability.

                              Hyp             Multiplier              Square           Desperf           Ethernet              Conamx
     Method              Recall ↑              Recall ↑               Recall ↑         Recall ↑           Recall ↑             Recall ↑
     SPL                      0.93                   0.52                0.72            0.60                0.42                0.45
     DSR                      0.20                   0.11                0.46            0.76                0.72                0.88
   XGBoost                    0.91                   0.86                0.46            0.79                0.33                0.68
   RidgeLR                    0.81                   0.62                0.88            0.79                0.33                0.54
   Random                     0.50                   0.44                0.48            0.50                0.47                0.50
  CMO (Ours)                  0.99                   0.96                0.98            0.80                0.72                0.84
                          Sixteen               Twenty                   Ci1             Ci2                  Ci3                    Ci4
     Method              Recall ↑              Recall ↑               Recall ↑         Recall ↑           Recall ↑             Recall ↑
     SPL                      0.43                   0.44                0.85            0.91                0.98                0.80
     DSR                      0.63                   0.63                0.85            0.83                0.95                0.94
   XGBoost                    0.62                   0.58                0.78            0.81                0.77                0.79
   RidgeLR                    0.79                   0.84                0.85            0.95                0.71                0.37
   Random                     0.50                   0.50                0.51            0.50                0.50                0.49
  CMO (Ours)                  0.86                   0.85                1.00            1.00                0.99                0.96


Table 9: We compare our CMO with five lightweight baselines. The results demonstrate that our
approach outperforms all of the lightweight baselines in terms of online heuristics efficiency and
optimization performance.

                               Hyp                                                                    Multiplier
   Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑      Normalized AR ↑    Time (s) ↓     Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑        Normalized AR ↑    Time (s) ↓
    SPL              659.33                   0.99           234.88         SPL               20.67                     0.91            15.63
    DSR              527.67                   0.79           257.61         DSR                4.00                     0.18            14.41
  XGBoost            650.00                   0.98           246.79       XGBoost             20.00                     0.91            14.28
  RidgeLR            646.00                   0.97           228.22       RidgeLR             20.00                     0.91            11.52
   Random            374.33                   0.57           228.51        Random             14.00                     0.64            13.74
 GESD (Ours)         661.00                   1.00           213.39      GESD (Ours)          20.00                     0.91            14.32
                              Square                                                                   Desperf
   Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑      Normalized AR ↑    Time (s) ↓     Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑        Normalized AR ↑    Time (s) ↓
    SPL                5.33                   0.67            14.17         SPL               927.67                    0.83            31.27
    DSR                1.00                   0.13            20.63         DSR               865.00                    0.77            26.42
  XGBoost              1.00                   0.13            19.73       XGBoost            1026.00                    0.92            29.97
  RidgeLR              3.00                   0.38            14.90       RidgeLR             942.00                    0.84            33.26
   Random              3.67                   0.46            17.82        Random             790.00                    0.71            29.42
 GESD (Ours)           7.33                   0.92            12.54      GESD (Ours)          983.00                    0.95            22.38
                              Ethernet                                                                 Conmax
   Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑      Normalized AR ↑    Time (s) ↓     Method      And Reduction (AR) ↑        Normalized AR ↑    Time (s) ↓
    SPL               17.67                   0.46            32.39         SPL              681.67                     0.87            25.25
    DSR               31.00                   0.82            28.49         DSR              767.00                     0.98            22.70
  XGBoost             30.00                   0.79            34.57       XGBoost            751.00                     0.96            23.28
  RidgeLR             18.00                   0.47            34.49       RidgeLR            638.00                     0.82            24.96
   Random             21.00                   0.55            28.96        Random            557.67                     0.71            22.31
 GESD (Ours)          30.67                   0.82            16.25      GESD (Ours)         703.33                     0.90            15.27


                                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: we report more results about the Model Inference Time. Note that all of the experiments
are tested on purely CPU-based machines.

                    Hyp         Multiplier        Square           Desperf       Ethernet     Conamx
    Method       Time (s) ↓     Time (s) ↓   Time (s) ↓       Time (s) ↓        Time (s) ↓    Time (s) ↓
     COG           16.730         3.415           2.383             6.238          2.771        3.557
    Effisyn        0.152          0.015           0.010             0.056          0.018        0.023
  CMO (Ours)       0.059          0.009           0.007             0.049          0.018        0.010
                   Sixteen       Twenty            Ci1              Ci2               Ci3        Ci4
    Method       Time (s) ↓     Time (s) ↓   Time (s) ↓       Time (s) ↓        Time (s) ↓    Time (s) ↓
     COG          1377.657      1787.070          31.710           18.230         30.540       38.770
    Effisyn        9.670         12.189           0.320            0.220          0.290        0.160
  CMO (Ours)       4.156          4.956           0.170            0.060          0.140        0.160


Table 11: We present the inference times for the GNN model COG and its integrated LO heuristic,
COG-Mfs2, on open-source and industrial circuits. Ratio denotes the proportion of the COG model’s
time accounted for by COG-Mfs2. The results demonstrate that the runtime of the GNN accounts
up to 29.46% to that of COG-Mfs2, which significantly impacts the efficiency of the Mfs2 heuristic
in purely CPU-based LO tools.

                      Hyp                                                    Multiplier
  COG(time, s)   COG-Mfs2(time, s)     ratio(%)      COG(time, s)         COG-Mfs2(time, s)     ratio(%)
     16.73             247.26             6.77             18.14                  3.42           18.83
                     Square                                                   Desperf
  COG(time, s)   COG-Mfs2(time, s)     ratio(%)      COG(time, s)         COG-Mfs2(time, s)     ratio(%)
      2.38              16.11             14.79            6.24                  29.97           20.82
                    Ethernet                                                 Conmax
  COG(time, s)   COG-Mfs2(time, s)     ratio(%)      COG(time, s)         COG-Mfs2(time, s)     ratio(%)
      2.77              20.01             13.85            3.56                  19.03           18.69
                      Ci1                                                       Ci2
  COG(time, s)   COG-Mfs2(time, s)     ratio(%)      COG(time, s)         COG-Mfs2(time, s)     ratio(%)
     31.71             327.05             9.70             18.23                 61.89           29.46
                      Ci3                                                       Ci4
  COG(time, s)   COG-Mfs2(time, s)     ratio(%)      COG(time, s)         COG-Mfs2(time, s)     ratio(%)
     30.54             145.12             21.04            38.77                 161.19          24.05


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 12: A detailed description of circuits from the EPFL benchmark. Nodes denotes the sizes of
circuits, and Lev denotes the depths of circuits.

         Circuit             PI      PO        Latch     Nodes     Edge       Cube       Lev
           Adder            256     129         0         1020      2040       1020      255
      Barrel shifter        135     128         0         3336      6672       3336       12
          Divisor           128     128         0        57247     114494     57247     4372
       Hypotenuse           256     128         0        214335    428670     214335    24801
           Log2              32      32         0        32060      64120     323060     444
           Max              512     130         0          2865      5730       2865      287
        Multiplier          128     128         0         27062     54124      27062      274
            Sin              24      25         0          5416     10832       5416      225
       Square-root          128      64         0         24618     49236      24618     5058
          Square             64     128         0        18486     36969      18485      250
   Round-robin ariter       256     129         0        11839     23678      11839       87
    Alu control unit          7      26         0          175       348        174       10
      Coding-cavlc          10       11         0          693      1386        693        16
         Decoder              8     256         0          304       608        304        3
      i2c controller        147     142         0         1357      2698       1356       20
  Int to float converter     11       7         0          260       520        260       16
   Memory controller       1204     1230        0         47110     93945      47109      114
    Priority encoder        128       8         0          978      1956        978      250
 Lookahead XY router         60      30         0          284       514        257       54
           Voter           1001       1         0         13758     27516      13758       70

Table 13: A detailed description of circuits from the IWLS benchmark. Nodes denotes the sizes of
circuits, and Lev denotes the depths of circuits.

         Circuit              PI      PO         latch     nodes      edge       cube      lev
        aes core              259     129         530      20797      40645      24444     28
        des area             240       64         128       5005       9882       5889     35
         des perf            234      64        8808      98463      180542     108666     28
         ethernet             98     115        10544     46804      113378      72850     37
            i2c               19      14         128       1147        2299       1375     15
        mem ctrl             115     152        1083      11508      26436      14603      31
      pci bridge32           162     207        3359      16897      34607      23130      29
 pci conf cyc addr dec        32      32           0        109        212        128       6
      pci spoci ctrl          25      13          60       1271        2637       1557     19
           sasc               16      12         117        552        1148        766     10
       simple spi             16      12         132        823        1694       1089     14
            spi               47      45         229       3230       6904       4054      32
   steppermotordrive           4       4           25        228        397        253     11
       systemcaes            260     129         670       7961       18236      11648     44
       systemcdes            132      65         190       3324       6304        3791     33
           tv80               14      32         359       7166       16280       9352     50
        usb funct            128     121         1746      12871      27102      16378     25
         usb phy              15      18          98        559        1001        638     12
         vga lcd              89     109        17079     124050     242332     146201     25
       wb conmax             1130    1416         770      29036      77185      39619     26
        wb dma                217     215         263       3495       7052       4496     26


                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 14: A detailed description of two very large-scale circuits from the EPFL benchmark. Nodes
denotes the sizes of circuits, and Lev denotes the depths of circuits.


 Circuit                PI           PO          Latch                 Nodes                   Lev
 twenty               137            60                 0           20732893                   162
 sixteen              117            50                 0           16216836                   140



Table 15: A statsical description of 27 industrial circuits (23 training circuits and 4 testing circuits)
from Huawei HiSilicon. Nodes denotes the sizes of circuits, and Lev denotes the depths of circuits.

 Traning Circuits               PI               PO          Latch         Nodes              Lev
         mean                8410.5         5978.682            0        104229.4         55.95455
         max                 59974           29721              0         788288             104
         min                   41             107               0          2775               18
 Testing Circuits               PI               PO          Latch          nodes              lev
         mean              18540.67            18015            0        356111.2         103.3333
         max                42257              33849            0         655243            185
         min                 523                483             0          24778             40


Table 16: We present the structural and semantic scoring functions of the industiral circuits to illus-
trate the interpretability of CMO. Here x represents node feature.


   Ci1      structural      sin(x0 ∗ x2 + x0 − cos x1 )/x0
            semantic        ¬(x64 ∧ x20 ∧ x24 ) ∧ ¬(x6 ∧ x63 ∧ x26 ∧ x47 ∧ x27 )
   Ci2      structural      exp x3 − cos(x3 /x0 ) − x3 + x2
            semantic        ¬(x32 ∧ x56 ∧ x36 ) ∧ ¬(x47 ∧ ¬x33 ∧ x57 )
   Ci3      structural      sin(x0 − cos(x2 ) − x3 )/x0
            semantic        (x52 ∨ ¬x65 ) ∧ ¬(x17 ∧ x44 )
   Ci4      structural      x0 − exp(x1 )/ exp(x2 )/ sin(x0 + x3 ) + x3
            semantic        ¬(x26 ∧ x62 ∧ x5 ∧ x55 ) ∧ ¬(x20 ∧ x32 ∧ x26 )


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Table 17: We provide our manually designed node features.


        heuristic                                                                       Node features
            Mfs2                              Semantic information                                             Structure information
 Input: 6-LUTs                                Truth table of the node                                               Fanin number
                                             the node is 6-input LUT                                                Fanout number
                                             (64-dimensional vector)                                                    Level
                                                                                                                       LevelR
                                                                                                                       Node ID


Table 18: We compare the Default Mfs2 heuristic with our 2CMO-Mfs2 heuristic with the hyperpa-
rameter k set as 30%, 40% and 50% on open-source and industrial circuits. Optimized Nd denotes
the node number (size) of circuits, and Lev denotes the level (depth) of circuits. We define an
Improvement metric by M (Default)−M  (Ours)
                           M (Default)      , where M (·) denotes the Nd, Lev, or Time.

 Open-source Circuits                                         Hyp                                                            Multiplier
                                                 Improvement ↑                     Improvement ↑                      Improvement ↑                    Improvement ↑
        Method                   Lev ↓                                Time (s) ↓                   Optimized Nd ↓                         Time (s) ↓
                                               (Optimized Nd, %)                     (Time, %)                      (Optimized Nd, %)                    (Time, %)
    Default (Mfs2)              8259.00               NA                319.33           NA           7799.00              NA               22.58           NA
  CMO-Mfs (0.5, Ours)           8259.00                0                158.49          50.37         7801.00             -0.03             14.28          36.77
 2CMO-Mfs (0.3, Ours)           5762.00              30.23              127.51          60.07         7661.00              7.27             18.06          20.00
 2CMO-Mfs (0.4, Ours)           5762.00              30.23              170.45          46.62         7659.00              7.36             20.81          7.85
 Open-source Circuits                                        Square                                                          Ethernet
                                                Improvement ↑                      Improvement ↑                      Improvement ↑                    Improvement ↑
        Method               Optimized Nd ↓                           Time (s) ↓                   Optimized Nd ↓                         Time (s) ↓
                                                  (Lev, %)                           (Time, %)                      (Optimized Nd, %)                    (Time, %)
    Default (Mfs2)              5701.00               NA                 27.55           NA           13638.00             NA               34.48           NA
  CMO-Mfs (0.5, Ours)           5701.67              -0.01               12.54          54.47         13645.00            -0.08             21.73          36.99
 2CMO-Mfs (0.3, Ours)           5518.67               3.26               15.04          45.42         13516.67             4.19             15.57          54.84
 2CMO-Mfs (0.4, Ours)           5515.33               3.32               19.06          30.80         13516.33             4.20             24.38          29.28
 Open-source Circuits                                       Conmax                                                            Desperf
                                                 Improvement ↑                     Improvement ↑                      Improvement ↑                    Improvement ↑
        Method               Optimized Nd ↓                           Time (s) ↓                   Optimized Nd ↓                         Time (s) ↓
                                               (Optimized Nd, %)                     (Time, %)                      (Optimized Nd, %)                    (Time, %)
    Default (Mfs2)               16509                NA                 23.78           NA           30853.00             NA               36.76           NA
  CMO-Mfs (0.5, Ours)           16587.67             -0.48               15.27          35.81          30910              -0.18             26.40          28.19
 2CMO-Mfs (0.3, Ours)           15723.33              2.00               18.24          23.32         29392.00             2.31             30.16          17.96
 2CMO-Mfs (0.4, Ours)           15666.67              2.08               21.65           8.95         29175.67             2.50             38.20          -3.92
very Large-scale Circuits                                   Sixteen                                                           Twenty
                                                 Improvement ↑                     Improvement ↑                      Improvement ↑                    Improvement ↑
        Method               Optimized Nd ↓                           Time (s) ↓                   Optimized Nd ↓                         Time (s) ↓
                                               (Optimized Nd, %)                     (Time, %)                      (Optimized Nd, %)                    (Time, %)
    Default (Mfs2)              6017631               NA               78784.04          NA           7693089              NA             108735.49         NA
  CMO-Mfs2 (0.5, Ours)          6018729             -0.001             32001.27         59.38         7694455            -0.002           56965.94         47.61
 2CMO-Mfs2 (0.3, Ours)          5434092              9.70              36425.15         53.77         6877483             10.60           59786.55         45.02
 2CMO-Mfs2 (0.4, Ours)          5433745              9.70              46572.91         40.80         6877158             10.61           75956.18         30.15

  Industrial Circuits                                        Ci1                                                                  Ci2
                                               Improvement ↑                       Improvement ↑                      Improvement ↑                    Improvement ↑
        Method                  Lev ↓                                 Time (s) ↓                   Optimized Nd ↓                         Time (s) ↓
                                                 (Lev, %)                            (Time, %)                      (Optimized Nd, %)                    (Time, %)
   Default (Mfs2)                47                 NA                 180.35           NA             99245              NA                78.07           NA
 CMO-Mfs2 (0.5, Ours)            47                 0.00               113.08          37.30           99245              0.00              45.61          41.58
2CMO-Mfs2 (0.3, Ours)            45                 4.26               142.96          20.73           94240              5.04              64.37          17.55
2CMO-Mfs2 (0.4, Ours)            45                 4.26               177.04           1.84           93184              6.11              81.07          -3.84
  Industrial Circuits                                        Ci3                                                                  Ci4
                                                Improvement ↑                      Improvement ↑                      Improvement ↑                    Improvement ↑
        Method              Optimized Nd ↓                            Time (s) ↓                   Optimized Nd ↓                         Time (s) ↓
                                              (Optimized Nd, %)                      (Time, %)                      (Optimized Nd, %)                    (Time, %)
   Default (Mfs2)              196565                NA                458.31            NA           215708               NA              201.43           NA
 CMO-Mfs2 (0.5, Ours)          196565                0.00              255.90           44.16         215711             -0.001            109.42          45.68
2CMO-Mfs2 (0.3, Ours)          194516               1.042              402.67          12.140         215476              0.11             182.60           9.35
2CMO-Mfs2 (0.4, Ours)          194516               1.042              515.15         -12.402         215476              0.11             202.72          -0.64


                                                                                   32
