Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K NOWLEDGE E NTROPY D ECAY DURING L ANGUAGE M ODEL
P RETRAINING H INDERS N EW K NOWLEDGE ACQUISITION
 Jiyeon Kim1∗                 Hyunji Lee1∗         Hyowon Cho1            Joel Jang2

 Hyeonbin Hwang1               Seungpil Won3        Youbin Ahn3         Dohaeng Lee3         Minjoon Seo1

 1                        2                                   3
     KAIST AI                 University of Washington            LG AI Research
 {jiyeon.kim, hyunji.amy.lee, minjoon}@kaist.ac.kr



                                                  A BSTRACT
             In this work, we investigate how a model’s tendency to broadly integrate its parametric
             knowledge evolves throughout pretraining and how this behavior affects overall perfor-
             mance, particularly in terms of knowledge acquisition and forgetting. We introduce the
             concept of knowledge entropy, which quantifies the range of memory sources the model
             engages with; high knowledge entropy indicates that the model utilizes a wide range of
             memory sources, while low knowledge entropy suggests reliance on specific sources with
             greater certainty. Our analysis reveals a consistent decline in knowledge entropy as pre-
             training advances. We also find that the decline is closely associated with a reduction
             in the model’s ability to acquire and retain knowledge, leading us to conclude that di-
             minishing knowledge entropy (smaller number of active memory sources) impairs the
             model’s knowledge acquisition and retention capabilities. We find further support for this
             by demonstrating that increasing the activity of inactive memory sources enhances the
             model’s capacity for knowledge acquisition and retention.1


1        I NTRODUCTION
Recent studies have analyzed how language models store world knowledge in their parameters and utilize
this knowledge to generate responses during inference time (Geva et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2022a;b; Meng
et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2024). However, little is known about how their behavior of integrating various
factual knowledge embedded in their parameters changes throughout the pretraining stage. In this work, we
perform a deep analysis of how a model’s property of broadly integrating diverse parametric knowledge
evolves throughout pretraining and how these shifts affect overall performance, particularly in terms of
knowledge acquisition and forgetting in a continual learning setup. We hypothesize that this varying level of
integration may explain why models in the later stages of pretraining encounter challenges in acquiring new
knowledge (Dohare et al., 2024; Jang et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2024).
We introduce knowledge entropy, which reflects how a language model integrates various knowledge sources,
to investigate how this behavior evolves throughout pretraining. Recent studies have shown that feed-forward
layers (FFNs) serve as a key-value memory (Geva et al., 2022; 2021; Dai et al., 2022a). Building on this
research, as shown in Figure 1, we view the second projection matrix V as a memory, composed of memory
     ∗
         Denotes equal contribution
     1
         Code in https://github.com/kaistAI/Knowledge-Entropy.git


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   ...                 ...             ...             [Continual Learning Performance]

  Memory

                          ...                 Initial              Mid               Final
  Vectors


                                       Knowledge


                                         Entropy
                                                                                                                              Forgetting


 Memory
                         ...
Coefficients


                                                                                                                              Acquisition
                                ...
                                                                                                                                Pretraining

                                                                                                     Initial   Mid    Final        steps
                                                                                     Pretraining


                                                         Initial   Mid       Final       steps


Figure 1: Illustration of our findings: distribution of memory coefficients C̄ in feed-forward layers become
sparser throughout pretraining, as indicated by a decrease in knowledge entropy H(θ). This sparsity deteri-
orates the model’s knowledge acquisition A(θ) and increases forgetting F(θ) when conducting continual
knowledge learning with models from different pretraining stages. Thereby, as denoted by the star, when we
artificially increase the knowledge entropy of the final stage model, both knowledge acquisition and retention
increase.


vectors, which store the model’s parametric knowledge, and view the first projection matrix K as generating
coefficients C̄ that determine how these memory vectors are combined. Knowledge entropy measures how
sparsely these memory coefficients are distributed; high knowledge entropy indicates that the model tends to
integrate a broad range of memory vectors whereas the model with low knowledge entropy relies on specific
memory vectors with high certainty. We analyze models at different stages of pretraining to investigate how
knowledge entropy changes throughout pretraining. Our findings show that models in the later stages of
pretraining tend to exhibit lower knowledge entropy, suggesting a shift from utilizing a larger set of active
memory vectors to a smaller, more focused set as pretraining progresses.
We hypothesize that changes in knowledge entropy would influence the model’s behavior when encountering
new knowledge. To test this, we conduct a thorough analysis of the model’s ability to acquire new knowledge
and retain existing knowledge in a continual knowledge learning2 scenario on a target corpus (Jang et al., 2022;
Wu et al., 2023), starting from different stages of pretraining. This involves further training the pretrained
model on new-domain corpora using a language modeling objective to integrate new knowledge. Our
results reveal a strong correlation between knowledge entropy and the model’s ability to acquire and retain
knowledge: both knowledge entropy and knowledge acquisition and retention decrease as the pretraining
progresses.
We assume that this correlation arises because lower knowledge entropy indicates a smaller set of active
memory vectors, leading to frequent overwriting of these memory vectors to store new knowledge. To test
this assumption, we conduct experiments where we artificially increase the activity of previously inactive
memory vectors, allowing the model to store new knowledge across a broader range of memory vectors.
Surprisingly, we observe that these modified models demonstrate improved knowledge acquisition and
reduced forgetting compared to the original models when undergoing continual knowledge learning; though
not to the same extent as the original pretrained model with equivalent knowledge entropy. Such a result
bolsters our hypothesis that having a limited number of active memory vectors (low knowledge entropy)
plays a critical role in explaining the degradation of the model’s ability to acquire and retain knowledge as
pretraining advances.
    2
        In this work, we use the term “continual knowledge learning” and “continual learning” interchangeably.


                                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Overall, our findings reveal that as pretraining progresses, models exhibit a narrower integration of
memory vectors, reflected by decreasing knowledge entropy, which hinders both knowledge acquisition
and retention. Models in the later stages of pretraining3 show low knowledge entropy, leading to poor
knowledge acquisition and higher forgetting rates despite being trained on larger datasets. In contrast, early-
stage models display high knowledge entropy, enabling better knowledge acquisition and retention; however,
their performance is often limited by weaker language modeling capabilities. Thus, mid-stage models strike a
balance, showing strong knowledge acquisition and retention along with overall performance, making them
a practical choice for further training to incorporate new knowledge. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work to analyze how a model’s behavior in integrating various memory vectors changes across
pretraining stages and the subsequent effects on performance when acquiring new knowledge in a continual
knowledge learning setup.


2       R ELATED W ORK

Dynamics of Knowledge in Language Models Recent studies have shown that language models embed
world knowledge within their parameters and integrate this knowledge to generate responses (Yang, 2024;
Petroni et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021). Thereby, various research efforts aim to understand these dynamics
of knowledge in language models (how they learn, store, and engage their parametric knowledge) during
inference and training phases. Several studies have focused on investigating the inference process: Geva
et al. (2023) analyzes the role of different layers in language models. Allen-Zhu & Li (2024b) demonstrates
that model parameters have a limited knowledge capacity. Some studies suggest key-value memory (Geva
et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2022a). Other research focuses on the pretraining phase. Liu et al.
(2021) studies the sequence that language models learn various types of knowledge. Allen-Zhu & Li (2024a)
examines strategies to enhance knowledge storage and extraction. Teehan et al. analyzes internal structural
changes. Sun & Dredze (2024) investigates the interaction between pretraining and finetuning. Chang et al.
(2024) analyzes patterns of knowledge acquisition specifically during the pretraining process, addressing the
question of how language models acquire knowledge during pretraining. While their study shares similarities
with ours in investigating knowledge acquisition behavior during LLM training, our work takes a different
focus. We aim to understand why LLMs encounter increasing difficulty in acquiring new knowledge as
pretraining progresses, exploring the underlying reasons behind the challenges faced by later-stage models
in learning new knowledge. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to explore how the behavior
of language models in integrating their knowledge evolves throughout the pretraining phase, and to analyze
how these changes affect model performance in terms of knowledge acquisition and forgetting in continual
knowledge learning.

Entropy in Natural Language Processing In information theory, entropy quantifies the value of infor-
mation, where predictable (certain) events have low entropy and unpredictable (uncertain) events have high
entropy (Lairez, 2022; Majenz, 2018). In natural language processing (NLP), entropy is used in various
ways to measure the certainty of language models. Yang (2024) analyzes the entropy of model outputs based
on input prompts. Araujo et al. (2022) calculates the entropy of outputs at each layer to determine weight
adjustments in a continual learning setup. Other papers focus on token probability entropy to understand the
information required to predict the next word in a sequence (Vazhentsev et al.; Geng et al., 2024; Malinin
& Gales, 2021). Lower entropy in a model’s predictions may indicate that the model has become more
certain about its predictions based on training data. Additionally, Kumar & Sarawagi (2019) measures entropy
over the cross-attention layer to assess the uncertainty in the attention layer of encoder-decoder models.
The entropy proposed in our paper, knowledge entropy, differs from previous work in that it focuses on the

    3
     We define the final stage as the last stage of the pre-determined learning rate schedule, with the most decayed learning
rate. The mid-stage refers to around 50% of the schedule, while the initial stage refers to around 20%.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


entropy of a model’s parametric knowledge, assessing the uncertainty or variability in utilizing the knowledge
encoded within the language model.


3       K NOWLEDGE E NTROPY

In this section, we introduce knowledge entropy (Section 3.1) to examine how broadly the model integrates
its parametric knowledge and describe the experimental setup used to measure it (Section 3.2). Next,
in Section 3.3, we measure knowledge entropy at various pretraining stages to analyze how the model’s
knowledge integration behavior evolves over pretraining. In Section 3.4, we extend our investigation by
exploring alternative definitions of entropy.

3.1       D EFINITION

In this work, we introduce a new concept, knowledge entropy, to analyze the scope of a model’s access
patterns to its parametric knowledge. Low knowledge entropy suggests that the model relies on a narrower set
of specific knowledge sources with high certainty whereas high knowledge entropy indicates that the model
integrates with a diverse range of knowledge sources. Inspired by prior research that considers feed-forward
layers (FFNs) as key-value memory containing a model’s parametric memory (Geva et al., 2021; Dai et al.,
2022a; Meng et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2022), we consider the knowledge source to be the memory vectors,
which is the second projection matrix of FFN. We measure how broadly the model integrates these memory
vectors with memory coefficients, which are calculated by the first projection matrix and the activation
function.
Geva et al. (2021) propose the concept of key-value memory, demonstrating that FFNs function similarly to
the key-value neural memories (Sukhbaatar et al., 2015). The feed-forward layer consists of two projection
layers and activation in the middle:

                                               F F N (x) = f (x · K T ) · V                                            (1)
where x ∈ Rd . The first projection matrix (K ∈ Rm×d ) corresponds to the keys, and the second projection
matrix (V ∈ Rm×d ) represents the values, or the memories comprised of memory vectors. The output,
F F N (x), is a linear combination of the memory vectors vi=1,··· ,m ∈ Rd which are the rows of V , where
the coefficients4 C are determined by f (x · K T ), with f being a non-linear activation function such as ReLU.
Previous studies have shown that various types of factual and linguistic knowledge are encoded within these
memories (Dai et al., 2022a; Geva et al., 2022; Meng et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2022). Thus, the final output is
generated by combining the contributions of these memory vectors, where the memory coefficients determine
the combination.
Thereby knowledge entropy, H(θ), is calculated by the sum of layer-wise entropy H(θl ), which is based on
the average coefficient C̄ l ∈ Rm averaged across all tokens in dataset D, as described in Equation 2.

                                           
                            |D|     Tn
                         1  X     1 X   (l)                                   c̄l
                 C̄ l =               C ;                   prob(c̄li ) = Pm i         ,   for i = 1, 2, . . . , m
                        |D| n=1 Tn j=1 n,j                                           l
                                                                               k=1 c̄k
                                                                                                                       (2)
                                                 m
                                                 X                                                     L
                                                                                                       X
                                    H(θl ) = −         prob(c̄li ) · log(prob(c̄li ));       H(θ) =           H(θl )
                                                 i=1                                                    l=1

    4
        We use the terms “coefficient” and “memory coefficient” interchangeably.


                                                          4
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                      70                        Attention Entropy   2.8
                                                          1B                                                                    NTP Entropy


                                                                                  Attention Entropy
              144.0                                       7B 297.6
                                                                                                                                                    2.7


                                                                                                                                                     NTP Entropy
                                                                                                      60
Entropy(1B)


                                                                    Entropy(7B)
              143.9
                                                                297.4                                                                               2.6
              143.8
                                                                297.2
                                                                                                      50
              143.7                                                                                                                                 2.5
              143.6                                             297.0                                 40                                            2.4
                       0     20     40     60     80      100                                              0    200      400        600
                           Rate of Pre-trained Step (%)                                                         Pre-trained steps (k)
 Figure 2: Entropy (y-axis) across different model                                 Figure 3: Entropy (y-axis) defined with Attention
 states (x-axis) for OLMo 1B and 7B. The x-axis                                    weight and next token prediction probability across
 represents the rate of the current step relative to the                           different model states (x-axis) for OLMo 1B.
 last step (738k for 1B and 557k for 7B).


       (l)
 Cn,j represents the coefficient of the j-th token position of the n-th instance at layer l, c̄li indicates the i-th
 element from C̄ l , Tn is the sequence length of the n-th instance in the dataset D, m is the inner dimension of
 feed-forward layer, and L denotes the number of layers in the model.

 3.2                E XPERIMENT S ETUP

 To conduct the experiment, we use the OLMo (Groeneveld et al., 2024) models (1B and 7B), which are
 open-source large language models with intermediate pretraining checkpoints released, trained on the Dolma
 dataset (Soldaini et al., 2024)5 . To measure knowledge entropy, we use a subset of Dolma, 2k instances
 that appear in the first batch within the official pretraining data order to ensure that all models we are using
 have seen the corpus during pretraining step. Please note that the trend persists across other corpora as
 well (Figure 7 in Appendix A.2); however, since we are analyzing the model’s behavior throughout training,
 we define knowledge entropy based on calculations using the training dataset.
                                                                        (l)                                    (l)
 In the case of OLMo, the memory coefficient Cn,j is calculated as Cn,j = abs(SwiGLU(xj )) where xj is
 the j-th token of input x and SwiGLU (Shazeer, 2020) is the activation function. We apply the absolute
 value since the SwiGLU allows negative values and the magnitude determines the contribution of the
 corresponding memory vector in the linear combination. Then, the absolute values are converted into
 a probability distribution. We also show experimentally that the trend persists with different choices of
 activation functions. Further details regarding knowledge entropy can be found in Appendix A.2.

 3.3                F INAL M ODELS T END TO E XHIBIT L OWER K NOWLEDGE E NTROPY

 Figure 2 illustrates how knowledge entropy (y-axis) changes across different stages of pretraining (x-axis).
 The results show a consistent decrease in knowledge entropy as pretraining progresses in both 1B and
 7B models. This trend suggests that models in the later stages of pretraining tend to engage with a narrower
 range of memories, relying more heavily on specific memory vectors rather than accessing and integrating
 knowledge from a broader range of memories. A consistent reduction in knowledge entropy is observed
 across all layers, with the most significant reduction occurring in the last layer, which closely resembles the
 output distribution right before the token prediction (Figure 8 in Appendix).
              5
                  We used OLMo and Dolma from the official repository


                                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.4     S IMILAR T RENDS ARE O BSERVED BY D IFFERENT D EFINITIONS OF E NTROPY

While our work defines knowledge entropy focusing on the feed-forward layer, previous studies have exam-
ined entropy in different contexts, such as the entropy of attention (Kumar & Sarawagi, 2019) and the entropy
of next-token prediction over the vocabulary space (Vazhentsev et al.; Malinin & Gales, 2021). To gain a
more comprehensive understanding of the model’s overall behavior, we extend our analysis by exploring the
entropy trends in both attention mechanisms and next-token prediction. The formula and details are provided
in Appendix A.3)

Entropy of Attention Layers Following Kumar & Sarawagi (2019), we measure attention entropy to
capture the degree of uncertainty in attention weights. It is calculated as the sum of layer-wise entropy, where
the layer-wise entropy measures the sparsity of the attention weights in each attention head. Thus, attention
entropy reflects how much weight the model assigns to specific tokens with confidence when generating the
next token given the input based on token relationships. Figure 3 shows that attention entropy consistently
decreases during pretraining, with a sharp decline in the early stages followed by a more gradual reduction.
This trend suggests that the model learns to focus on contextually important tokens within the attention layer.

Entropy of Next Token Prediction Entropy can also be measured based on the probability distribution
of next-token predictions over the vocabulary space (Vazhentsev et al.; Geng et al., 2024; Malinin & Gales,
2021). Figure 3 shows that the entropy of the next token prediction also consistently decreases throughout
pretraining, reflecting the model’s increasing certainty in its next token prediction.


4       K NOWLEDGE ACQUISITION AND F ORGETTING

We hypothesize that the reduction of knowledge entropy as pretraining progresses impacts the model’s
knowledge acquisition and forgetting as low knowledge entropy indicates sparse activation of memory
vectors, thus the vectors are likely to be consistently overwritten when new knowledge is introduced. To test
this hypothesis, we measure knowledge acquisition and forgetting using checkpoints from different stages
of pretraining in a continual knowledge learning setup (Jang et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023), where further
training is performed on new-domain corpora by next token prediction to inject new knowledge into the
pretrained models. Section 4.1 details the experimental setup and the metrics used. In Section 4.2, we present
the results of knowledge acquisition and forgetting across various pretraining stages. Finally, Section 4.3
further explores whether a relationship exists between the two behaviors: activating the inactive memory
vectors increases the knowledge acquisition ability.

4.1     E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Model & Hyperparameters We experiment using intermediate checkpoints from OLMo6 . Hyperparame-
ters are chosen following previous research on continual knowledge learning (Jang et al., 2022; Kim et al.,
2023) and we test various combinations to assess their generalizability. For batch size, we test 128 and 2048;
for learning rate, we experiment with 1e-4, 4e-4, and 1e-3. We also investigate the effect of training duration
by comparing a single epoch to three epochs. Among these configurations, we focus primarily on a batch
size of 128, a learning rate of 4e-4, and single-epoch training as this setup most closely aligns with continual
knowledge learning.

    6
    We select these intermediate checkpoints following Sun & Dredze (2024), which explores language model (OLMo)
throughout pretraining. Available checkpoints can be found here.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dataset We experiment on a subset of two datasets7 : PubMed 8 , a corpus of bio-medical and life science
topics with abstracts, and C4 (Raffel et al., 2020), a large-scale corpus comprising diverse text data gathered
from web pages. We use PubMed as the primary dataset as it contains more new knowledge, making it a
better fit for our continual knowledge learning setup (Appendix B.1). In addition to the dataset, we inject
synthetic knowledge during training to assess the model’s ability to acquire new information. Specifically, we
utilize F ICTIONAL K NOWLEDGE dataset (Chang et al., 2024), which is designed to assess how well language
models acquire factual knowledge during pretraining9 . This dataset includes 130 paragraphs about fictional
yet realistic entities and 1,950 probes where each paragraph contains 15 different probes. The passages
are incorporated into the training batch 10 times during the continual knowledge learning. After training,
we evaluate the models on evaluation probes of the Fictional Knowledge dataset to measure knowledge
acquisition, and evaluate on six downstream tasks in zero-shot manner (Sun & Dredze, 2024; Groeneveld
et al., 2024) to measure knowledge forgetting (SciQ (Welbl et al., 2017), Winogrande (Sakaguchi et al.,
2021), PIQA (Bisk et al., 2020), OBQA (Mihaylov et al., 2018), HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019), and ARC
Easy (Clark et al., 2018)). Detailed explanation is included in Appendix B.1.

Metric Knowledge acquisition of a language model θ is measured with the probing performance on
evaluation probes following Chang et al. (2024). When given the injected knowledge W , each instance wi in
a corpus has a corresponding set of probes Pwi , containing 15 different probes. To measure how well the
model recalls the injected knowledge, we compute the probe performance K(θ), the average log probability
ℓ(pi ;θ) of thePtarget span forPeach probe pi ∈ Pwi across all instances in wi ∈ W and calculate average;
            1             1
K(θ) = |W     |   wi ∈W |Pwi |   pi ∈Pwi ℓ(pi ; θ). The knowledge acquisition metric A(θ) is defined as the
improvement rate of K(θ) from θPT to θCL , where θPT represents the model checkpoint from a pretraining
step, which serves as the starting point and θCL represents the model after continual knowledge learning. High
A(θ) indicates the model has learned new knowledge well.
To measure knowledge forgetting of a language model, we measure average performance over six down-
stream tasks P(θ). Knowledge forgetting F(θ) is calculated by the reduction rate from θPT to θCL . Low
F(θ) indicates that the models have retained their existing knowledge. The equation and a detailed explanation
are presented in Appendix B.2.

4.2    K NOWLEDGE ACQUISITION AND R ETENTION D ECREASES ACROSS P RETRAINING S TAGE

Figure 4a shows the performance of OLMo 1B and 7B models 10 from various stages of pretraining as an
initial state. We observe that models in the final stages of pretraining struggle more with acquiring
new knowledge A(θ) and exhibit greater forgetting F(θ). As shown in Figure 4b, continually training
the models at the mid-point of the pretraining as the initial checkpoint tends to yield the best performance
in knowledge probing and downstream tasks compared to both models from the initial and final stages of
pretraining. While early-stage models demonstrate high knowledge acquisition with minimal forgetting, their
overall performance is limited by weaker language modeling capabilities. Conversely, later-stage models,
despite being trained on larger datasets, exhibit lower knowledge acquisition and higher rates of forgetting,
resulting in lower overall performance compared to the mid-stage models. This aligns with previous research
suggesting that a model in the final stage of pretraining tends to struggle when learning new knowledge,
showing a trade-off between plasticity and stability (Dohare et al., 2024; Biesialska et al., 2020; Jang et al.,
   7
     We randomly sample 205k instances for each dataset.
   8
     Datasets in huggingface
   9
     We slightly modified the dataset to our setting of which details are in Appendix B.1
  10
     For this experiment, we used PubMed as a training corpus, but we also experiment with C4 as a training corpus,
which presumably exhibits more similar distribution to the pretraining corpus, Dolma. The comparison of the two corpora
and the results can be found in Appendix B.1 and B.4.2


                                                      7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     20.0


                                                                                                                                                                      Downstream perf ( ) (%)
                              1B ( )                                 17.5                                         0.25                                               64
                  30
                              1B ( )


                                                                                            Knowledge probe ( )
                              7B ( )                                 15.0                                         0.26                                               62
Acquisition ( )


                                                                           Forgetting ( )
                  27          7B ( )                                                                                                                      1B ( )     60
                                                                     12.5                                         0.27                                    1B ( )
                  24                                                                                                                                      7B ( )     58
                                                                     10.0                                         0.28                                    7B ( )
                                                                                                                                                                     56
                                                                     7.5                                          0.29
                  21                                                                                                                                                 54
                                                                     5.0                                          0.30                                               52
                         20            40    60        80      100                                                       20      40        60        80        100
                                Rate of Pre-trained Step (%)                                                                  Rate of Pre-trained Step (%)
                                             (a)                                                                                        (b)

 Figure 4: (a) Rates of knowledge acquisition A(θ) and forgetting F(θ) (b) End performance of knowledge
 probe K(θ) and downstream task P(θ) for OLMo 1B (solid line) and 7B (dotted line) across different model
 states. The x-axis represents the ratio of the pretraining step of the initial model used in continual learning to
 the final step. (738k for 1B and 557k for 7B)


 2022). Therefore, we suggest that using a mid-stage checkpoint strikes a good balance, making it a practical
 choice as an initial starting point for further training to inject new knowledge.
We consistently observe this pattern of later-stage models underperforming compared to earlier-stage models
across various hyperparameter settings, including batch size, learning rate, training corpus, and the number of
epochs. A detailed analysis of these results is provided in Appendix B.4.

 4.3                   R ESUSCITATING I NACTIVE M EMORY V ECTORS I NCREASES K NOWLEDGE ACQUISITION

We observe a strong correlation11 between the trend of knowledge entropy (Figure 2) and the model’s ability
to acquire and retain knowledge (Figure 4a). We assume that the model’s increasing reliance on a limited
set of memory vectors (as indicated by a decrease in knowledge entropy) leads to more frequent updates
to these vectors, making it difficult to acquire new knowledge and resulting in a higher rate of forgetting.
(The intuition behind this hypothesis can be found in Appendix A.1) To test this assumption, we conduct
experiments where we artificially increase the activity or resuscitate previously inactive memory vectors.
To resuscitate inactive memory vectors, we modify the up-projection matrix K which engages with producing
memory coefficients C̄ (notations from Equation 2). Specifically, as shown in Algorithm 1, we identify the
lowest p% (resuscitation ratio) of memory coefficients and apply a multiplier u to parameters in K that are
associated with these p%. Multiplier u can take any value; in this experiment, we divide the mean coefficient
value of each layer by the respective coefficient value c̄li at each identified position i at layer l, and then
multiply the result by an amplifying factor q. By varying the value of q, we control the degree of resuscitation
applied to the p% low-activation coefficients, thereby influencing the magnitude of the average coefficient
and the corresponding size of the parameter updates.
 Figure 5a shows the knowledge acquisition and forgetting rates and Figure 5b presents the knowledge probe
 and downstream task performance after continual learning with various resuscitation configurations. For the
 experiment, we fix p to 50 with varying q and use the OLMo checkpoint at the last step of pretraining. Results
 show that when q is set to 1 or greater, it generally yields better performance in both knowledge acquisition
 and retention compared to the original model. In contrast, when q is set to 0.5, which further reduces already
            11
     The Pearson correlation between knowledge entropy and knowledge acquisition is 0.94, and with forgetting, it is
-0.96. Both correlations are statistically significant, with p-values of 6e-5 and 1e-5, respectively.


                                                                                 8
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  70                                                                                         0.28
                                                                 20                                                                                       52.3


                                                                                                                                                             Downstream perf ( ) (%)
                  60


                                                                                       Knowledge probe ( )
                                  ()                                                                         0.29                                         52.2
                                  ()                             0
Acquisition ( )


                                                                      Forgetting ( )
                  50                                                                                                                                      52.1
                                                                     20                                      0.30
                  40                                                                                                                                      52.0
                  30                                                 40                                      0.31
                                                                                                                                         ()               51.9
                  20                                                                                                                     ()
                                                                                                             0.32                                         51.8
                       original        q=0.5   q=1   q=2   q=3                                                      original   q=0.5   q=1    q=2   q=3

                                               (a)                                                                                     (b)

 Figure 5: (a) Rates of knowledge acquisition A(θ) and forgetting F(θ) (b) End performance of knowledge
 probe K(θ) and downstream task P(θ) after training with varying the amplifying factor q (x-axis) while p is
 fixed as 50.


 inactive memory coefficients, both acquisition and retention decline suggesting that concentrating parameter
 updates more heavily on already active locations leads to sparser updates, ultimately impairing overall
 performance. These results suggest that having a narrower active memory vector (low knowledge entropy)
 tends to reduce the model’s capacity to acquire new knowledge and increases knowledge forgetting.
Further experiments with fixed q and varying p show that increasing p to activate a larger portion of inactive
parameters generally leads to improved performance. Detailed result of this configuration is in Appendix B.6.
We also analyze how the result changes when using models from different stages of pretraining as the original
model. The trend holds consistently across different checkpoints of pretraining. However, the effect of
the resuscitation becomes more pronounced as the original model progresses to later stages of pretraining.
Detailed results are included in Appendix B.7.
Our result indicates that resuscitating inactive memory vectors of final-stage models tends to enhance
knowledge acquisition and overall performance compared to the unmodified final-stage model. However,
we observe that the performance remains lower compared to models from the pretraining step with similar
knowledge entropy, such as the mid-stage model. This suggests that applying linear scaling to a subset of
specific layers alone is insufficient to induce fundamental behavioral changes in the model. In other words,
to restore a model that has lost its plasticity (Dohare et al., 2024) to its previous state, more fundamental
and alternative approaches are required. Further exploring methods for effectively modifying the parameters
would be an interesting direction for future work.


 5                 C ONCLUSION

In this work, we examine how large language models’ ability to broadly integrate their parametric knowledge
(measured by knowledge entropy) changes throughout pretraining and how these changes affect knowledge
acquisition and forgetting in a continual learning setup. Our findings reveal a strong correlation between
knowledge entropy and the model’s capacity to acquire and retain knowledge. Models in the final stages
of pretraining tend to exhibit narrower integration of memory vectors, leading to lower knowledge entropy,
which negatively impacts both knowledge acquisition and retention. Interestingly, artificially increasing
knowledge entropy by modifying the parameters of final-stage models tends to improve these capabilities.
Based on our analysis, we suggest that models from the mid-stage of pretraining offer a good balance between
knowledge acquisition, retention, and overall performance, making them a good choice for further training to
introduce new knowledge.

                                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Resuscitating Low Memory Coefficients
Require: C̄ (average coefficients), p (resuscitation ratio), q (amplifying factor), K (up-projection matrix)
Ensure: Scaled up-projection matrix K using computed multiplier u
 1: for each layer l in K do
 2:     Extract average activations for layer l:
                                                    C = C̄[l]
 3:     Compute the threshold t for the lowest p% activations:
                                              t = percentile(C, p)
 4:     Identify positions of values below the threshold t:
                                            idx = (C ≤ t).nonzero( )
 5:     Compute the multiplier u for coefficients in layer l:
                                                   mean(C)
                                               u=             ×q
                                                      C
 6:     Apply scaling to the up-projection weights Kl at the identified positions:
                                              Kl [idx, :] ×= u[idx]
 7: end for


6     L IMITATION & F UTURE W ORK
Due to computational constraints, our study measures knowledge acquisition and forgetting in a continual
learning setup. Future work could explore whether these behaviors also manifest during the pretraining
phase. We focused on OLMo 1B and 7B models, as they are the only models that publicly provide inter-
mediate pretraining checkpoints and demonstrate strong performance (Sun & Dredze, 2024; Chang et al.,
2024). Extending this investigation to other models would be a valuable direction for further research. Our
resuscitation method, which arbitrarily modifies model parameters to test our hypothesis, showed promising
results in improving knowledge acquisition and retention. However, performance tended to decline when
resuscitating models at their initial or mid-stages. This suggests that more refined methods for resuscitating
model parameters—ones that avoid random modification and preserve language modeling capabilities—could
yield better outcomes. Additionally, while we observed that models in the mid-stage of pretraining strike
a good balance for further training on tasks that involve acquiring new knowledge, defining the mid-point
precisely remains an open question. In this study, we approximated the mid-point as 50% of the learning rate
schedule.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Sohee Yang, Hoyeon Chang, Seongyun Lee, Seungone Kim, Doyoung Kim, and Hanseok Oh for
helpful discussions and constructive feedback.
This work was supported by LG AI Research grant (Self-improving logical reasoning capabilities of LLMs,
2024, 50%) and the Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation(IITP)
grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (RS-2024-00397966, Development of a Cybersecurity Spe-
cialized RAG-based sLLM Model for Suppressing Gen-AI Malfunctions and Construction of a Publicly
Demonstration Platform, 20%; No.2022-0-00113, Developing a Sustainable Collaborative Multi-modal
Lifelong Learning Framework, 20%; No.RS-2021-II212068, Artificial Intelligence Innovation Hub, 10%)

                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
AF Agarap. Deep learning using rectified linear units (relu). arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.08375, 2018.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.1, knowledge storage and extraction.
  In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024a. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=5x788rqbcj.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.3, knowledge capacity scaling laws.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05405, 2024b.
Vladimir Araujo, Julio Hurtado, Alvaro Soto, and Marie-Francine Moens. Entropy-based stability-plasticity
  for lifelong learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 3721–3728, 2022.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hallahan,
  Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al. Pythia: A suite
  for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.
Magdalena Biesialska, Katarzyna Biesialska, and Marta Ruiz Costa-jussà. Continual lifelong learning in natu-
 ral language processing: A survey. ArXiv, abs/2012.09823, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
 org/CorpusID:227231454.
Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Jianfeng Gao, Yejin Choi, et al. Piqa: Reasoning about physical commonsense
  in natural language. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp.
  7432–7439, 2020.
Hoyeon Chang, Jinho Park, Seonghyeon Ye, Sohee Yang, Youngkyung Seo, Du-Seong Chang, and Minjoon
  Seo. How do large language models acquire factual knowledge during pretraining? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.11813, 2024.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind
  Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.
Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao Chang, and Furu Wei. Knowledge neurons in pretrained
  transformers. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings of the 60th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8493–8502,
  Dublin, Ireland, May 2022a. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.
  581. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.581.
Damai Dai, Wen-Jie Jiang, Qingxiu Dong, Yajuan Lyu, Qiaoqiao She, and Zhifang Sui. Neural knowledge
  bank for pretrained transformers. In Natural Language Processing and Chinese Computing, 2022b. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:251223709.
Shibhansh Dohare, J. Fernando Hernandez-Garcia, Qingfeng Lan, Parash Rahman, Ashique Rupam Mahmood,
  and Richard S. Sutton. Loss of plasticity in deep continual learning. Nature, 632:768 – 774, 2024. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259251905.
Qingxiu Dong, Damai Dai, Yifan Song, Jingjing Xu, Zhifang Sui, and Lei Li. Calibrating factual knowledge
  in pretrained language models. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Findings
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp. 5937–5947, Abu Dhabi, United
  Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  findings-emnlp.438. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-emnlp.438.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiahui Geng, Fengyu Cai, Yuxia Wang, Heinz Koeppl, Preslav Nakov, and Iryna Gurevych. A survey of
   confidence estimation and calibration in large language models. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven
   Bethard (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
   Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6577–6595,
   Mexico City, Mexico, June 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
   naacl-long.366. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-long.366.
Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are key-
 value memories. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.),
 Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 5484–5495,
 Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
 doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.446. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.446.
Mor Geva, Avi Caciularu, Kevin Wang, and Yoav Goldberg. Transformer feed-forward layers build predictions
 by promoting concepts in the vocabulary space. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang
 (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
 30–45, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
 doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.3. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.3.
Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting recall of factual associations
 in auto-regressive language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of
 the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 12216–12235, Singapore,
 December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.751.
 URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.751.
Dirk Groeneveld, Iz Beltagy, Pete Walsh, Akshita Bhagia, Rodney Kinney, Oyvind Tafjord, Ananya Harsh
  Jha, Hamish Ivison, Ian Magnusson, Yizhong Wang, et al. Olmo: Accelerating the science of language
  models. ACL 2024, 2024.
Joel Jang, Seonghyeon Ye, Sohee Yang, Joongbo Shin, Janghoon Han, Gyeonghun KIM, Stanley Jungkyu
  Choi, and Minjoon Seo. Towards continual knowledge learning of language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=vfsRB5MImo9.
Yujin Kim, Jaehong Yoon, Seonghyeon Ye, Sung Ju Hwang, and Se-young Yun. Carpe diem: on the evaluation
  of world knowledge in lifelong language models. NACCL 2024, 2023.
Aviral Kumar and Sunita Sarawagi. Calibration of encoder decoder models for neural machine translation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.00802, 2019.
Didier Lairez. What entropy really is: the contribution of information theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05747,
  2022.
Zeyu Liu, Yizhong Wang, Jungo Kasai, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Noah A. Smith. Probing across time: What
  does RoBERTa know and when? In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott
  Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pp. 820–842,
  Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2021.findings-emnlp.71. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-emnlp.71.
Christian Majenz. Entropy in quantum information theory–communication and cryptography. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1810.10436, 2018.
Andrey Malinin and Mark Gales. Uncertainty estimation in autoregressive structured prediction. In Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  jN5y-zb5Q7m.

                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex J Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual associations
  in GPT. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=-h6WAS6eE4.
Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Can a suit of armor conduct electricity? a
  new dataset for open book question answering. In Ellen Riloff, David Chiang, Julia Hockenmaier, and
  Jun’ichi Tsujii (eds.), Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 2381–2391, Brussels, Belgium, October-November 2018. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1260. URL https://aclanthology.org/D18-1260.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H. Miller, and
  Sebastian Riedel. Language models as knowledge bases? In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, 2019. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:202539551.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
  Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer.
  Journal of machine learning research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. Winogrande: An adversarial
  winograd schema challenge at scale. Communications of the ACM, 64(9):99–106, 2021.
Noam Shazeer. Glu variants improve transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05202, 2020.
Luca Soldaini, Rodney Kinney, Akshita Bhagia, Dustin Schwenk, David Atkinson, Russell Authur, Ben
  Bogin, Khyathi Chandu, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar, et al. Dolma: An open corpus of three trillion
  tokens for language model pretraining research. ACL 2024, 2024.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jason Weston, Rob Fergus, et al. End-to-end memory networks. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Kaiser Sun and Mark Dredze. Amuro & char: Analyzing the relationship between pre-training and fine-tuning
  of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06663, 2024.
Ryan Teehan, Miruna Clinciu, Oleg Serikov, Eliza Szczechla, Natasha Seelam, Shachar Mirkin, and Aaron
  Gokaslan. Emergent structures and training dynamics in large language models. ACL 2022. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.bigscience-1.11.
Artem Vazhentsev, Akim Tsvigun, Roman Vashurin, Sergey Petrakov, Daniil Vasilev, Maxim Panov, Alexan-
  der Panchenko, and Artem Shelmanov. Efficient out-of-domain detection for sequence to sequence models.
  Findings of ACL 2023. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.93.
Cunxiang Wang, Pai Liu, and Yue Zhang. Can generative pre-trained language models serve as knowledge
  bases for closed-book QA? In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
  Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3241–3251, Online,
  August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.251. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.251.
Johannes Welbl, Nelson F. Liu, and Matt Gardner. Crowdsourcing multiple choice science questions. In
  Leon Derczynski, Wei Xu, Alan Ritter, and Tim Baldwin (eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Noisy
  User-generated Text, pp. 94–106, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-4413. URL https://aclanthology.org/W17-4413.
Yuhao Wu, Tongjun Shi, Karthick Sharma, Chun Wei Seah, and Shuhao Zhang. Online continual knowledge
  learning for language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09632, 2023.

                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wenzhe Yang. Entropy, thermodynamics and the geometrization of the language model. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2407.21092, 2024.
Yunzhi Yao, Ningyu Zhang, Zekun Xi, Meng Wang, Ziwen Xu, Shumin Deng, and Huajun Chen. Knowledge
  circuits in pretrained transformers. ArXiv, abs/2405.17969, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:270068372.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. HellaSwag: Can a machine
  really finish your sentence? In Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluís Màrquez (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4791–4800, Florence,
  Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1472. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P19-1472.


A     K NOWLEDGE E NTROPY
A.1    I NTUITION B EHIND THE D EFINITION OF K NOWLEDGE E NTROPY

The mechanism behind the relationship between decreasing knowledge entropy and the ability to acquire
and retain knowledge during pretraining is that the coefficients in the linear combination of memory vectors
determine how the corresponding memory vectors are updated. As defined in Equation 1, the output
of the feed-forward layers (FFNs) is a linear combination of memory vectors vi=1,··· ,m ∈ Rd , the row
vectors of V ∈ Rm×d , where the coefficients ci are given by f (x · K T ). In other words, F F N (x) =
c1 v1 + c2 v2 + · · · + cm vm . Within a given layer, since the operations beyond the FFNs and the input to the
FFNs remain consistent across all memory vectors, the coefficients act as scaling factors for the gradient by
                                                 ∂L
the chain rule. During training, the gradient ∂v  i,j
                                                      for i = 1, 2, . . . , m and j = 1, 2, . . . , d can be decomposed
as:
                                         ∂L            ∂L         ∂F F N (x)
                                               =                ·
                                        ∂vi,j     ∂F F N (x)          ∂vi,j
Here, ∂F F∂LN (x) is  the same  for all v i , meaning   that the  relative   magnitude of the gradient depends on
∂F F N (x)
  ∂vi,j   = ci . Thus, larger coefficients result in proportionally larger gradients being applied to the
corresponding memory vectors, amplifying their updates during backpropagation.
As pretraining progresses, a spikier coefficient distribution—captured by decreasing knowledge en-
tropy—implies that gradient updates become increasingly concentrated on specific positions where the
average coefficients are larger. This centralization can affect the model’s ability to evenly utilize its memory
capacity, thereby impacting knowledge acquisition and retention.

A.2    K NOWLEDGE E NTROPY

Does the choice of model change the trend? To assess the generalizability of the trend observed in
Figure 2, we conducted experiments on the knowledge entropy trend using Pythia 1.4B model (Biderman
et al., 2023). As shown in Figure 6, knowledge entropy measured with the Pythia model also tends to decrease
as pretraining progresses.

Does the choice of dataset change the trend? As expressed in Equation 2, knowledge entropy is dependent
on the dataset D. We define D as the dataset used during pretraining, as knowledge entropy reflects how the
model integrates the knowledge stored in its memory vectors, learned during pretraining. However, to further
explore whether the choice of dataset influences the trend of knowledge entropy, we measure it using PubMed
and C4. Figure 7 shows that the trend remains consistent regardless of the dataset used when calculating
knowledge entropy.

                                                     14
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Knowledge Entropy
                    143.7
                                                                                                           143.9                                          C4


                                                                                       Knowledge Entropy
                                                                                                           143.8                                          Pubmed
                                                                                                                                                          Dolma
                    143.6                                                                                  143.7
                                                                                                           143.6
                    143.5                                                                                  143.5
                                                                                                           143.4
                    143.4                                                                                  143.3
                                20      40      60       80   100         120   140                                100 200 300 400 500 600 700
                                            Pre-trained steps (k)                                                             Pre-trained steps (k)
 Figure 6: Knowledge Entropy (y-axis) measured                                           Figure 7: Knowledge Entropy(y-axis) measured with
 with Dolma on different pretraining stages of Pythia                                    Dolma, C4, Pubmed corpus across different pretrain-
 1.4B model.                                                                             ing stages



                    9.00                                                                                   9.30
Knowledge Entropy


                                                                                       Knowledge Entropy
                    8.98                                                                                   9.27
                    8.96                                                                                   9.24
                    8.94                                                                                   9.21
                    8.92                                                                                   9.18
                                     18k                                                                               5k
                    8.90             369                                                                   9.15        278k
                    8.88             738k                                                                              557k
                                                                                                           9.12
                            0          2       5         7    10          12     15                                0     5      10         15   20   25      30
                                                     Layer                                                                             Layer
                                                   (a)                                                                               (b)

                                            Figure 8: Layer-wise Knowledge Entropy of OLMo-1B(a) and 7B(b)



  Does the choice of activation function change the trend? We also explored an alternative where we do
  not take the absolute value of the SwiGLU output. Instead, following the ReLU function (Agarap, 2018),
  another widely used activation function, we replaced all negative values with 0. Figure 9 shows that the trend
  remains consistent even under this modification.

                                                                    (l)
                                                               Cn,j = ReLU(gate(xj )) ⊗ up(xj ),


  Layer-wise Knowledge Entropy Figure 8 shows how knowledge entropy changes by layer during pretrain-
  ing. Knowledge entropy consistently decreases in every layer, with the most significant reduction occurring
  in the last layer, which closely resembles the output distribution right before the token prediction. OLMo-7B
  model also shows a similar trend to 1B model.

                                                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          144.0                                       SwiGLU                    3000
                                                      ReLU                                                                         pubmed
                                                                                2500                                               c4
          143.8
                                                                                2000
Entropy


                                                                    Frequency
          143.6
                                                                                1500
          143.4                                                                 1000
          143.2                                                                 500
                  0   100 200 300 400 500 600 700                                 0
                             Pre-trained Step (k)                                       0     10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
                                                                                             Average Perplexity of Entities in the Instance
Figure 9: Knowledge Entropy(y-axis) when employ-
ing original SwiGLU(solid line) and ReLU activa-                    Figure 10: Histogram of average perplexity of enti-
tion(dotted line) across different pretraining stages               ties in C4 and Pubmed corpus


A.3           E NTROPY OF ATTENTION L AYERS

Inspired by previous research that emphasizes the attention layer’s role of attribute extraction (Geva et al.,
2023), we also measure attention entropy H(θatt ) similarly to Kumar & Sarawagi (2019)12 . Attention weights,
which are the output of softmax normalization after the key-query-value operation, can be interpreted as
weight assigned to the previous tokens. As the attention weight for each token position in each attention head
forms a probability distribution(summing to 1), calculating entropy follows the normal entropy formula. Then,
                         l
layer-wise entropy H(θatt  ) is averaged over token position and attention heads and attention entropy H(θatt )
                                      l
is the sum of layer-wise entropy H(θatt ). Following the notations from Geva et al. (2023), attention entropy is
calculated as:


                                          j
                                          X
                               h,l
                        Hn,j (θatt )=−          Ah,l,n
                                                 i,j   · log(Ah,l,n
                                                              i,j ) for i = 1, 2, . . . , Tn and j = 1, 2, . . . , Tn
                                          i=1
                           |D|
                                                                                                                                        (3)
                                     Tn                                                N                               L
             h,l     1  X
                            1
                                     X    h,l                                    1 X    h,l
                                                                                                                       X
          H(θatt )=                Hn,j (θatt ) ;                 l
                                                               H(θatt )=              H(θatt );           H(θatt ) =             l
                                                                                                                              H(θatt )
                    |D| n=1 Tn j=1                                                N
                                                                                       h=1                              l=1


where Ah,l,n ∈ RTn ×Tn represents the attention weights of the h-th attention head in layer l for the n-th
instance, Tn is the sequence length of the n-th instance in the training dataset D, N denotes the number of
attention heads, and L denotes the number of layers in the model.

A.4           E NTROPY OF N EXT T OKEN P REDICTION

The entropy of next token prediction (Vazhentsev et al.; Geng et al., 2024; Malinin & Gales, 2021) is defined
       n,j      P|V|
as H(θntp  ) = − i=1 pi · log(pi ), where pi represents the probability of the i-th token. This value is then
averaged over the sequence length (Tn ) and the dataset size (|D|).
   12
      Kumar & Sarawagi (2019) measures entropy using attention weights from cross-attention in an encoder-decoder
architecture. However, as we employ a decoder-only model, we modify the equation to use attention weights from
self-attention.


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     K NOWLEDGE ACQUISITION AND FORGETTING

B.1    DATASETS

Training Dataset for Continual Knowledge Learning In this section, we share a brief description of the
datasets we used. For continual knowledge learning, we experiment with PubMed and C4. The PubMed
dataset consists of biomedical literature abstracts from the PubMed database, containing articles across a
wide range of topics in medicine and biology. The C4 (Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus) dataset (Raffel
et al., 2020) is a large-scale, preprocessed collection of text scraped from the web, designed to be a clean and
diverse representation of natural language.
To compare the distribution of C4, PubMed, and Dolma, we evaluate the average perplexity of entities for C4
and PubMed, as shown in Figure 10. On the x-axis, we plot the range of an average perplexity of instances,
while the y-axis represents the number of instances. We randomly sample 10,000 instances from each corpus,
extract entities using GPT-4o, and calculate perplexity with the last checkpoint of OLMo. The perplexity
values from the last checkpoint of OLMo indicate how likely these entities are to appear in the pretraining
corpus, Dolma. The results reveal that PubMed exhibits a broad distribution of perplexity, with a higher
number of instances having high perplexity values. In contrast, C4 shows a tendency towards lower perplexity,
suggesting that the distribution of entities in PubMed differs from that in Dolma, while the distribution in C4
tends to be more similar to Dolma.

Evaluation Dataset to measure Knowledge Acquisition To measure knowledge acquisition of language
model, we use the fictional knowledge dataset (Chang et al., 2024), which is designed to assess how well
LLMs acquire factual knowledge during pretraining. This dataset includes 130 paragraphs 13 presented in a
Wikipedia-style format with fictional yet realistic entities (injected knowledge) and 1,950 probes which are
cloze-task-style sentences to query the information within the corpus. The final span of each probe, referred
to as the target span, is used to evaluate the model’s prediction probability, which serves as a measure of
knowledge acquisition performance.
In Chang et al. (2024), the probes are divided into three levels of difficulty, with five sentences created for
each level. This results in 15 probes per corpus. The difficulty levels are as follows: 1) Memorization
probes directly ask about sentences explicitly present in the fictional corpus. 2) Semantic generalization
probes are paraphrased versions of the memorization probes to test the model’s understanding of meaning
beyond surface forms. 3) Compositional generalization probes are designed to assess whether the model
can integrate multiple pieces of knowledge from the fictional corpus. The injected knowledge is incorporated
into the training corpus during continual learning, with updates occurring every 160 steps.
Following Chang et al. (2024), we divide the 130 corpora into two settings: paraphrase and once. In the
paraphrase setting, 70 instances are each paraphrased 10 times. For every 160 steps, one paraphrased version
of an instance is added to the training corpus, repeating this process 10 times14 . In the once setting, each
instance is presented only once throughout the entire continual learning process. The 60 instances are divided
into 10 groups, with 6 instances added every 160 steps.

Evaluation Dataset to measure Knowledge Forgetting                To measure the forgetting rate, we evaluate on 6
downstream datasets.
   13
      While Chang et al. (2024) utilizes 120 paragraphs, comprising 40 for paraphrase setup, 40 for duplicate, and 40 for
once, we utilized 130 paragraphs, the whole original data. We scaled up the number of paragraphs with paraphrases to 70,
utilizing GPT-4 following Chang et al. (2024)
   14
      We maintain updates every 160 steps(10 steps when batch size is 2048) because our total training duration is 1,600
steps(100 steps), and we repeat the dataset injection process 10 times.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • S CI Q: multiple-choice question-answering dataset consisting of over 13,000 science exam-style
         questions, covering subjects such as physics, chemistry, biology, and earth science
       • W INOGRANDE: large-scale benchmark designed to test commonsense reasoning in natural language
         understanding
       • PIQA: commonsense reasoning about everyday physical interactions such as how to perform tasks
         involving physical actions
       • OBQA: multiple-choice question-answering benchmark designed to assess a model’s ability to
         answer elementary-level science questions.
       • H ELLA S WAG: a large-scale benchmark for commonsense reasoning, focusing on selecting the most
         plausible continuation of a given narrative or scene.
       • ARC E ASY: multiple-choice science questions typically answered by students in elementary and
         middle school.

B.2   M ETRIC

In this section, we share a detailed description of how we evaluate knowledge acquisition and knowledge
forgetting.

Knowledge Acquisition Given a language model θ, θPT represents the model extracted from a pretraining
step and serves as the initial point for continual learning, and θCL represents the model after it. The acquisition
metric A(θ) for the model θ is defined as Equation 4. When given a corpus set of once setting Wonce , each
instance in a corpus wi has a corresponding set of probes Pwi , which contains 15 different probes. To
calculate the performance of the once setting, Konce (θ), we compute the average log probability ℓ(pi ;θ) of the
target span for each probe pi ∈ Pwi across all instances in wi ∈ Wonce and sum these averages. The same
calculation is performed for the paraphrase setting. The total performance K(θ) is calculated by the weighted
average of Konce (θ) and Kpara (θ). Finally, the acquisition metric A(θ) is defined as the improvement rate in
performance K(θ) from the initial model state θPT to final model state θCL .


                 1          X           1    X                                    1          X           1    X
 Konce (θ) =                                   ℓ(pi ; θ);         Kpara (θ) =                                   ℓ(pi ; θ)
               |Wonce |               |Pwi |                                    |Wpara |               |Pwi |
                          wi ∈Wonce        pi ∈Pwi                                         wi ∈Wpara        pi ∈Pwi

                                       |Wonce | × Konce (θ) + |Wpara | × Kpara (θ)                       K(θCL ) − K(θPT )
                            K(θ) =                                                 ;         A(θ) =
                                                   |Wonce | + |Wpara |                                       K(θPT )
                                                                                                                         (4)

Knowledge Forgetting The forgetting metric F(θ) is calculated as the average performance degradation
from the initial model θPT to the final model θCL across six downstream tasks T : SciQ (Welbl et al.,
2017), Winograde (Sakaguchi et al., 2021), PIQA (Bisk et al., 2020), OBQA (Mihaylov et al., 2018),
HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019), and ARC Easy (Clark et al., 2018).


                                         1 X                              P(θCL ) − P(θPT )
                             P(θ) =          Ti (θ);          F(θ) = −                                                   (5)
                                        |T |                                  P(θPT )
                                            i∈|T |


                                                        18
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                0.200                                           0.28


                                                                                                                                                                                        Downstream perf ( ) (%)
                  40                                                                                                                                                                   64
                                                                                0.225


                                                                                                          Knowledge probe ( )
                                                                                    Knowledge probe ( )
                                                                                0.250                                           0.30                                                   62
                  30
Acquisition ( )


                             Paraphrase ( )                                     0.275                                                                                       CL ( CL)   60
                             Paraphrase ( )                                                                                     0.32                                        CL ( CL)
                  20         Once ( )                                           0.300                                                                                       PT ( PT)   58
                             Once ( )                                           0.325                                           0.34                                        PT ( PT)   56
                  10                                                            0.350
                                                                                                                                0.36                                                   54
                                                                                0.375
                  0                                                                                                                                                                    52
                                                                                0.400
                       100    200     300     400     500       600     700                                                            100   200   300     400   500       600   700
                                       Pre-trained Step (k)                                                                                         Pre-trained Step (k)

 Figure 11: Rates of knowledge acquisition A(θ)                                                            Figure 12: End performance of knowledge
 and final performance of knowledge probe K(θ)                                                             probe K(θ) and downstream task P(θ) of initial
 according to the number of injection. Paraphrase                                                          model (dotted line) and model after continual train-
 prompts (solid line) were injected 10 times and                                                           ing (solid line) in baseline setup. The x-axis repre-
 Once (dotted line) prompt only once throughout con-                                                       sents the initial model state used for continual train-
 tinual training.                                                                                          ing.


                                                                                  20                                            0.28


                                                                                                                                                                                        Downstream perf ( ) (%)
                  24          Pubmed ( )                                          18                                                                                                   57
                                                                                                          Knowledge probe ( )
                              Pubmed ( )                                          16                                                          Pubmed ( )
                                                                                                                                0.29                                                   56
Acquisition ( )


                              C4 ( )
                                                                                   Forgetting ( )


                  22                                                              14                                                          Pubmed ( )
                              C4 ( )                                                                                                          C4 ( )
                                                                                  12                                                          C4 ( )                                   55
                  20
                                                                                                                                0.30
                                                                                  10                                                                                                   54
                  18
                                                                                  8                                                                                                    53
                  16                                                              6                                             0.31
                                                                                                                                                                                       52
                       100     200      300    400        500     600     700                                                          100   200   300     400   500       600   700
                                        Pre-trained Step (k)                                                                                        Pre-trained Step (k)
                                                    (a)                                                                                                    (b)

 Figure 13: (a) Rates of knowledge acquisition A(θ) and forgetting F(θ) (b) End performance of knowledge
 probe K(θ) and downstream task P(θ) of Pubmed(solid line) and C4(dotted line) corpus across different
 model states. The x-axis represents the initial model state used for continual training.



 B.3                    F REQUENCY OF K NOWLEDGE I NJECTIONS

We divide the experiment into two settings: the once setting, where knowledge is injected a single time, and
the paraphrase setting, where knowledge is injected ten times using ten paraphrased paragraphs. Figure 11
presents knowledge acquisition results based on the frequency of injections. Knowledge acquisition and final
performance generally follow similar trends in both settings, with models in the later stages of pretraining
showing the lowest performance. However, the performance and acquisition rate of once setting lag behind
those of paraphrase setting. Also, notably, for models in the final stage of pretraining, the acquisition rate in
the once setting was negative. This indicates that the log probability of the injected knowledge decreased,
preventing successful incorporation of the new knowledge. In other words, even the knowledge injected
during continual learning is subject to forgetting throughout the continual learning process.

                                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.4     K NOWLEDGE ACQUISITION & F ORGETTING

B.4.1    BASELINE S ETUP

Our base experiments are conducted using a hyperparameter configuration most closely aligned with continual
knowledge learning studies, specifically with a batch size of 128, a learning rate of 4e-4, while training
single-epoch of PubMed corpus. We use adamW optimizer (β = 0.9, 0.95, weight decay= 0.1), cosine LR
scheduler with warmup=0.05, and set maximum sequence length as 1024. We randomly selected 204,800
instances from the PubMed and C4 datasets and matched the sequence length to 1,024 tokens by concatenating
instances. This resulted in a training dataset consisting of approximately 210 million tokens.
As analyzed in Section 4.2, final performance generally deteriorates as later-stage models are utilized as the
initial model. Figure 12 illustrates the model’s initial performance before continual learning, as well as its
performance afterward. Models in the later stages of pretraining exhibit superior language modeling abilities
before continual learning, as evidenced by the lower log probability for the newly injected knowledge (dotted
line). However, after continual learning, their performance deteriorates compared to models from the earlier
stages of pretraining (solid line). Similarly, the downstream task performance of the later-stage models was
better initially, but after continual learning, their performance declined more than that of the earlier-stage
models.

B.4.2    VARIOUS S ETTINGS

We observed consistently, even with altered hyperparameter settings, that models in the later stages of
pretraining struggle to learn new knowledge and retain existing knowledge.

Training Dataset for Continual Knowledge Learning To investigate how the type of new knowledge
affects performance, we further conducted experiments using the C4 corpus, which has a distribution more
similar to the pretraining corpus, Dolma, compared to PubMed. Figure 13a indicates that the gap in acquisition
rate between later-stage models and initial-stage models is larger when the new knowledge distribution differs
significantly from the pretraining corpus: models trained with PubMed (-6.4%p) exhibit a more pronounced
gap compared to those trained with C4 (-3.4%p).
All models, regardless of their pretraining stage, tend to perform better when continually pretrained with
PubMed compared to C4. We hypothesize that this is because PubMed’s different distribution from the
pretraining corpus encourages the model to learn more new knowledge, enhancing its ability to acquire new
information. However, the rate of improvement varies by model state. Later-stage models tend to show
similar performance regardless of the type of new knowledge, suggesting a limit in their learning capacity. In
contrast, initial-stage models exhibit a stronger ability to acquire knowledge when trained on a corpus with a
different distribution, such as PubMed, demonstrating their greater adaptability in learning new and diverse
information.

Model Size To test the universal deterioration of knowledge acquisition and retention capabilities, we also
experimented with the OLMo 7B model Groeneveld et al. (2024). In Figure 4a, the 7B model exhibits a
clear trend of diminishing knowledge acquisition A(θ) capabilities as pretraining progresses. This decline
is accompanied by an increase in forgetting F(θ), indicating that the model struggles to retain previously
learned information as new data is introduced.

Batch Size In Table 1 line (b), when the batch size is large, the influence of individual data points on the
model update decreases, resulting in a lower acquisition rate, while forgetting is less pronounced. In the later
stages of training, however, if sufficient learning rate warmup is not provided, the model appears to collapse.

                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    A(θ) ↑                                  F(θ) ↓

              Pretraining Step of θ     118k     369k         554k     738k      118k     369k     554k     738k
              (a) Baseline               25.2    24.8         21.4     18.8      10.5     12.9     17.0     19.5
              (b) BS :128 → 2048          8.9      7.8         1.0     -92.2      2.2      3.5      5.5     44.9
              (c) lr : 4e-4 → 1e-3       17.3    15.7         10.7      5.0      16.7     20.3     23.0     23.5
              (d) lr : 4e-4 → 1e-4       21.6    23.0         23.7     22.6       2.4      3.2      4.6      7.3
              (e) ep : 1 → 3             28.8    28.0         25.9     24.5      14.8     17.4     20.1     23.1

Table 1: Knowledge Acquisition A(θ)[%] and Forgetting F(θ)[%] across different Continual Learning
hyperparameters.

                                                    K(θ) ↑                                       P(θ) ↑

           Pretraining Step of θ      118k      369k          554k       738k      118k     369k     554k     738k
           (a) Baseline               -0.281    -0.280        -0.293    -0.301     54.0     54.6     52.8     52.0
           (b) BS :128 → 2048         -0.342    -0.344        -0.368    -0.714     59.0     60.5     60.1     35.6
           (c) lr : 4e-4 → 1e-3       -0.310    -0.314        -0.332    -0.353     50.3     49.9     49.0     49.4
           (d) lr : 4e-4 → 1e-4       -0.294    -0.287        -0.284    -0.287     58.9     60.7     60.6     59.9
           (e) ep : 1 → 3             -0.267    -0.268        -0.276    -0.280     51.4     51.7     50.8     49.7

Table 2: Probe Performance K(θ) and average performance on six downstream task P(θ) across different
Continual Learning hyperparameters.


Learning Rate In Table 1 line (c), when the learning rate is increased, not only is the acquisition rate lower
but forgetting becomes more pronounced. Conversely, when the learning rate is very small (in line (d)), the
models in the late stage show improved acquisition performance with the least gap compared with initial
models, but still perform worse than the mid-stage model.

Epoch In Table 1 line (e), as the number of epochs increases, leading to more repetitions, acquisition
improves with the cost of more forgetting.

B.5   T RAINING DYNAMICS OF P YTHIA

Figure 14 shows the training dynamics of Pythia Biderman et al. (2023) 1.4B and OLMo 1B. We observe
that the overall training dynamics of Pythia and OLMo are similar. However, Pythia tends to conclude early
in training, using only 10% of training tokens compared to OLMo. As a result, Pythia struggles to capture
the full dynamics of the language model during pretraining. This is because models in the early stage of
training are still influenced by a large portion of randomly initialized parameters, which leads to different
behavior compared to models that have undergone more training steps and reached a stable state. For OLMo,
based on our analysis, we assume the model reaches a stable point around 118k steps (15% of the training
dataset). However, Pythia’s final step occurs before this stable point, causing its trend to resemble that of
OLMo but deviate from the trend observed in Section 4, where knowledge acquisition improves until the
stable point and then decreases. We hypothesize that previous studies using intermediate checkpoints during

                                                         21
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                Olmo
                                                                         144.1


                                                                                                                                                               Knowledge Acquisition
                                                                         144.0


                                                     Knowledge Entropy
                                                                                                                                                              24
                                                                         143.9
                                                                         143.8                                                                                22
                                                                         143.7
                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                         143.6
                                                                                 0            1000                            2000                     3000
                                                                                                                Pythia


                                                                                                                                                               Knowledge Acquisition
                                                                         143.7                                                                                26
                                                     Knowledge Entropy



                                                                         143.6                                                                                25

                                                                         143.5                                                                                24

                                                                         143.4                                                                                23
                                                                                 0            1000       2000                                          3000
                                                                                                 Tokens (M)

 Figure 14: Knowledge Entropy and Rates of knowledge acquisition A(θ) of OLMo 1B and Pythia 1.4B
 model across different pretraining stages

                                                                                                                                         0.28                                                               52.4
                  24                                                                        19.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                               Downstream perf ( ) (%)
                                                                                            19.0
                                                                                                                   Knowledge probe ( )


                                  ()                                                                                                     0.29                                                               52.3
                                  ()
Acquisition ( )


                  22                                                                        18.5
                                                                                               Forgetting ( )


                                                                                                                                                                                                            52.2
                                                                                            18.0                                         0.30
                  20                                                                        17.5                                                                                                            52.1
                                                                                            17.0                                         0.31                                                               52.0
                                                                                                                                                                                         ()
                  18                                                                        16.5                                                                                         ()
                                                                                                                                         0.32                                                               51.9
                       original        p=30   p=50               p=70                p=90                                                       original      p=30                     p=50   p=70   p=90

                                               (a)                                                                                                                                     (b)

 Figure 15: (a) Rates of knowledge acquisition A(θ) and forgetting F(θ) (b) End performance of knowledge
 probe K(θ) and downstream task P(θ) after training with varying p (x-axis) while q is fixed as 1.


 pretraining (Chang et al., 2024; Sun & Dredze, 2024) also only measured with OLMo without Pythia for the
 same reason.

 B.6                     R ESUSCITATION E XPERIMENT: VARYING p WHILE F IXING q

Figure 15 shows the overall performance when q was fixed at 1, meaning that the lowest p% of coefficients
were scaled to converge toward the layer’s mean. It is shown that increasing p to activate a larger portion of

                                                                                                   22
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                    20                                          0.26
                                                                                                                                                                                                 54.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                    Downstream perf ( ) (%)
                  50
                                                                                                                                0.27


                                                                                                          Knowledge probe ( )
                                                                                    10                                                                                                           54.0
Acquisition ( )


                                                                                         Forgetting ( )
                  40                                                                0                                           0.28                                                             53.5
                                   resuscitation ( )
                                   resuscitation ( )
                                   original ( )                                         10                                      0.29                                                             53.0
                  30               original ( )                                                                                                   resuscitation ( )
                                                                                                                                0.30              resuscitation ( )                              52.5
                                                                                        20                                                        original ( )
                  20                                                                                                                              original ( )
                                                                                                                                0.31                                                             52.0
                       100        200     300          400     500    600   700                                                        100        200     300      400      500    600   700
                                           Pre-trained Step (k)                                                                                            Pre-trained Step (k)
                                                         (a)                                                                                                          (b)

 Figure 16: (a) Rates of knowledge acquisition A(θ) and forgetting F(θ) (b) End performance of knowledge
 probe K(θ) and downstream task P(θ) of original continual learning (dotted line) and resuscitation (solid
 line) method where p is fixed as 50 and q as 2, across different model states. The x-axis represents the initial
 model state used for continual training.

                                                                                    20                                          0.28


                                                                                                                                                                                                    Downstream perf ( ) (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 54.5
                  60                                                                10
                                                                                    0                     Knowledge probe ( )
                                                                                                                                                                                                 54.0
Acquisition ( )


                                                                                         Forgetting ( )



                  50              369k ( )                                            10
                                  369k ( )                                                                                      0.29                    369k ( )
                  40              554k ( )                                            20                                                                369k ( )                                 53.5
                                  554k ( )                                                                                                              554k ( )
                                                                                      30                                                                554k ( )
                  30                                                                  40                                                                                                         53.0

                  20                                                                  50                                        0.30                                                             52.5
                       original         q=0.5           q=1          q=2      q=3                                                      original         q=0.5         q=1         q=2      q=3

                                                         (a)                                                                                                          (b)

 Figure 17: (a) Rates of knowledge acquisition A(θ) and forgetting F(θ) (b) End performance of knowledge
 probe K(θ) and downstream task P(θ) of model from 369k steps (solid line) in pretraining schedule and
 554k (dotted line) when varying the amplifying factor q (x-axis) while p is fixed as 50.


 inactive parameters generally led to improved performance. However, interestingly, setting p too high(e.g.,
 at 90) negatively impacted performance, likely due to the unintended effect of reducing the parameters in
 already active regions.

 B.7                    R ESUSCITATION E XPERIMENT ACROSS P RETRAINING S TEPS

 Figure 16a illustrates the overall performance when q was fixed to 2 and p to 50, across different pretraining
 stages of the original model. The effect of the resuscitation method becomes more pronounced as the original
 model progresses to later stages of pretraining, as indicated by the transition from the dotted line to the
 solid line. We hypothesize that this is because late-stage models tend to rely on a smaller subset of memory
 sources and thus benefit from a broader scope of activation enabled by the resuscitation method. As shown in
 Figure 16b, end performance deteriorates when the beginning model is initial (118k) and mid (369k) stage
 model, indicating that resuscitation may impair performance when the model’s knowledge entropy is not
 sufficiently low. This trend of the resuscitation showing a more positive effect for models in the later stage
 of pretraining can also be seen in Figure 17, which shows the results when varying q while fixing p at 50:

                                                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                20                                               0.29                                          52.2


                                                                                                                                                                  Downstream perf ( ) (%)
                    50
                                                                10                                                                                             52.1


                                                                                           Knowledge probe ( )
  Acquisition ( )

                                                                                                                                                               52.0


                                                                     Forgetting ( )
                    40         Original                         0                                                0.30
                               Attn Resuscitation                                                                                                              51.9
                               FFN Resuscitation                    10                                                                                         51.8
                    30                                                                                           0.31
                                                                    20                                                        Original                         51.7
                                                                                                                              Attn Resuscitation
                    20                                                                                                        FFN Resuscitation                51.6
                                                                    30                                           0.32
                         1.5                        2.0   3.0                                                           1.5                        2.0   3.0


                                                    (a)                                                                                        (b)

Figure 18: (a) Rates of knowledge acquisition A(θ) and forgetting F(θ) (b) End performance of knowledge
probe K(θ) and downstream task P(θ) when resuscitation is applied at attention layers, with the x-axis
representing temperature. The dotted line indicates performance when resuscitation is applied to the feed-
forward layer with p=50, q=2. The dashed line represents the original performance without any resuscitation.


performance deteriorates when running continual learning on the model from 369k, while improvement of
performance with larger q is observed when the model is from 554k.

B.8                  R ESUSCITATION E XPERIMENT ACROSS ATTENTION L AYERS

In Figure 3, we observe that as pretraining progresses, not only knowledge entropy but also attention entropy
decreases. We explore whether extending the resuscitation method to the attention layers could similarly
improve knowledge acquisition and retention. For the feed-forward layer, we can adjust knowledge entropy
by tuning the parameters at positions with low activation values. However, since attention entropy reflects the
probability distribution over token positions, the same resuscitation method cannot be directly applied to the
attention layers. To artificially increase attention entropy, we employed temperature scaling on the softmax
function in the attention calculation, which reduces the sparsity of the probability distribution.
We experimented with temperature values ranging from 1.5 to 3.0. Figure 18 shows that resuscitation in the
feed-forward layer consistently results in the highest knowledge acquisition rate and generally leads to the best
knowledge retention. This trend is observed in both knowledge probe results and downstream performance.
These findings suggest that knowledge entropy plays a critical role in influencing both knowledge acquisition
and forgetting, thereby driving the observed differences in performance.


                                                                                      24
