Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O FFLINE RL IN R EGULAR D ECISION P ROCESSES :
S AMPLE E FFICIENCY VIA L ANGUAGE M ETRICS
  Ahana Deb1∗ Roberto Cipollone2† Anders Jonsson1 Alessandro Ronca3
  Mohammad Sadegh Talebi4
 1
   Universitat Pompeu Fabra 2 Leonardo S.p.A. 3 University of Oxford
 4
   University of Copenhagen



                                                A BSTRACT
             This work studies offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) in a class of non-Markovian
             environments called Regular Decision Processes (RDPs). In RDPs, the unknown
             dependency of future observations and rewards from the past interactions can
             be captured by some hidden finite-state automaton. For this reason, many RDP
             algorithms first reconstruct this unknown dependency using automata learning
             techniques. In this paper, we consider episodic RDPs and show that it is possi-
             ble to overcome the limitations of existing offline RL algorithms for RDPs via
             the introduction of two original techniques: a novel metric grounded in formal
             language theory and an approach based on Count-Min-Sketch (CMS). Owing to
             the novel language metric, our algorithm is proven to be more sample efficient
             than existing results, and in some problem instances admitting low complexity
             languages, the gain is showcased to be exponential in the episode length. The
             CMS-based approach removes the need for naïve counting and alleviates the mem-
             ory requirements for long planning horizons. We derive Probably Approximately
             Correct (PAC) sample complexity bounds associated to each of these techniques,
             and validate the approach experimentally.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The Markov assumption is fundamental for most Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms, requiring
that the immediate reward and transition only depend on the last observation and action. Thanks
to this property, computing (near-)optimal policies involves only functions over observations and
actions. However, in complex environments, observations may not be complete representations of
the internal environment state. In this work, we consider RL in Non-Markov Decision Processes
(NMDPs) (Whitehead & Lin, 1995; Bacchus et al., 1997), expressive models where the probability of
future observations and rewards may depend on the entire history, i.e. the past interaction sequence
composed of observations and actions. However, the unrestricted dynamics of NMDPs make them
intractable from both statistical and computational standpoints. This has steered much research effort
towards tractable subclasses of NMDPs. In this work, we focus on Regular Decision Processes
(RDPs) (Brafman & De Giacomo, 2019; 2024). In RDPs, the distribution of the next observation
and reward is determined by conditions over the history that, in terms of formal language theory, fall
within the class of the regular languages. This is a rich class containing many fundamental temporal
patterns, including all patterns that can be specified in Linear Temporal Logic (Manna & Pnueli,
1989; De Giacomo & Vardi, 2013) and those captured by Reward Machines (Toro Icarte et al., 2018;
2019; Toro Icarte et al., 2022). Thus, RDPs can model complex temporal dependencies that may be
based on events that occur arbitrarily far in the past, e.g. that an agent may only enter a restricted area
if it has previously asked for permission and the access was granted. At the same time, RDPs enjoy
many favourable properties, which can be leveraged to develop effective RL algorithms. Prominently,
the fact that the dynamics of an RDP can be represented by a probabilistic-deterministic finite
automaton. This key fact is the basis of all existing RL algorithms for RDPs: learning the automaton
underlying an RDP amounts to learning a representation of the histories that is instrumental to tackle
non-Markovianity, as it allows one to work with an associated Markov Decision Process (MDP).
    ∗
        Correspondence to: ahana.deb@upf.edu.
    †
        The work was conducted while the author was at Sapienza University of Rome.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          G       Figure 1: T-maze (Bakker, 2001) with corridor
 S                                        T
                                                  length N = 10. The observation produced at the
                                                  initial position S indicates the position of the goal G
                                                  at the end of the corridor for the current episode.


It is worth noting that RDPs are related to decision processes operating under partial observability.
More precisely, the automaton state of an RDP can be seen as a hidden information state (Subramanian
et al., 2022), and as shown by Brafman & De Giacomo (2019), any RDP is also a POMDP (Kaelbling
et al., 1998), whose hidden dynamics evolve according to its finite-state automaton. Thus RDPs
constitute the class of POMDPs where hidden states are determined by the history of observations,
namely, those in which the agent can have sharp beliefs. They also fall into the framework of Predictive
State Representations (PSRs) (Bowling et al., 2006). Therefore, in the hierarchy of decision processes,
RDPs greatly generalise MDPs, without introducing strong forms of partial observability present
in more general processes, such as POMDPs, which quickly lead to intractability (Papadimitriou &
Tsitsiklis, 1987). Despite such applicability, provably correct and sample efficient algorithms for
RDPs are still missing. On one hand, local optimisation approaches are computationally efficient,
but lack correctness guarantees, e.g. Abadi & Brafman (2020), Toro Icarte et al. (2019) and all
RL algorithms with policy networks that can operate on sequences. On the other hand, algorithms
with formal guarantees do not provide a practical implementation (Cipollone et al., 2023; Ronca &
De Giacomo, 2021) or can only be applied effectively in small environments (Ronca et al., 2022).
We study offline RL in episodic RDPs, where the goal is to find a near-optimal policy from a dataset
pre-collected using a behavior policy. A recent algorithm called RegORL (Cipollone et al., 2023)
achieves a sample complexity with polynomial dependency on the episode length and the number of
actions, observations, and automaton states. Besides, the sample complexity inversely depends on a
complexity notion called Lp∞ -distinguishability, which is grounded in automata theory and captures
the ability to distinguish between relevant histories generated by the behavior policy. This sample
complexity bound exhibits two major drawbacks. First, the Lp∞ -distinguishability could be very small
relative to problem parameters, and there exist RDPs in which Lp∞ -distinguishability ≃ 2−H , for
episode length H, as formalized in Theorem 1, which asserts that the sample complexity of RegORL
can be exponential in H. Indeed, such an exponential blow-up is observed in many domains that
seem simple from an intuitive point of view, such as T-maze by Bakker (2001), introduced below and
discussed throughout the paper. Second, the only existing sample complexity lower bound presented
in Cipollone et al. (2023) depends on Lp1 -distinguishability, another complexity notion that is larger
than Lp∞ -distinguishability and does not suffer from the exponential decay above. Thus, the following
question naturally arises: Is it possible to provably learn a near-optimal policy in RDPs offline without
requiring an exponential (in H) sample complexity, while admitting a computationally tractable
implementation? We answer this question in the affirmative by developing novel algorithmic ideas
that build on the theory of formal languages as well as using a suitable data structure.
Example 1 (T-maze). As a running example, we consider a variant of T-Maze(c) (Bakker, 2001) that
we call T-maze. An agent has to reach a goal G from an initial position S in a corridor of length N
that terminates with a T-junction as shown in Figure 1, using actions North, South, East, and West.
In each episode, the rewarding goal G is placed above or below the T-junction uniformly at random.
The initial observation of the agent is 011 if the goal is above the T-junction, and 110 otherwise. At
every step in the corridor the observation is 101 or 111 with equal probability, and at the T-junction
and beyond the observation is 010. In particular, when crossing the corridor, the agent cannot observe
its precise location or the goal position. This yields history-dependent dynamics that cannot be
modeled by an MDP or any k-order MDP. As we show later, this domain can be expressed as an RDP.

Contributions Our main contribution is a provably sample efficient algorithm for offline RL in
episodic RDPs. At the core is a statistical test defined via a novel language metric LX , whose design
borrows ideas from the theory of formal languages. Its construction involves a sophisticated way
of expressively capturing relevant patterns on episode traces in the collected data, which allows
for defining a suitable hierarchy of language families that proves effective for learning in RDPs.
Specifically, as formalized in Theorem 3, this yields a PAC sample complexity bound that depends
on a new notion of complexity called LX -distinguishability, which offers a more refined notion than
Lp∞ -distinguishability and, importantly, does not suffer from an exponential blow-up in domains with
a low language-theoretic complexity. Second, we develop a way to compactly represent probability


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


distributions on large sets in order to mitigate the memory requirements of RL algorithms that operate
on large sets of histories. We develop a solution that uses the data structure Count-Min-Sketch
(CMS) (Cormode & Muthukrishnan, 2005), taking inspiration from the automaton-learning algorithm
FlexFringe (Baumgartner & Verwer, 2023). To validate our claims, we provide a theoretical analysis
for both variants, when the LX -distinguishability or CMS is used. Finally, we report numerical
experiments to demonstrate the empirical performance of the proposed approaches.

1.1   R ELATED WORK

There is a rich and growing literature on offline (Markovian) RL that covers a broad range of MDP
settings; e.g., (Chen & Jiang, 2019; Jin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2024; Rashidinejad et al., 2021; Ren
et al., 2021; Uehara & Sun, 2022; Uehara et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2021; Yin & Wang, 2021; Zhan et al.,
2022; Sun et al., 2023). In particular, it is by now well established that the optimal sample complexity
in the episodic setting depends on the size of state-space, episode length, as well as some notion of
concentrability, reflecting the distribution mismatch between the behavior and optimal policies, and
optimal algorithms are reported (Li et al., 2024).

Non-Markovian RL The first online RL algorithm for RDPs is provided in Abadi & Brafman
(2020). Ronca & De Giacomo (2021) and Ronca et al. (2022) developed the first online RL algorithms
with sample complexity guarantees, adapting analogous results from automata learning literature
(Balle, 2013; Balle et al., 2013; 2014; Clark & Thollard, 2004; Palmer & Goldberg, 2007; Ron et al.,
1998). Cipollone et al. (2023) introduced RegORL, a provably efficient algorithm for offline RL in
RDPs. We study the same setting and improve on two weaknesses of RegORL regarding the sample
complexity and the space requirements. RL with non-Markovian rewards have been studied via
Reward Machines (Bourel et al., 2023; 2024; Giacomo et al., 2020; Hasanbeig et al., 2021; Toro
Icarte et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2020). Existing literature, however, provide theoretical sample efficiency
when the automaton of such processes is known, which makes the Markovian state computable; e.g.,
the online RL algorithm in Toro Icarte et al. (2019) could be applied to RDPs, but it is not proven to
be sample efficient. Lastly, non-Markovianity is also introduced by the logical specifications that the
agent is required to satisfy (Bozkurt et al., 2020; Fu & Topcu, 2014; Hahn et al., 2019; Hammond
et al., 2021; Hasanbeig et al., 2020); however, it is resolved a priori from the known specifications.

POMDPs, PSRs, and State Representation As discussed, RDPs are also POMDPs, and any
RL algorithm for POMDPs can be applied to RDPs. Tractable learning in POMDPs, to our best
knowledge, has been studied for special cases, such as undercomplete POMDPs (Guo et al., 2022;
Jin et al., 2020), few-step reachability (Guo et al., 2016), ergodicity (Azizzadenesheli et al., 2016),
few-step decodability (Efroni et al., 2022; Krishnamurthy et al., 2016), or weakly-revealing (Liu
et al., 2022). Hahn et al. (2024) further explore Omega-Regular Decision Processes (ODPs) which
generalizes RDPs with an ω-regular lookahead, and present classical complexity results. However,
none of these fully capture the entire RDP class. Non-Markovian dynamics, and thus RDPs, fall into
the framework of PSRs (Bowling et al., 2006; James & Singh, 2004; Kulesza et al., 2015; Singh
et al., 2003). However, existing sample complexity bounds for online RL in PSRs (Zhan et al., 2023)
involve PSR-specific parameters that do not immediately apply to RDPs. RDPs bear resemblance to
state representation methods (Mahmud, 2010; Maillard et al., 2013; Ortner et al., 2019; Lattimore
et al., 2013), since they provide a compact way of mapping from histories to a state space via their
underlying automata. However, existing bounds for state representations grow linearly in the number
of representations, which is exponential in the number of states in our case.

2     P RELIMINARIES
Notation Given a set Y, ∆(Y) denotes the set of probability distributions over Y. For a function
f : X → ∆(Y), f (y | x) is the probability of y ∈ Y given x ∈ X . Further, we write y ∼ f (x) to
abbreviate y ∼ f (· | x). Given an event E, I(E) denotes the indicator function of E, which equals
1 if E is true, and 0 otherwise. For any pair of integers m and n such that 0 ≤ m ≤ n, we let
Jm, nK := {m, . . . , n} and JnK := J1, nK. The notation O(·)
                                                         e hides poly-logarithmic terms.

Count-Min-Sketch Count-Min-Sketch, or CMS (Cormode & Muthukrishnan, 2005), is a data
structure that compactly represents a large non-negative vector v = (v1 , . . . , vm ). CMS takes two


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


parameters δc and ε as input, and constructs a matrix C with d = ⌈log δ1c ⌉ rows and w = ⌈ eε ⌉
columns. For each row j ∈ JdK, CMS picks a hash function hj : JmK → JwK uniformly at random
from a pairwise independent family (Motwani & Raghavan, 1995). Initially, all elements of v and C
equal 0. An update (i, c) consists in incrementing the element vi by c > 0. CMS approximates an
update (i, c) by incrementing C(j, hj (i)) by c for each j ∈ JdK. At any moment, a point query vei
returns an estimate of vi by taking the minimum of the row estimates, i.e. vei = minj C(j, hj (i)). For
each row j ∈ JdK, since the updates for vi are always stored in the element C(j, hj (i)), it follows
that C(j, hj (i)) ≥ vi . Hence each point query satisfies vei ≥ vi , i.e. CMS never underestimates vi .

2.1   L ANGUAGES AND OPERATORS

An alphabet Γ is a finite non-empty set of elements called letters. A string x over Γ is a concatenation
a1 · · · aℓ of letters from Γ; we call ℓ its length, and we write |x| = ℓ. In particular, the string containing
no letters, having length zero, is a valid string called the empty string, and it is denoted by λ. Given
two strings x = a1 · · · aℓ and y = b1 · · · bm , their concatenation xy is the string a1 · · · aℓ b1 · · · bm .
In particular, xλ = λx = x. Note that |xy| = |x| + |y|. Concatenation is associative and hence we
can write the concatenation x1 x2 · · · xk of an arbitrary number of strings. The set of all strings over
alphabet Γ is written as Γ∗ , and the set of all strings of length ℓ is written as Γℓ . Thus, Γ∗ = ∪ℓ∈N Γℓ .
A language is a subset of Γ∗ . Given two languages X1 and X2 , their concatenation is the language
defined by X1 X2 = {x1 x2 | x1 ∈ X1 , x2 ∈ X2 }. When concatenating with a singleton language
{x}, we often write Xx instead of X{x}, and xX instead of {x}X. Concatenation of languages is
associative, allowing us to write the concatenation X1 X2 · · · Xk of an arbitrary number of languages.
Given the fundamental definitions above, we introduce a novel operator to construct sets of languages,
which will play a key role in the algorithm design through defining relevant patterns on episode
traces. It is inspired by classes of languages in the first level of the dot-depth hierarchy, a well-known
hierarchy of star-free regular languages (Simon, 1972; Thérien, 2005; Pin, 2017).
Definition 1. For ℓ ∈ N and k ∈ JℓK, the operator Cℓk maps any set of languages G to a new set of
languages as follows:
 Cℓk (G) = {{x0 G1 · · · xk−1 Gk xk | x0 , . . . , xk ∈ Γ∗ , |x0 · · · xk | = (ℓ − k)} | G1 , . . . , Gk ∈ G} .

In the definition, each xi can be any string over the chosen alphabet Γ, including the empty string λ.
Thus, xi are arbitrary strings between a string from Gi and the next string from Gi+1 . Each resulting
string consists of ℓ occurrences of a letter from Γ or a string from G1 , . . . , Gk ∈ G. Different choices
of G1 , . . . , Gk ∈ G yield different languages in the resulting set.
Example 2. Let Γ = {a, b, c} and let G = {{a}, {b}}. Then
                                              ∗                                ∗
                  C10

                   1 (G) = {xay | x, y ∈ Γ , |xy| = 9}, {xby | x, y ∈ Γ , |xy| = 9}

is the set consisting of (i) the language of all 10-letter strings that include an occurrence of a, and
(ii) the language of all 10-letter strings that include an occurrence of b. Similarly,
                                             ∗                                   ∗
          C10

            2 (G) = {xayaz | x, y, z ∈ Γ , |xyz| = 8}, {xbybz | x, y, z ∈ Γ , |xyz| = 8},
                      {xaybz | x, y, z ∈ Γ∗ , |xyz| = 8}, {xbyaz | x, y, z ∈ Γ∗ , |xyz| = 8}
is the set consisting of (i) the language of all 10-letter strings that include two occurrences of a,
(ii) the language of all 10-letter strings that include two occurrences of b, (iii) the language of all
10-letter strings that include an occurrence of a followed by an occurrence of b, (iv) the language of
all 10-letter strings that include an occurrence of b followed by an occurrence of a.

2.2   E PISODIC REGULAR DECISION PROCESSES

A generic episodic decision process is a tuple P = ⟨O, A, R, T̄ , R̄, H⟩, where O is a finite set of
observations, A is a finite set of actions, R ⊂ [0, 1] is a finite set of rewards, and H ≥ 1 is a finite
horizon. We frequently consider the concatenation AO of the sets A and O. Let Ht = (AO)t+1 be
the set of histories of length t + 1, and let em:n ∈ Hn−m denote a history from time m to time n,
both included. Each action-observation pair ao ∈ AO in a history has an associated reward label
r ∈ R, which we write ao/r ∈ AO/R with the understanding that the slash corresponds to string
concatenation. A trajectory e0:T is the full history generated until (and including) time T .


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We assume that a trajectory e0:T can be partitioned into episodes eℓ:ℓ+H ∈ HH of length H + 1.
In each episode e0:H , a0 = a⊥ is a dummy action used to initialize the distribution on H0 . The
transition function T̄ : H × A → ∆(O) and the reward function R̄ : H × A → ∆(R) depend on the
                                                                                       ∗
current history in H = ∪H  t=0 Ht . Given P, a generic policy is a function π : (AO) → ∆(A) that
maps trajectories to distributions over actions. The value function V π : J0, HK × H → R of a policy
π is a mapping that assigns real values to histories. For h ∈ H, it is defined as V π (H, h) := 0 and
                                        " H             #
                                           X
                           π
                         V (t, h) := E          ri h, π , ∀t < H, ∀h ∈ Ht .                         (1)
                                              i=t+1

For brevity, we write Vtπ (h) := V π (t, h). The optimal value function V ∗ is defined as Vt∗ (h) :=
supπ Vtπ (h), ∀t ∈ J0, HK, ∀h ∈ Ht , where sup is taken over all policies π∗: (AO)∗ → ∆(A). Any
                   ∗                                         ∗            π      ∗
policy achieving V is called optimal, which we denote by π ; namely V = V . In what follows,
we consider simpler policies of the form π : H → ∆(A) mapping finite histories to distributions
over actions. Let ΠH denote the set of such policies. It can be shown that ΠH always contains an
optimal policy, i.e. Vt∗ (h) := maxπ∈ΠH Vtπ (h), ∀t ∈ [H], ∀h ∈ Ht . A policy π b is ε-optimal iff
Eh0 [V0∗ (h0 ) − V0πb (h0 )] ≤ ε, where h0 = a⊥ o0 , for some random o0 ∈ O.

Episodic RDPs An episodic Regular Decision Process (RDP) (Abadi & Brafman, 2020; Brafman
& De Giacomo, 2019; 2024) is an episodic decision process R = ⟨O, A, R, T̄ , R̄, H⟩ described by
a finite transducer (Moore machine) ⟨U, Σ, Ω, τ, θ, u0 ⟩, where U is a finite set of states, Σ = A O
is a finite input alphabet composed of actions and observations, Ω is a finite output alphabet, τ :
U × Σ → U is a transition function, θ : U → Ω is an output function, and u0 ∈ U is a fixed initial
state (Moore, 1956; Shallit, 2008). The output space Ω = Ωo × Ωr consists of a finite set of functions
that compute the conditional probabilities of observations and rewards, on the form Ωo ⊂ A → ∆(O)
and Ωr ⊂ A → ∆(R). For simplicity, we use two output functions, θo : U × A → ∆(O) and
θr : U × A → ∆(R), to denote the individual conditional probabilities. Let τ −1 denote the inverse
of τ , i.e. τ −1 (u) ⊆ U × AO is the subset of state-symbol pairs that map to u ∈ U. An RDP R
implicitly represents a function τ̄ : H → U from histories in H to states in U, recursively defined
as τ̄ (h0 ) := τ (u0 , a0 o0 ), where a0 is some fixed starting action, and τ̄ (ht ) := τ (τ̄ (ht−1 ), at ot ).
The transition function and reward function of R are defined as T̄ (o | h, a) = θo (o | τ̄ (h), a) and
R̄(r | h, a) = θr (r | τ̄ (h), a), ∀h ∈ H, ∀ao/r ∈ AO/R. As in previous work (Cipollone et al.,
2023), we assume that any episodic RDP generates a designated termination observation o⊥ ∈ O
after exactly H transitions. This ensures that any episodic RDP is acyclic, i.e. the states can be
partitioned as U = U0 ∪ · · · ∪ UH+1 , where each Ut+1 is the set of states generated by the histories
in Ht for each t ∈ J0, HK. An RDP is minimal if its Moore machine is minimal. We use A, O, R, U
to denote the cardinality of A, O, R, U, respectively, and assume H ≥ 2, A ≥ 2 and O ≥ 2.
Since the conditional probabilities of observations and rewards are fully determined by the current
state-action pair (u, a), an RDP R adheres to the Markov property over its states, but not over the
observations. Given a state ut ∈ U and an action at ∈ A, the probability of the next transition is
          P(rt , ot , ut+1 | ut , at , R) = θr (rt | ut , at ) θo (ot | ut , at ) I(ut+1 = τ (ut , at ot )).
Since RDPs are Markovian in the unobservable states U, there is an important class of policies that
is called regular. Given an RDP R, a policy π : H → ∆(A) is called regular if π(h1 ) = π(h2 )
whenever τ̄ (h1 ) = τ̄ (h2 ), for all h1 , h2 ∈ H. Hence, we can compactly define a regular policy as
a function of the RDP state, i.e. π : U → ∆(A). Let ΠR denote the set of regular policies for R.
Regular policies exhibit powerful properties. First, under a regular policy, suffixes have the same
probability of being generated for histories that map to the same RDP state. Second, there exists at
least one optimal policy that is regular. Finally, in the special case where an RDP is Markovian in
both observations and rewards, it reduces to a nonstationary episodic MDP.
Example 3 (RDP for T-maze). Consider the T-maze described in Example 1, for a generic corridor
length N and horizon H = N + 2. This can be modeled as an episodic RDP ⟨U, Σ, Ω, τ, θ, u0 ⟩
with states U := u0 ∪ ({u1,⊤ , . . . , uN +3,⊤ } ∪ {u1,⊥ , . . . , uN +3,⊥ }) × {1, . . . , H}, which include
the initial state u0 and two parallel components, ⊤ and ⊥, for the N + 3 cells of the grid world. In
addition, each state also includes a counter for the time step. Within each component {(ui,⊤ , t)}i and
{(ui,⊥ , t)}, the transition function τ mimics the grid world dynamics of the maze and increments
the counter t. From the initial state and the start action a0 , τ (u0 , a0 o0 ) equals u1,⊤ if o0 = 011,
and u1,⊥ if o0 = 110. In the initial state, observations are θo (u0 , a0 ) = unif{110, 011}; in the


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


corridor θo (ui,g , a) = unif{101, 111} for every i ∈ JN K and g ∈ {⊤, ⊥}; and in the T-junction the
observation is 010. The rewards are null, except for a 1 in the top right or bottom right cell, depending
on if the current state is in the component ⊤ or ⊥, respectively.

Distinguishability Consider a minimal RDP R with states U = ∪t∈J0,H+1K Ut . Given a regular
policy π ∈ ΠR and t ∈ J0, HK, each RDP state u ∈ Ut+1 defines a unique probability distri-
bution P(· | ut+1 = u, π) on episode suffixes in ΓH−t , where Γ = AO/R is the alphabet of
action-observation-reward triplets. The states in Ut+1 can be compared in terms of the probability
distributions they induce over ΓH−t . Consider any L = {Lℓ }H  ℓ=0 , where each Lℓ is a metric over
∆(Γℓ ). We define the L-distinguishability of R under π as the maximum µ0 ≥ 0 such that, for
any t ∈ J0, HK and any two distinct u, u′ ∈ Ut+1 , the probability distributions over suffix traces
et+1:H ∈ ΓH−t from the two states satisfy
                 LH−t P(et+1:H | ut+1 = u, π), P(et+1:H | ut+1 = u′ , π) ≥ µ0 .


We will often omit the remaining episode length ℓ = H − t from Lℓ and simply write L. We
consider the Lp∞ -distinguishability, instantiating the definition above with the metric Lp∞ (p1 , p2 ) =
maxj∈JℓK,e∈Γj |p1 (e ∗) − p2 (e ∗)|, where pi (e ∗), i ∈ {1, 2}, represents the probability of the trace
                                         ′                  p
prefix e ∈ Γj , followed by any                 ℓ−j
                               Ptrace e ∈ Γ . The L1 -distinguishability is defined analogously
        p
using L1 (p1 , p2 ) = maxj∈JℓK e∈Γj |p1 (e ∗) − p2 (e ∗)|.

2.3    O FFLINE RL IN EPISODIC RDP S

Consider a batch dataset D comprising episodes sampled using a regular behavior policy π b . Specifi-
cally, the k-th episode (or episode trace) in D is of the form ek0:H = ak0 ok0 /r0k · · · akH okH /rH
                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                      where,
for each t ∈ J0, HK,
      uk0 = u0 ,   akt ∼ π b (ukt ),    okt ∼ θo (ukt , akt ),   rtk ∼ θr (ukt , akt ),   ukt+1 = τ (ukt , akt okt ).
The learner seeks an ε-optimal policy π b for a given accuracy ε ∈ (0, H], using the smallest dataset D
possible, without further exploration. More precisely, we aim at finding π    b satisfying V0∗ (h)−V0πb (h) ≤
ε for each h ∈ H0 with probability at least 1 − δ, using the smallest dataset D possible. We stress
that in so doing π b and underlying RDP states ukt are unknown to the learner. It suffices to restrict
attention to regular ε-optimal policies (cf. Proposition 5 in Appendix B). However, some assumptions
must be imposed on π b to provably guarantee that an ε-optimal regular policy can be learnt from
D. We first recall the notion of occupancy. Given a regular policy π : U → ∆(A) and a time step
t ∈ J0, HK, let dπt ∈ ∆(Ut × A O) be the induced occupancy, i.e. a probability distribution over the
states in Ut and the input symbols in A O, recursively defined as dπ0 (u0 , a0 o0 ) = θo (o0 | u0 , a0 ) and
                                 X
            dπt (ut , at ot ) =             dπt−1 (u, ao) · π(at | ut ) · θo (ot | ut , at ), t > 0.
                              (u,ao)∈τ −1 (ut )
                                                            ∗
Of particular interest is the occupancy d∗t := dπt associatedb with an optimal policy π ∗ , which is
unique if we assume that π ∗ is unique. Likewise, let dbt := dπt be the occupancy associated with π b .
As in offline RL in MDPs, it is necessary to control the mismatch in occupancy between the behavior
policy π b and the optimal policy π ∗ . Concretely, the single-policy RDP concentrability coefficient
associated with RDP R and behavior policy π b is defined as in Cipollone et al. (2023):
                                        ∗                       d∗t (u, ao)
                                       CR =           max                   .                                           (2)
                                              t∈JHK,u∈Ut ,ao∈AO dbt (u, ao)
                                                                             ∗
We assume that the concentrability is bounded away from infinity, i.e. that CR < ∞, which further
                                        b
implies that for any t ∈ JHK, u ∈ Ut , dt (u, a) > 0 whenever a ∈ A is chosen by an optimal policy.

3     L EARNING RDP S WITH STATE - MERGING ALGORITHMS FROM OFFLINE DATA
To learn episodic RDPs from a dataset D of episodes, we adapt the algorithm A DACT-H (Cipollone
et al., 2023). A DACT-H is a state-merging algorithm that iteratively constructs the set of RDP
states U0 , . . . , UH+1 and associated transition function τ of a minimal RDP R. For each t ∈ J0, HK,
A DACT-H maintains a set of candidate states Uc,t+1 = {uao | u ∈ Ut , ao ∈ AO} and a set of


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


promoted states Ut+1 . Each candidate state uao has an associated multiset of suffixes Z(uao) =
{ekt+1:H : ek ∈ D, τ̄ (ek0:t−1 ) = u, akt okt = ao}, i.e. episode suffixes whose history is consistent with
uao. Initially, Ut+1 contains the candidate with largest multiset. To decide if a candidate uao should
be promoted to Ut+1 or merged with a promoted state u′ ∈ Ut+1 , A DACT-H compares the empirical
probability distributions on suffixes using the prefix distance Lp∞ . For reference, we include the
pseudocode of A DACT-H(D, δ) in Appendix A. Cipollone et al. (2023) prove that A DACT-H(D, δ)
constructs a minimal RDP R with probability at least 1 − 4AOU δ if D is large enough.
In practice, the main bottleneck of A DACT-H is the statistical test on the last line,
                                     q
                     Lp∞ (Z1 , Z2 ) ≥ 2 log(8(ARO)H−t /δ)/ min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |),
where Z1 and Z2 are two multisets of traces in ΓH−t associated with a candidate state uao and a
promoted state u′ , respectively. This is because the number of episode suffixes in ΓH−t is exponential
in the current horizon H − t. The purpose of the present paper is to develop tractable methods for
implementing the statistical test. These tractable methods can be directly applied to any algorithm
that performs such statistical tests, e.g. the approximation algorithm A DACT-H-A (Cipollone et al.,
2023) whose pseudocode we also include in Appendix A. Either algorithm can be incorporated into
an offline RL algorithm for learning an ε-optimal policy, cf. Algorithm RegORL in Appendix A.

4       A TRACTABLE ALGORITHM FOR OFFLINE LEARNING OF RDP S
The lower bound derived in Cipollone et al. (2023) shows that sample complexity of learning RDPs
is inversely proportional to the Lp1 -distinguishability. When testing candidate states of the unknown
RDP, Lp1 is the metric that allows maximum separation between distinct distributions over traces.
Unfortunately, accurate estimates of Lp1 are impractical to obtain for distributions over large supports—
in our case the number of episode suffixes which is exponential in the horizon. Accurate estimates of
Lp∞ are much more practical to obtain. However, there are instances for which states can be well
separated by Lp1 , but have an Lp∞ -distance that is exponentially small. To address these issues, in this
section we develop two improvements over the previous learning algorithms for RDPs.

4.1       T HE LANGUAGE METRIC

Testing in the language metric The metrics L1 and L∞ are generic and can be applied to any
distribution. Although this is generally an advantage, they do not exploit the internal structure of the
sample space. In our application, a sample is a trace that, as discussed above, can be regarded as a
string of a specific language. An important improvement, proposed by Balle (2013), is to consider Lp1
and Lp∞ , which take into account the variable length and conditional probabilities of longer suffixes.
This was the approach followed by the previous RDP learning algorithms. However, these two
metrics are substantially different and lead to dramatically different sample and space complexities.
In this section, we define a new formalism that unifies both metrics and will allow the development
of new techniques for distinguishing distributions over traces. Specifically, instead of expressing the
probability of single strings, we generalize the concepts above by considering the probability of sets
of strings. A careful selection of the sets to consider, which are languages, will allow an accurate
trade-off between generality and complexity.
Definition 2 (Language metric). Let ℓ ∈ N, let Γ be an alphabet, and let X be a set of languages
consisting of strings in Γℓ . The language metric1 in X is a function LX : ∆(Γℓ ) × ∆(Γℓ ) → R, on
pairs of probability distributions p, p′ over Γℓ , defined as
                                  LX (p, p′ ) := max |p(X) − p′ (X)|,                               (3)
                                                  X∈X
                                                    P
where the probability of a language is p(X) := x∈X p(x).
This original notion unifies all the most common metrics. Considering distributions     over Γℓ , when
                    ℓ                                                           Γℓ
X = {{x} | x ∈ Γ }, the language metric LX reduces to L∞ . When X = 2 , which is the set of
all languages in Γℓ , the language metric becomes the total variation distance, which is half the value
of L1 . A similar reduction can be made for the prefix distances. The language metric
                                                                                    t
                                                                                         captures Lp∞
when X = {xΓℓ−t | t ∈ J0, ℓK, x ∈ Γt }, and it captures Lp1 when X = ∪t∈J0,ℓK 2Γ .
    1
        LX is only guaranteed to be a pseudometric, but we call it a metric for simplicity.


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Testing in language classes The language metric can be applied directly to the language of traces
and used for testing in RDP learning algorithms. The language of traces is over the alphabet Γ =
AO/R. Thus, it suffices to consider any set of languages X that satisfy X ⊆ ΓH−t = (AO/R)H−t
for each X ∈ X . However, as we have seen above, the selection of a specific set of languages X has a
dramatic impact on the metric that is being captured. In this section, we study an appropriate trade-off
between generality and sample efficiency, obtained through a suitable selection of X . Intuitively,
we seek to evaluate the distance between candidate states based on increasingly complex sets of
languages. We present a way to construct a hierarchy of sets of languages of increasing complexity.
As a first step, we define sets of basic patterns Gi of increasing complexity.

    G1 = aO/R | a ∈ A ∪ AO/r | r ∈ R ∪ Ao/R | o ∈ O ,

    G2 = G1 ∪ ao/R | a ∈ A, o ∈ O ∪ aO/r | a ∈ A, r ∈ R ∪ Ao/r | a ∈ A, r ∈ R ,

    G3 = G2 ∪ ao/r | a ∈ A, o ∈ O, r ∈ R .
The patterns G1 focus on single components, by matching a single action a, reward r, or observation o.
Then, the patterns G2 focus on pairs, and the patterns G3 on triplets. Note that the number of basic
patterns increases as we consider more interaction among actions, observations and rewards. For
the first set we have |G1 | = A + O + R, for the second |G2 | = |G1 | + AO + AR + OR, and for
the third |G3 | = |G2 | + AOR. Starting from the above hierarchy, we identify one more dimension
along which complexity can grow. It results from concatenating the basic patterns from Gi , and is
obtained by applying the operator Cℓk (Definition 1). Thus, letting ℓ = H − t, we define the following
two-dimensional hierarchy of sets Xi,j of languages. It is parameterised by i for the granularity of
the atomic symbols, and by j for the sequential composition with operator Cℓk . Formally,
                           Xi,j = k∈JjK Cℓk (Gi ),
                                  S
                                                        ∀i ∈ J3K, ∀j ∈ JℓK.
The family Xi,j induces a family of language metrics LXi,j , which are non-decreasing along the
dimensions of the hierarchy:

                      LXi,j ≤ min LXi+1,j , LXi,j+1 , ∀i ∈ J3K, ∀j ∈ JℓK.
The number of languages in each set grows as |Xi,j | ∈ O(|Gi |j ) = O((AOR)j ), since the operator
Cℓj introduces one language for each combination of j languages from Gi . Hence the family LXi,j
has increasing complexity as we increase the values of the parameters i and j. Moreover, the last
level X3,ℓ satisfies LX3,ℓ ≥ Lp∞ since {xE ℓ−t | t ∈ J0, ℓK, x ∈ E t } ⊆ X3,ℓ . Therefore, the metric
LX3,ℓ is at least as effective as Lp∞ in distinguishing states. It can be much more effective as shown
next.
Example 4 (Exponential gain in the T-maze). In the T-maze of Examples 1 and 3, when the
behaviour policy π b always chooses East in the corridor and North or South with equal probability
at the T-junction, we observe the following exponential gap between the Lp∞ -distinguishability and
the LX2,1 -distinguishability. The Lp∞ -distinguishability decreases exponentially with the corridor
length N , since the distance between states is determined by the probability of single episode suffixes,
which decreases exponentially with N due to the random observations in the corridor. At the same
time, the LX2,1 -distinguishability is constant. In this case, the distance between states is determined by
the probability of observing a positive reward upon performing action North. This probability is 0.5
in states of kind ⊤, and it is 0 in states of kind ⊥. More formally, the distance between states in Ut is
determined by the probability of the language {x North O/r y | x, y ∈ Γ∗ , |xy| = H −t+1} ∈ X2,1 .

The argument of the example can be developed into a proof of the following theorem, showing that the
language metric can yield an exponential improvement in distinguishability—proof in Appendix C.
Theorem 1. There exist a family of RDPs (RN )N ∈N and a corresponding family of regular behaviour
           b
policies (πN )N ∈N satisfying the two following properties: (i) the Lp∞ -distinguishability of RN under
πNb
    is O(2−N ); and (ii) the LX2,1 -distinguishability of RN under πN  b
                                                                          is Ω(1).
                                        b
Assumption 1. The behavior policy π ensures an LXi,j -distinguishability of at least µ0 > 0, where
Xi,j is constructed as above and is an input to the algorithm.

Given ℓ ∈ J0, HK, let p1 , p2 ∈ ∆(Γℓ ) be two distributions over traces. To have accurate estimates for
the language metric over some Xi,j , we instantiate two estimators, pb1 and pb2 , respectively built using
       P of traces Z1 and Z2 , defined as the
multisets                                  P fraction of samples that belong to the language; that is,
pb1 := e∈Z1 I(e ∈ Xi,j )/|Z1 | and pb2 := e∈Z2 I(e ∈ Xi,j )/|Z2 |.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.2   A NALYSIS

In this section we derive high-probability sample complexity bounds for A DACT-H (presented in
Appendix A) when Count-Min-Sketch (CMS) or the language metric LX is used.
Theorem 2. A DACT-H(D, δ) returns the minimal RDP R with probability at least 1 − 3AOU δ
when CMS is used to store empirical probability estimates, the statistical test is
                                      q
                     Lp∞ (Z1 , Z2 ) ≥ 8 log(4(ARO)H−t /δ)/ min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |),
                                                    ∗
                                                e HCR∗log(1/δ)
and the size of the dataset D is at least |D| ≥ O         2      , where d∗m = mint,ut ao d∗t (ut , ao)
                                                     dm ·µ0
                                                   ∗
is the minimum occupancy of the optimal policy π .

The proof of Theorem 2 appears in Appendix C. Our new analysis uncovered a mistake in the proof
of Cipollone et al. (2023),
                     √      and as a result, both their and our sample complexity has an additional
multiplicative term H/µ0 . The theorem shows that we can achieve the same asymptotic sample
complexity when using CMS, but at a much lower memory cost.
Theorem 3. A DACT-H(D, δ) returns the minimal RDP R with probability at least 1 − 2AOU δ
when using the language metric LX to define a statistical test
                                           p
                         LX (Z1 , Z2 ) ≥ 2 log(2|X |/δ)/ min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |),
                                                    ∗
                                                e CR log(1/δ)   log |X |
and the size of the dataset D is at least |D| ≥ O          ∗
                                                          d ·µ2            .
                                                               m    0

The proof of Theorem 3 also appears in Appendix C. By definition, µ0 is the LX -distinguishability of
R for the chosen language set X , which has to satisfy µ0 > 0 for A DACT-H to successfully learn a
minimal RDP. In the worst case, log |X | = O(H),
                                               e       which matches the original bound. However, in the
case of our language hierarchy Xi,j , if j is a small constant we have log |Xi,j | = O(log((AOR)j )) =
O(j log(AOR)) = O(1).  e      The constant 1/d∗m depends exponentially on H if there exists an RDP
state that is very hard to reach, but can be much smaller for structured RDPs. In addition, as discussed
earlier, 1/µ0 may be exponentially smaller for LX than for Lp∞ . For completeness, Appendix C also
proves sample complexity bounds for CMS and LX for the approximation algorithm A DACT-H-A.

5     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section we present experimental results to illustrate the properties of our two versions of
A DACT-H. We perform experiments in five domains from the literature on POMDPs and RDPs:
Corridor (Ronca & De Giacomo, 2021), T-maze(c) (Bakker, 2001), Cookie (Toro Icarte et al., 2019),
Cheese (McCallum, 1992) and Mini-hall (Littman et al., 1995), and summarize the results in Table 1.
Appendix D contains a detailed description of each domain, as well as example automata learned. We
compare against FlexFringe (Baumgartner & Verwer, 2023), a state-of-the-art algorithm for learning
probabilistic-deterministic finite automata, which include RDPs as a special case. The RDPs output
by FlexFringe are not always directly comparable to the RDPs output by A DACT-H, since FlexFringe
sometimes learns RDPs with cycles, and uses a number of heuristics that optimize performance, but
which no longer preserve the high-probability sample complexity guarantees.


                              FlexFringe                      CMS                    Language metric
    Name        H    U    r                time   U       r             time   U     r            time
    Corridor    5    11  1.0               0.03  11   1.0               0.3   11     1.0        0.01
    T-maze(c)   5    29  0.0               0.11  104  4.0               10.1  18     4.0        0.26
    Cookie      9    220 1.0               0.36  116  1.0               6.05  91     1.0        0.08
    Cheese      6    669 0.69 ± .04        19.28 1158 0.4 ± .05         207.4 1178   0.87 ± .03 12.11
    Mini-hall   15   897 0.33 ± .04        25.79 -    -                 -     6098   0.86 ± .03 29.90

Table 1: Summary of the experiments. For each domain, H is the horizon, and for each algorithm, U
is the number of states of the learned automaton, r is the reward of the derived policy, averaged over
100 episodes, and time is the running time in seconds of automaton learning. The maximum reward
for all the domains is 1, except for T-maze(c) where the reward upon reaching the goal is 4.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) Time (seconds) vs length of corridor           (b) Number of RDP states vs length of corridor

    Figure 2: Impact of increasing the length of the corridor for the T-maze domain of Example 1.


In Table 1, we see that A DACT-H with the language family X3,1 is faster than FlexFringe in all
domains except T-maze(c)—here FlexFringe fails to find the optimal policy, since the heuristics used
are not optimized to preserve reward—and outputs smaller automata than both FlexFringe and CMS
in all domains except Mini-hall. Since the number of languages in X3,1 is independent of H, the
statistical test does not have to iterate over all suffixes, and the resulting RDPs better exploit the
underlying structure of the domains. In the CMS-based approach, despite having a more compact
representation of the probability distributions, the statistical test still has to iterate over all suffixes,
which is exponential in H for the Lp∞ distance, and exceeds the allotted time budget of 1800 seconds
in the Mini-hall domain. In Corridor and Cookie, all algorithms learn automata that admit an optimal
policy. However, in T-maze, Cheese and Mini-hall, the RDPs learned by A DACT-H with the language
family X3,1 admit a policy that outperforms those of FlexFringe and CMS.
To better illustrate the improvement in performance for our language-based algorithm, in Figure 2
we compare the time and number of RDP states as a function of the corridor length in T-maze
(Example 1) for our two methods based on CMS and the language metric, respectively. With the
increasing corridor length N (and horizon H ≃ N ), we plot the time taken and RDP size over 20
runs, with K = 100 episodes. Figure 2a shows the time taken for the CMS-based algorithm increases
exponentially whereas there is only a linear increase for the language-based approach, which is
expected since the number of RDP states generated also increases linearly with H. In Figure 2b, the
plot indicates the size of the RDP states produced by the language based approach is optimal (∼2H),
and grows exponentially with H for the CMS approach. We also extend this experiment by increasing
N up to 100, observing the same trend for our language-based approach. However, CMS suffers
from slow running times, and exceeds 1800 seconds of running time over 20 runs after H = 15.


6     C ONCLUSION


In this paper, we propose two new approaches to offline RL for Regular Decision Processes and
provide their respective theoretical analysis. We also improve upon existing algorithms for RDP
learning, and propose a modified algorithm using Count-Min-Sketch with reduced memory complex-
ity. We define a hierarchy of language families and introduce a language-based approach, removing
the dependency on Lp∞ -distinguishability parameters and compare the performance of our algorithms
to FlexFringe, a state-of-the-art algorithm for learning probabilistic deterministic finite automata.
Although CMS suffers from a large running time, the language-restricted approach offers smaller
automata and optimal (or near optimal) policies, even in domains requiring long-term dependencies.
Finally, as a future work, we plan to expand our approach to the online RDP learning setting, and
investigate how to learn RDPs with cycles.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been co-funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 under the Maria de Maeztu
Units of Excellence Programme (CEX2021-001195-M). Anders Jonsson is partially supported by
AGAUR 2021 SGR 00933 and Spanish grants PID2019-108141GB-I00 and UE-PID2023-147145NB-
I00. Alessandro Ronca is supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant agreement No. 852769, ARiAT).
Mohammad Sadegh Talebi acknowledges partial support by the Independent Research Fund Denmark,
grant number 1026-00397B.

R EFERENCES
Eden Abadi and Ronen I. Brafman. Learning and solving Regular Decision Processes. In International
  Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 1948–1954, 2020.
Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Alessandro Lazaric, and Animashree Anandkumar. Reinforcement learning
  of POMDPs using spectral methods. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pp. 193–256,
  2016.
Fahiem Bacchus, Craig Boutilier, and Adam Grove. Structured solution methods for non-Markovian
  decision processes. In AAAI/IAAI, pp. 112–117, 1997.
Bram Bakker. Reinforcement learning with long short-term memory. In Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 1475–1482, 2001.
Borja Balle. Learning Finite-State Machines: Statistical and Algorithmic Aspects. PhD thesis,
  Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 2013.
Borja Balle, Jorge Castro, and Ricard Gavaldà. Learning probabilistic automata: A study in state
  distinguishability. Theor. Comput. Sci., 473:46–60, 2013.
Borja Balle, Jorge Castro, and Ricard Gavaldà. Adaptively learning probabilistic deterministic
  automata from data streams. Machine Learning, 96(1):99–127, 2014.
Robert Baumgartner and Sicco Verwer. Learning state machines from data streams: A generic
  strategy and an improved heuristic. In International Conference on Grammatical Inference (ICGI),
  pp. 117–141, 2023.
Hippolyte Bourel, Anders Jonsson, Odalric-Ambrym Maillard, and Mohammad Sadegh Talebi. Ex-
  ploration in reward machines with low regret. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 4114–4146, 2023.
Hippolyte Bourel, Anders Jonsson, Odalric-Ambrym Maillard, Chenxiao Ma, and Mohammad Sadegh
  Talebi. Provably efficient exploration in reward machines with low regret. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2412.19194, 2024.
Michael H. Bowling, Peter McCracken, Michael James, James Neufeld, and Dana F. Wilkinson.
 Learning predictive state representations using non-blind policies. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 129–136, 2006.
Alper Kamil Bozkurt, Yu Wang, Michael M. Zavlanos, and Miroslav Pajic. Control synthesis from
  linear temporal logic specifications using model-free reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 10349–10355, 2020.
Ronen I. Brafman and Giuseppe De Giacomo. Regular Decision Processes: A Model for Non-
  Markovian Domains. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp.
  5516–5522, 2019.
Ronen I Brafman and Giuseppe De Giacomo. Regular decision processes. Artificial Intelligence,
  331:104113, 2024.
Jinglin Chen and Nan Jiang. Information-theoretic considerations in batch reinforcement learning. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1042–1051, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Roberto Cipollone, Anders Jonsson, Alessandro Ronca, and Mohammad Sadegh Talebi. Provably
  efficient offline reinforcement learning in regular decision processes. In Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Alexander Clark and Franck Thollard. PAC-learnability of probabilistic deterministic finite state
  automata. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 5:473–497, 2004.
Graham Cormode and S. Muthukrishnan. An improved data stream summary: the Count-Min Sketch
  and its applications. Journal of Algorithms, 55(1):58–75, 2005.
Giuseppe De Giacomo and Moshe Y. Vardi. Linear temporal logic and linear dynamic logic on finite
  traces. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 854–860, 2013.
Yonathan Efroni, Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Provable reinforcement
  learning with a short-term memory. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
  5832–5850, 2022.
Jie Fu and Ufuk Topcu. Probably approximately correct MDP learning and control with temporal
   logic constraints. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2014.
Giuseppe De Giacomo, Marco Favorito, Luca Iocchi, Fabio Patrizi, and Alessandro Ronca. Tem-
  poral logic monitoring rewards via transducers. In Principles of Knowledge Representation and
  Reasoning (KR), pp. 860–870, 2020.
Hongyi Guo, Qi Cai, Yufeng Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Provably efficient offline
  reinforcement learning for partially observable Markov decision processes. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 8016–8038, 2022.
Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Shayan Doroudi, and Emma Brunskill. A PAC RL algorithm for episodic
  POMDPs. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pp.
  510–518, 2016.
Ernst Moritz Hahn, Mateo Perez, Sven Schewe, Fabio Somenzi, Ashutosh Trivedi, and Dominik
  Wojtczak. Omega-regular objectives in model-free reinforcement learning. In Tools and Algorithms
  for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS), pp. 395–412, 2019.
Ernst Moritz Hahn, Mateo Perez, Sven Schewe, Fabio Somenzi, Ashutosh Trivedi, and Dominik
  Wojtczak. Omega-regular decision processes. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 38(19):21125–21133, Mar. 2024. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v38i19.30105. URL https:
  //ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/30105.
Lewis Hammond, Alessandro Abate, Julian Gutierrez, and Michael J. Wooldridge. Multi-agent
  reinforcement learning with temporal logic specifications. In Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
  Systems (AAMAS), pp. 583–592, 2021.
Mohammadhosein Hasanbeig, Alessandro Abate, and Daniel Kroening. Cautious reinforcement
 learning with logical constraints. In Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), pp.
 483–491, 2020.
Mohammadhosein Hasanbeig, Natasha Yogananda Jeppu, Alessandro Abate, Tom Melham, and
 Daniel Kroening. DeepSynth: automata synthesis for automatic task segmentation in deep
 reinforcement learning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 7647–7656, 2021.
Michael R. James and Satinder Singh. Learning and discovery of predictive state representations in
 dynamical systems with reset. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2004.
Chi Jin, Sham M. Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Qinghua Liu. Sample-efficient reinforcement
  learning of undercomplete POMDPs. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline RL? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 5084–5096, 2021.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L. Littman, and Anthony R. Cassandra. Planning and acting in
  partially observable stochastic domains. Artif. Intell., 101(1–2):99–134, 1998.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. PAC reinforcement learning with rich
  observations. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 1840–1848, 2016.
Alex Kulesza, Nan Jiang, and Satinder Singh. Spectral learning of predictive state representations
  with insufficient statistics. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 2715–2721, 2015.
Tor Lattimore, Marcus Hutter, and Peter Sunehag. The sample-complexity of general reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2013.
Gen Li, Laixi Shi, Yuxin Chen, Yuejie Chi, and Yuting Wei. Settling the sample complexity of
  model-based offline reinforcement learning. The Annals of Statistics, 52(1):233–260, 2024.
Michael L. Littman, Anthony R. Cassandra, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning policies for partially
 observable environments: Scaling up. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
 pp. 362–370, 1995.
Qinghua Liu, Alan Chung, Csaba Szepesvári, and Chi Jin. When is partially observable reinforcement
  learning not scary? In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pp. 5175–5220, 2022.
M. M. Hassan Mahmud. Constructing states for reinforcement learning. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 727–734, 2010.
Odalric-Ambrym Maillard, Phuong Nguyen, Ronald Ortner, and Daniil Ryabko. Optimal regret
  bounds for selecting the state representation in reinforcement learning. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 543–551, 2013.
Zohar Manna and Amir Pnueli. Completing the temporal picture. In International Colloquium on
  Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), pp. 534–558, 1989.
R. Andrew McCallum. First results with utile distinction memory for reinforcement learning.
  Technical report, University of Rochester, USA, 1992.
Edward F Moore. Gedanken-experiments on sequential machines. Automata studies, 34:129–153,
  1956.
Rajeev Motwani and Prabhakar Raghavan. Randomized algorithms. Cambridge university press,
  1995.
Ronald Ortner, Matteo Pirotta, Alessandro Lazaric, Ronan Fruit, and Odalric-Ambrym Maillard.
  Regret bounds for learning state representations in reinforcement learning. In Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 12717–12727, 2019.
Nick Palmer and Paul W. Goldberg. PAC-learnability of probabilistic deterministic finite state
  automata in terms of variation distance. Theor. Comput. Sci., 387(1):18–31, 2007.
Christos H. Papadimitriou and John N. Tsitsiklis. The complexity of Markov decision processes.
  Mathematics of Operations Research, 12(3):441–450, 1987.
Jean-Éric Pin. The dot-depth hierarchy, 45 years later. The Role of Theory in Computer Science:
  Essays Dedicated to Janusz Brzozowski, pp. 177–201, 2017.
Paria Rashidinejad, Banghua Zhu, Cong Ma, Jiantao Jiao, and Stuart Russell. Bridging offline
  reinforcement learning and imitation learning: A tale of pessimism. In Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 11702–11716, 2021.
Tongzheng Ren, Jialian Li, Bo Dai, Simon S Du, and Sujay Sanghavi. Nearly horizon-free offline
  reinforcement learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 15621–15634,
  2021.
Dana Ron, Yoram Singer, and Naftali Tishby. On the learnability and usage of acyclic probabilistic
  finite automata. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 56(2):133–152, 1998.
Alessandro Ronca and Giuseppe De Giacomo. Efficient PAC reinforcement learning in regular
  decision processes. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 2026–
  2032, 2021.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alessandro Ronca, Gabriel Paludo Licks, and Giuseppe De Giacomo. Markov abstractions for PAC
  reinforcement learning in non-markov decision processes. In International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 3408–3415, 2022.
Jeffrey Shallit. A second course in formal languages and automata theory. Cambridge University
  Press, 2008.
Imre Simon. Hierarchies of events with dot-depth one. PhD thesis, University of Waterloo, 1972.
Satinder Singh, Michael L. Littman, Nicholas K. Jong, David Pardoe, and Peter Stone. Learning
  predictive state representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
  712–719, 2003.
Jayakumar Subramanian, Amit Sinha, Raihan Seraj, and Aditya Mahajan. Approximate information
  state for approximate planning and reinforcement learning in partially observed systems. Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 23(1):483–565, 2022.
Yihao Sun, Jiaji Zhang, Chengxing Jia, Haoxin Lin, Junyin Ye, and Yang Yu. Model-bellman
  inconsistency for model-based offline reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 33177–33194. PMLR, 2023.
Denis Thérien. Imre simon: an exceptional graduate student. RAIRO Theor. Informatics Appl., 39(1):
  297–304, 2005.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Anthony Valenzano, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Using
  reward machines for high-level task specification and decomposition in reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 2112–2121, 2018.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Ethan Waldie, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Anthony Valenzano, Margarita P.
  Castro, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Learning reward machines for partially observable reinforcement
  learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 15497–15508, 2019.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Anthony Valenzano, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Reward
  machines: Exploiting reward function structure in reinforcement learning. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 73:
  173–208, 2022.
Masatoshi Uehara and Wen Sun. Pessimistic model-based offline reinforcement learning under partial
 coverage. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Masatoshi Uehara, Xuezhou Zhang, and Wen Sun. Representation learning for online and offline RL
 in low-rank MDPs. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Steven D Whitehead and Long-Ji Lin. Reinforcement learning of non-Markov decision processes.
  Artificial intelligence, 73(1-2):271–306, 1995.
Tengyang Xie, Nan Jiang, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Yu Bai. Policy finetuning: Bridging
  sample-efficient offline and online reinforcement learning. In Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 27395–27407, 2021.
Zhe Xu, Ivan Gavran, Yousef Ahmad, Rupak Majumdar, Daniel Neider, Ufuk Topcu, and Bo Wu.
  Joint inference of reward machines and policies for reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS), pp. 590–598, 2020.
Ming Yin and Yu-Xiang Wang. Towards instance-optimal offline reinforcement learning with
 pessimism. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 4065–4078, 2021.
Wenhao Zhan, Baihe Huang, Audrey Huang, Nan Jiang, and Jason Lee. Offline reinforcement
 learning with realizability and single-policy concentrability. In Conference on Learning Theory
 (COLT), pp. 2730–2775, 2022.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Wen Sun, and Jason D. Lee. PAC reinforcement learning for
 predictive state representations. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
 2023.


                                                 14
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     A    P SEUDOCODE OF A DACT-H, A DACT-H-A AND R E G ORL

     In this section we present the pseudocode of A DACT-H, the approximation algorithm A DACT-H-A
     and the full reinforcement learning algorithm RegORL.



     Function A DACT–H(D, δ)
     Input: Dataset D of traces in ΓH+1 , failure probability 0 < δ < 1
     Output: Set U of RDP states, transition function τ : U × A O → U
 1 U0 ← {u0 }, Z(u0 ) ← D                                                          // initial state
 2 for t = 0, . . . , H do
 3      Uc,t+1 ← {uao | u ∈ Ut , ao ∈ A O}                                 // get candidate states
 4      foreach uao ∈ Uc,t+1 do Z(uao) ← {et+1:H | aroet+1:H ∈ Z(u)}            // compute suffixes
 5      um am om ← arg maxuao∈Uc,t+1 |Z(uao)|                            // most common candidate
 6      Ut+1 ← {um am om }, τ (um , am om ) = um am om                        // promote candidate
 7      Uc,t+1 ← Uc,t+1 \ {um am om }                          // remove from candidate states
 8      for uao ∈ Uc,t+1 do
 9          Similar ← {u′ ∈ Ut+1 | not T EST D ISTINCT(t, Z(uao), Z(u′ ), δ)} // confidence test
10          if Similar = ∅ then Ut+1 ← Ut+1 ∪ {uao}, τ (u, ao) = uao          // promote candidate
11          else u′ ← element in Similar, τ (u, ao) = u′ , Z(u′ ) ← Z(u′ ) ∪ Z(uao) // merge states
12      end
13 end
14 return U0 ∪ · · · ∪ UH+1 , τ

15                               Z1 , Z2 , δ)
     Function T EST D ISTINCT (t,p
16      return Lp∞ (Z1 , Z2 ) ≥ 2 log(8(ARO)H−t /δ)/ min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |)


     Function A DACT–H–A(D, δ, ε, U , C)
     Input: Dataset D of traces in ΓH+1 , failure probability 0 < δ < 1, accuracy ε ∈ (0, H], bounds U and C
     Output: Set U ′ of RDP states, transition function τ ′ : U ′ × A O → U ′
 1 U0′ ← {u0 }, Z(u0 ) ← D                                                                   // initial state
     ′      ′         e          e
 2 U0 ← U0 ∪ {u0 }, Z(u0 ) ← ∅                                                          // initial side state
 3 for t = 0, . . . , H do
          ′
 4      Ut+1    ← {uet+1 }                                                                      // side state
 5      foreach ao ∈ AO do τ ′ (uet , ao) = uet+1 , Z(uet+1 ) ← {et+1:H | aroet+1:H ∈ Z(uet )}
          ′
 6      Uc,t+1    ← {uao | u ∈ Ut′ , ao ∈ A O}                                       // get candidate states
                               ′
 7      foreach uao ∈ Uc,t+1         do Z(uao) ← {et+1:H | aroet+1:H ∈ Z(u)} // compute suffixes
 8      um am om ← arg maxuao∈Uc,t+1         ′     |Z(uao)|                        // most common candidate
          ′           ′                          ′
 9      Ut+1 ← Ut+1 ∪ {um am om }, τ (um , am om ) = um am om                            // promote candidate
          ′             ′
10      Uc,t+1    ← Uc,t+1     \ {um am om }                               // remove from candidate states
                         ′
11      for uao ∈ Uc,t+1        such that |Z(uao)|/N ≥ 3ε/(10U AOC) do
12          Similar ← {u′ ∈ Ut+1        ′
                                              | not T EST D ISTINCT(t, Z(uao), Z(u′ ), δ)} // confidence test
                                           ′           ′
13          if Similar = ∅ then Ut+1 ← Ut+1               ∪ {uao}, τ ′ (u, ao) = uao     // promote candidate
14          else u ← element in Similar, τ (u, ao) = u′ , Z(u′ ) ← Z(u′ ) ∪ Z(uao) // merge states
                      ′                                 ′

15          if |U0′ | + · · · + |Ut+1
                                    ′
                                          | > U then return Failure
16      end
                         ′
17      for uao ∈ Uc,t+1        such that |Z(uao)|/N < 3ε/(10U AOC) do
                ′
18          τ (u, ao) = uet+1 , Z(uet+1 ) ← Z(uet+1 ) ∪ Z(uao)                     // merge with side state
19      end
20 end
              ′              ′        ′
21 return U0 ∪ · · · ∪ UH+1 , τ


                                                         15
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Algorithm 1: RegORL
    Input: Dataset D, accuracy ε ∈ (0, H], failure probability 0 < δ < 1, (optionally) upper bound U on |U|
    Output: Policy π̂ : H → ∆(A)
1 D1 , D2 ← separate D into two datasets of the same size
2 U, τ ← A DACT–H(D1 , δ/(4U AO)), where U = 2(AO)H if not provided
    ′
3 D2 ← Markov transformation of D2 with respect to τ̄
                            ′
4 π̂m ← O FFLINE RL(D2 , ε, δ/2)
5 return π̂ : h 7→ π̂m (τ̄ (h))


    B     P ROPERTIES OF REGULAR POLICIES

    In this appendix we restate two propositions from Cipollone et al. (2023). We refer the reader to the
    proofs in that paper.

    Proposition 4. Consider an RDP R, a regular policy π ∈ ΠR and two histories h1 and h2 in Ht ,
    t ∈ [H], such that τ̄ (h1 ) = τ̄ (h2 ). For each suffix et+1:H ∈ ΓH−t , the probability of generating
    et+1:H is the same for h1 and h2 , i.e. P(et+1:H | h1 , π, R) = P(et+1:H | h2 , π, R).


    Proposition 5. Each RDP R has at least one optimal policy π ∗ ∈ ΠR .


    C     P ROOF OF THEOREMS

    In this appendix we first prove Theorem 1. Then we prove Theorems 2 and 3 using a series of
    technical lemmas, and describing first how to implement A DACT-H using CMS.

    C.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1: E XPONENTIAL IMPROVEMENT VIA THE LANGUAGE METRIC

    Theorem 1. There exist a family of RDPs (RN )N ∈N and a corresponding family of regular behaviour
               b
    policies (πN )N ∈N satisfying the two following properties: (i) the Lp∞ -distinguishability of RN under
     b         −N                                                          b
    πN is O(2 ); and (ii) the LX2,1 -distinguishability of RN under πN        is Ω(1).

    Proof. Let RN be the RDP described in Example 3, where N is the corridor length and the horizon
                       b
    is H = N + 1. Let πN  be the policy for RN that always chooses East in the corridor, and chooses
    North or South with equal probability at the T-junction.
    We show the first point by showing that the Lp∞ -distinguishability is at most 0.5N . It suffices to show
                        Lp∞ (P(e1:H | u1 = u, πN
                                               b
                                                 ), P(e1:H | u1 = u′ , πN
                                                                        b
                                                                          )) ≤ 0.5N ,
    for any two states u, u′ ∈ U1 . Then inequality is proven immediately since the Lp∞ -distance is
    upper-bounded by the probability of any single episode suffix e1:H , which is 0.5N . In particular,
    a factor 0.5 is due to the uniform choice of an action at the T-junction, and 0.5N −1 is due to the
    uniform probability over the two possible observations when we take a step in the corridor, for a total
    of N − 1 times.
    We show the second point by showing that the LX2,1 -distinguishability is at least 0.5. Let t ∈ JN +1K,
    and let us consider two distinct states u, u′ ∈ Ut . It suffices to show
                                                    b
                                                      ), P(et:H | ut = u′ , πN
                                                                             b

                         LX2,1 P(et:H | ut = u, πN                             ) ≥ 0.5.
    Since U0 = {u0 } is a singleton, we have t ≥ 1, and hence u = (ut,⊤ , t) and u′ = (ut,⊥ , t). The
    set of languages X2,1 includes X = {x North O/r y | x, y ∈ Γ∗ , |xy| = H − t + 1}, which is the
    language consisting of all episode suffixes where the positive reward r is obtained upon performing
    action North. The probability of language X is 0.5 given ut = u, and it is 0 given ut = u′ . This
    proves the claimed inequality and hence the theorem.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   A NALYSIS OF CMS

Given a finite set Y = {y1 , . . . , ym } and a probability distribution p ∈ ∆(Y), let pb ∈ ∆(Y) be an
empirical estimate of p computed using n samples. CMS can store an estimate pe of the empirical
distribution pb. In this setting, the vector v = (v1 , . . . , vm ) contains the empirical counts of each
element of Y, i.e. for each i ∈ JmK, vi is the number of times that we have observed element yi .
Given n samples, we have ∥v∥1 = n and pb(yi ) = vi /n for each yi ∈ Y. The following lemma shows
how to bound the error between pe and pb.
Lemma 6. Given a finite set Y, a probability distribution p ∈ ∆(Y), and an empirical estimate
pb ∈ ∆(Y) of p obtained using n samples, let pe be the estimate of pb output by CMS with parameters
δc and ε. With probability at least 1 − |Y|δc it holds that ∥e   p − pb∥∞ ≤ ε.

Proof. Cormode & Muthukrishnan (2005) show that for a point query that returns an approximation
vei of vi , with probability at least 1 − δc it holds that
                                           vei ≤ vi + ε∥v∥1 .
In our case, the estimated probability of an element yi ∈ Y equals pe(yi ) = vei /n, where vei is the
point query for yi . Using the result above, with probability at least 1 − δc we have
                                       vei   vi   ε∥v∥1
                               pe(yi ) =   ≤    +          = pb(yi ) + ε.
                                        n    n       n
Since CMS never underestimates a value, pb(yi ) ≤ pe(yi ) trivially holds. Taking a union bound shows
that the inequality above holds simultaneously for all yi ∈ Y with probability 1 − |Y|δc .

In our setting, Y = Γℓ for a fixed ℓ ∈ JHK. Given a failure probability
                                                                      pδ and a multiset Z of elements
in Γℓ , we set the parameters of CMS to δc = δ/(AOR)ℓ and ε = log(2(AOR)ℓ /δ)/2|Z|. This
implies that the size of the matrix of CMS is proportional to
                                           s                          s
                                 (AOR)ℓ                                           2(AOR)ℓ

              1     e                                2|Z|
        log       · = e log                                      < e 2|Z| log
             δc     ε               δ         log (2(AOR)ℓ /δ)                          δ
                             p
                      =O  e     |Z|(ℓ + log(1/δ)) .

Hence the memory complexity is much smaller than |Γℓ |, the number of elements in v. Since
(AOR)ℓ = |Γℓ |, Lemma 6 implies that ∥e
                                      p − pb∥∞ ≤ ϵ holds with probability at least 1 − δ.
Given a language X ⊆ Γℓ , the estimation error |ep(X) − pb(X)| due to CMS is proportional to |X|ε,
which is large if X contains many elements. Alternatively, for a language set X = {X1 , . . . , Xm },
we could use the vector element vi of CMS to count the number of elements of Z that are also
members of Xi . However, if the languages overlap (which is the case for many of our language
families), then ∥v∥1 = n no longer holds, and neither does Lemma 6. Hence it is only practical to use
CMS to estimate the error of the language metric LX when the languages in X are small and disjoint.
To bound the prefix distance Lp∞ (e   puao , pbuao ) between the empirical and estimated distributions on
suffixes of length H − t, for each candidate state (u, ao) ∈ Ut × AO we need H − t copies of CMS
to store the counts for suffixes of different lengths ℓ ∈ JH − tK. We define an associated event ECMS
to correctly bound Lp∞ (epuao , pbuao ) for all candidate states:
           (                                                                   s                     )
                                                       p                         log(2(AOR)H−t /δ)
  ECMS = ∀t ∈ J0, HK, (u, ao) ∈ Ut × AO : L∞ (e           puao , pbuao ) ≤ ε =                         .
                                                                                        2|Z|
Since the number of instances of CMS is less than HU AO, event ECMS occurs with probability at
least 1 − HU AOδ.

C.3   T ECHNICAL LEMMAS

The following technical lemmas largely follow the analysis of Cipollone et al. (2023). However, we
reformulate the lemmas in terms of the language metric LX and make them more modular in order to
adapt them to our different settings. We first prove a high-probability upper bound on the language
metric LX between the true suffix distribution and its empirical estimate for any candidate state.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 7. Given a timestep t ∈ J0, HK, a candidate state (u, ao) ∈ Ut × AO, a multiset Z(uao)
of suffixes in ΓH−t , and a set X of languages defined on ΓH−t , with probability at least 1 − δ the
language metric LX satisfies
                                                      s
                                                        log(2|X |/δ)
                                 LX (bpuao , puao ) ≤                ,
                                                         2|Z(uao)|

where puao ∈ ∆(ΓH−t ) is the true distribution on suffixes in ΓH−t that start from (u, ao), and pbuao
is the empirical estimate of puao induced by Z(uao).
                                                     P
Proof. For each language
                   P       X ∈ X , let puao (X) = x∈X puao (x) be the true probability of X,
and let pbuao (X) = x∈Z(uao) I(x ∈ X)/|Z(uao)| be the empirical estimate of puao (X), i.e. the
proportion of elements in Z(uao) that are also in X. Hoeffding’s inequality implies that
                                                     s            !
                                                       log(2/δs )
                        P |bpuao (X) − puao (X)| >                   ≤ δs .
                                                       2|Z(uao)|

Choosing δs = δ/|X | and taking a union bound implies that LX satisfies
                                                                s
                                                                    log(2|X |/δ)
               LX (bpuao , puao ) = max |b
                                         puao (X) − puao (X)| ≤
                                    X∈X                              2|Z(uao)|

with probability 1 − |X |δs = 1 − δ, which completes the proof.

We define an associated event EX to correctly bound the language metric LX for all (u, ao):
               (                                                        s              )
                                                                          log(2|X |/δ)
        EX = ∀t ∈ J0, HK, (u, ao) ∈ Ut × AO : LX (b     puao , puao ) ≤                  .
                                                                           2|Z(uao)|

We next prove a high-probability sample complexity bound for accurately estimating the empirical
occupancy pb(uao) of each candidate state uao ∈ U × AO. Given a number of episodes N , an
empirical Bernstein inequality yields
                                         r                                  !
                              b            2b
                                            p(uao) log(4/δ) 14 log(4/δ)
             P pb(uao) − dt (u, ao) >                       +                 ≤ δ.           (4)
                                                  N                3N

Given a failure probability δ, let Gδ be the function for the bound in the empirical Bernstein inequality,
defined as                                  r
                                               2b
                                                p log(4/δ) 14 log(4/δ)
                              Gδ (bp, N ) =                  +
                                                    N              3N
It is easy to see that Gδ is monotonically increasing in pb and monotonically decreasing in N . We
define an associated event EB to correctly bound |b  p(uao) − dbt (u, ao)| for all (u, ao):
        EB = ∀t ∈ J0, HK, (u, ao) ∈ Ut × AO : pb(uao) − dbt (u, ao) ≤ Gδ (b

                                                                                    p(uao), N ) .
We show that we can control the number of episodes N to obtain an upper bound on the function Gδ .
Lemma 8. For fixed probabilities δ and pb, if N ≥ 16 log(4/δ)/b
                                                              p it holds that 3Gδ (b
                                                                                   p, N ) < 2b
                                                                                             p.

Proof. We first show that the inequality holds for N = 16 log(4/δ)/b
                                                                   p. In this case we have
                            s
                                 p2 log(4/δ) 14b

                                2b                 p log(4/δ)     3     14
            3Gδ (bp, N ) = 3                 +                = √ +           pb < 2b
                                                                                    p.
                                16 log(4/δ)      16 log(4/δ)       8 16
The case N > 16 log(4/δ)/b
                         p follows from the fact that Gδ is monotonically decreasing in N .

Since pb(uao) = |Z(uao)|/N implies N = |Z(uao)|/b
                                                p(uao), we obtain the following corollary.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                       p(uao) − dbt (u, ao)| ≤
Corollary 9. Under event EB , if |Z(uao)| ≥ 16 log(4/δ) it holds that |b
2b
 p(uao)/3.

We show that under event EB , we can choose the sample complexity N to ensure that we obtain at
least a certain number of elements in Z(uao).
Lemma 10. Given a candidate state uao ∈ Ut × AO and any b ≥ 1, under event EB it holds that
|Z(uao)| ≥ b log(4/δ) if the sample complexity N satisfies
                                            log(4/δ)
                                      N≥                (2b + 31/6) .
                                            dbt (u, ao)

Proof. Letting M = |Z(uao)|, due to event EB and the given bound on N it holds that

                     M
         dbt (u, ao) −   ≤ Gδ (M/N, N )
                     N
                ⇔ 0≤M +p          N Gδ (M/N, N ) − N dbt (u, ao)
                         ≤ M + p2M log(4/δ) + 14 log(4/δ)/3 − log(4/δ) (2b + 31/6)
                                              √
                         = M + 2 log(4/δ) M − log(4/δ) (2b + 1/2) .
                                             √
Solving the quadratic inequality for positive M yields
                          r          r
               √          log(4/δ)     log(4/δ)
               M ≥−                +            + log(4/δ) (2b + 1/2)
                              2            2
                       r
                          log(4/δ) p
                  =−               + log(4/δ) + 2b log(4/δ)
                              2
                       r             p           p
                          log(4/δ)     log(4/δ) + 2b log(4/δ) p
                  ≥−               +            √               = b log(4/δ),
                              2                   2
                                 √          √    √ √
where we have used the inequality x + y ≥ ( x + y)/ 2. Hence the bound on N in the lemma
                 √ 2
implies that M = M ≥ b log(4/δ).

C.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Let T EST D ISTINCTCM S be the version of T EST D ISTINCT that uses the statistical test in the theorem.
To prove Theorem 2, we show that T EST D ISTINCTCM S answers correctly if the multisets Z1 and
Z2 have a given minimum size MCM S , both when the suffix distributions are the same and when
they are different. These lemmas are analogous to Lemmas 13 and 14 of Cipollone et al. (2023).
Lemma 11. For t ∈ J0, HK, let Z1 and Z2 be multisets         p sampled from distributions p1 and
p2 on ∆(ΓH−t ). If we use CMS with parameters ε =               log(2(AOR)H−t /δ)/2|Z| and δc =
           H−t
δ/(AOR)        to store an approximation pei of the empirical estimate pbi of pi induced by Zi , i ∈ J2K,
if events ECM S and EX hold, and if p1 = p2 , then T EST D ISTINCTCM S (t, Z1 , Z2 , δ) returns false.

Proof. For i ∈ J2K, Lp∞ (b               pi , pi ) if X contains one language for each prefix from ΓH−t ,
                         pi , pi ) = LX (b
implying |X | ≤ 2(AOR)H−t . Events ECM S and EX and the triangle inequality now imply that

  Lp∞ (e
       p1 , pe2 ) ≤ Lp∞ (e                 p1 , p1 ) + LX (p1 , p2 ) + LX (p2 , pb2 ) + Lp∞ (b
                          p1 , pb1 ) + LX (b                                                 p2 , pe2 )
     s                                  s                        s                     s
        log(2(AOR)H−t /δ)                 log(2|X |/δ)               log(2|X |/δ)         log(2(AOR)H−t /δ)
  ≤                                  +                  +0+                         +
                   2|Z1 |                     2|Z1 |                    2|Z2 |                      2|Z2 |
     s
        8 log(4(AOR)H−t /δ)
  ≤                                   .
              min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |)

This is precisely the condition for which T EST D ISTINCTCM S returns false.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 12. For t ∈ J0, HK, let Z1 and Z2 be multisets         p sampled from distributions p1 and
p2 on ∆(ΓH−t ). If we use CMS with parameters ε =               log(2(AOR)H−t /δ)/2|Z| and δc =
           H−t
δ/(AOR)        to store an approximation pei of the empirical estimate pbi of pi induced by Zi , i ∈ J2K,
if events ECM S and EX hold, and if p1 ̸= p2 , then T EST D ISTINCTCM S (t, Z1 , Z2 , δ) returns true if
Z1 and Z2 satisfy min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |) ≥ 32 log(4(AOR)H−t /δ)/µ20 .

Proof. Using the same argument as in the proof of Lemma 11 yields
 Lp∞ (e
      p1 , pe2 ) ≥ LX (p1 , p2 ) − Lp∞ (e
                                        p1 , pb1 ) − LX (bp1 , p1 ) − LX (p2 , pb2 ) − Lp∞ (b
                                                                                            p2 , pe2 )
             s                            s                       s                    s
                log(2(AOR)H−t /δ)              log(2|X |/δ)          log(2|X |/δ)         log(2(AOR)H−t /δ)
 ≥ µ0 −                                −                       −                     −
                        2|Z1 |                     2|Z1 |               2|Z2 |                       2|Z2 |
             s                                      r                  s
                8 log(4(AOR)H−t /δ)                   µ20       µ0       8 log(4(AOR)H−t /δ)
 ≥ µ0 −                                  ≥ µ0 −            =        ≥                                  ,
                    min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |)                   4       2            min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |)

where we have used the condition on min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |) in the lemma. This is precisely the condition
for which T EST D ISTINCTCM S returns true.

We next show that A DACT-H returns a minimal RDP if the multiset Z(uao) associated with each
candidate state uao satisfies |Z(uao)| ≥ 32 log(4(AOR)H−t /δ)/µ20 ≡ MCM S .
Lemma 13. Under events ECM S and EX , A DACT-H outputs a minimal RDP R if the multiset
Z(uao) associated with each candidate state uao satisfies |Z(uao)| ≥ MCM S .

Proof. We show the result by induction. The base case is given by the set U0 , which is clearly
minimal since it only contains the initial state u0 . For t ∈ J0, HK, assume that the algorithm has
learned a minimal RDP for sets U0 , . . . , Ut . Let Ut+1 be the set of states at layer t + 1 of a minimal
RDP. Due to the regular property, each pair of histories that map to a state ut+1 ∈ Ut+1 generate
the same probability distribution over suffixes. Under events ECM S and EX , Lemma 11 implies that
T EST D ISTINCTCM S (t, Z(uao), Z(u′ a′ o′ ), δ) returns false for each pair of candidate states uao and
u′ a′ o′ that map to ut+1 . Consequently, A DACT-H merges uao and u′ a′ o′ .
On the other hand, by assumption, each pair of histories that map to different states of Ut+1 have
L∞ -distinguishability µ0 . Under events ECM S and EX , if min(|Z(uao)|, |Z(u′ a′ o′ )|) ≥ MCM S
then Lemma 12 implies that T EST D ISTINCTCM S (t, Z(uao), Z(u′ a′ o′ ), δ) returns true for each pair
of candidate states uao and u′ a′ o′ that map to different states in Ut+1 . Consequently, A DACT-H
does not merge uao and u′ a′ o′ . It follows that A DACT-H will generate exactly the set Ut+1 , which
is that of a minimal RDP.

To prove Theorem 2 we need to ensure that M ≥ MCM S for each candidate state uao. Choosing b =
64 log(AOR)H /µ20 and applying Lemma 10 yields the following bound on the sample complexity:

                                 log(4/δ) 128 log(AOR)H

                    N ≥ max                                 +  31/6      .
                          uao    dbt (u, ao)     µ20
The three events ECM S , EX and EB hold simultaneously with probability at least 1−(H +2)U AOδ ≥
1 − 2HU AOδ, so defining δ0 = δ/2HU AO ensures that the sample complexity holds with probabil-
ity at least 1 − δ0 . Since dbt (u, ao) ≥ d∗t (u, ao)/CR∗
                                                          ≥ d∗m /CR
                                                                  ∗
                                                                    , we can bound the sample complexity
as
                  ∗
                     log(8HU AO/δ0 ) 128 log(AOR)H

                CR                                                             HCR log(1/δ)
         N≥                                                   + 31/6 = O   e                    .
                           d∗m                      µ20                            d∗m · µ20
This concludes the proof of the theorem.
We also prove a bound on the sample complexity of the approximation algorithm A DACT-H-A. In
this algorithm, the subroutine T EST D ISTINCTCM S is only called for a candidate state uao when
pb(uao) satisfies
                                                 3ε
                                    pb(uao) ≥           ≡ ψ,
                                              10U AOC

                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where ε, U and C are inputs to the algorithm and ψ is a predefined threshold. We prove the following
theorem:
Theorem 14. A DACT-H-A(D, δ, ε, U , C) returns an 2ε -approximate RDP R′ with probability at
least 1 − 2HAOU δ when CMS is used to store empirical probability estimates, the statistical test is
                                     q
                   Lp∞ (Z1 , Z2 ) ≥ 8 log(4(ARO)H−t /δ)/ min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |),
and the size of the dataset D is at least

                                                        HU AOC log(1/δ)
                                        |D| ≥ O
                                              e                                   .
                                                             εµ20

We first prove that the resulting RDP is 2ε -approximate.
Lemma 15. Under events ECM S , EX and EB , if U and C are upper bounds on the number of RDP
states U ′ = |U ′ | and concentrability CR
                                         ∗
                                           ′ , then A DACT-H-A returns an
                                                                          ε                   ′
                                                                          2 -approximate RDP R .

Proof. Consider a candidate state uao with M = |Z(uao)|. If pb(uao) ≥ ψ then we impose the
condition M ≥ MCM S as before. For each such candidate state, A DACT-H-A calls T EST D IS -
TINCT CM S and correctly promotes the candidate state to an RDP state or merges it with an existing
RDP state.
On the other hand, if pb(uao) < ψ and N ≥ 16 log(4/δ)/ψ, event EB and Lemma 8 yield
      dbt (u, ao) − pb(uao) ≤ Gδ (b
                                  p(qao), N )
                                                                            5ψ         ε
              ⇔   dbt (u, ao) < pb(uao) + Gδ (b
                                              p(uao), N ) < ψ + Gδ (ψ, N ) ≤   =             .
                                                                             3     2U AOC
In this case, A DACT-H-A does not call T EST D ISTINCTCM S and hence the resulting RDP state may
be incorrect. We can bound the contribution of uao to the value under the optimal policy π ∗ as
               X                       X
   d∗t (u, ao)    π ∗ (τ (u, ao), a′ )   θr (τ (u, ao), a′ , r) · r
              a′ ∈A                       r∈R
                      X                            X                                                          ε
      ≤ d∗t (u, ao)           π (τ (u, ao), a′ )
                               ∗
                                                         θr (τ (u, ao), a′ , r) = d∗t (u, ao) ≤ CR
                                                                                                 ∗ b
                                                                                                   ′ dt ≤         ,
                      a′ ∈A                        r∈R
                                                                                                            2U AO
where we have used the fact that the reward is bounded by 1. Summing up the contribution of all
such candidate states to the expected optimal value of histories in H0 yields
  X X                      X                       X                              X X       ε   ε
             d∗t (ut , ao)    π ∗ (τ (u, ao), a′ )   θr (τ (u, ao), a′ , r) · r ≤              ≤ .
        u ao               ′                                                        u ao
                                                                                         2U AO  2
t∈J0,HK   t                   a ∈A                       r∈R                             t∈J0,HK   t

                                             ′
This proves that the resulting RDP R             is 2ε -approximate.

To prove Theorem 14, for each candidate state uao such that pb(uao) < ψ, a number of episodes
which satisfies N ≥ 16 log(4/δ)/ψ is sufficient to ensure that R′ is 2ε -approximate. If pb(uao) ≥ ψ,
we instead require M ≥ MCM S as before. Since MCM S ≥ 16 log(4/δ), event EB together with
Corollary 9 yield
                              2bp(uao)                     pb(uao)     ψ        ε
          pb(uao) − dbt (u, ao) ≤         ⇔ dbt (u, ao) ≥           ≥ =             .
                                  3                            3       3    10U AOC
Applying Lemma 10 directly yields the following bound on the sample complexity:
                         log(4/δ) 128 log(AOR)H

                                                                   16 log(4/δ)
            N ≥ max                                   + 31/6 +                   .
                 uao    dbt (u, ao)         µ20                         ψ
We can now use the lower bound on dbt (u, ao) in the case pb(uao) ≥ ψ to achieve the following
bound:
     10U AOC log(8HU AO/δ0 ) 128 log(AOR)H

                                                                  160U AOC log(8HU AO/δ0 )
N≥                                                   + 31/6 +
                 ε                         µ20                                3ε

   =O e HU AOC log(1/δ) .
                εµ20

                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.5   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

Let T EST D ISTINCTX be the version of T EST D ISTINCT that uses the statistical test in the theorem.
The proof of Theorem 3 is achieved by proving two lemmas analogous to Lemmas 11 and 12.
Lemma 16. For t ∈ J0, HK, let Z1 and Z2 be multisets sampled from distributions p1 and p2 on
∆(ΓH−t ), and let pb1 and pb2 be empirical estimates of p1 and p2 due to Z1 and Z2 , respectively.
Under event EX , if p1 = p2 then T EST D ISTINCTX (t, Z1 , Z2 , δ) answers false.

Proof. Due to event EX and the triangle inequality we have

                p1 , pb2 ) ≤ LX (b
            LX (b                p1 , p1 ) + LX (p1 , p2 ) + LX (p2 , pb2 )
                             s                        s                     s
                               log(2|X |/δ)               log(2|X |/δ)        2 log(2|X |/δ)
                           ≤                  +0+                         ≤                     .
                                   2|Z1 |                    2|Z2 |           min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |)
This is precisely the condition for which T EST D ISTINCTX returns false.
Lemma 17. For t ∈ J0, HK, let Z1 and Z2 be multisets sampled from distributions p1 and p2 on
∆(ΓH−t ), and let pb1 and pb2 be empirical estimates of p1 and p2 due to Z1 and Z2 , respectively.
Under event EX , if p1 ̸= p2 then T EST D ISTINCTX (t, Z1 , Z2 , δ) answers true if Z1 and Z2 satisfy
min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |) ≥ 8 log(2|X |/δ)/µ20 .

Proof. Due to event EX and the triangle inequality we have

            p1 , pb2 ) ≥ LX (p1 , p2 ) − LX (b
        LX (b                                 p1 , p1 ) − LX (p2 , pb2 )
                              s                      s
                                  log(2|X |/δ)          log(2|X |/δ)
                       ≥ µ0 −                     −
                                       2|Z1 |              2|Z2 |
                              s                               r                s
                                   2 log(2|X |/δ)                 µ20     µ0     2 log(2|X |/δ)
                       ≥ µ0 −                          ≥ µ0 −           =    ≥                     ,
                                  min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |)                 4     2      min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |)

where we have used the condition on min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |) in the lemma. This is precisely the condition
for which T EST D ISTINCTX returns true.

The remainder of the proof of Theorem 3 is analogous to that of Theorem 2. To satisfy the conditions
on |Z(uao)| in Lemma 17 and Corollary 9, we impose a bound MX = 16 log(4/δ) log |X |/µ20 . We
can now choose b = 16 log |X |/µ20 in Lemma 10 to obtain a bound

                                      log(4/δ) 32 log |X |
                         N ≥ max                              + 31/6    .
                               uao    dbt (u, ao)     µ20
Since T EST D ISTINCTX answers correctly under event EX , Lemma 13 directly applies, with the only
difference that we do not need event ECM S to hold, and hence it is sufficient to choose δ0 = δ/2U AO
to ensure that events EX and EB hold. Using the lower bound on dbt (u, ao) yields

                C ∗ log(8U AO/δ0 ) 32 log |X |
                                                                     ∗
          N≥ R                                    +  31/6   =  Oe CR log(1/δ) log |X | ,
                        d∗m               µ20                                d∗m · µ20

We also prove an analogous theorem for the approximation algorithm A DACT-H-A:
Theorem 18. A DACT-H-A(D, δ, ε, U , C) returns an 2ε -approximate RDP R′ with probability at
least 1 − 2AOU δ when using the language metric LX to define a statistical test
                                     p
                      LX (Z1 , Z2 ) ≥ 2 log(2|X |/δ)/ min(|Z1 |, |Z2 |),
and the size of the dataset D is at least

                                                U AOC log(1/δ) log |X |
                                |D| ≥ O
                                      e                                       ,
                                                        εµ20

                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The proof is also analogous to that of Theorem 14. Concretely, Lemma 15 still holds as long as we
ensure M ≥ MX for candidate states such that pb(uao) ≥ ψ, and N ≥ 16 log(4/δ)/ψ otherwise.
Applying Lemma 10 directly yields the following bound on the sample complexity:

                               log(4/δ) 32 log |X |              16 log(4/δ)
                  N ≥ max                           + 31/6 +                   .
                        uao   dbt (u, ao)     µ20                     ψ
Using the lower bound on dbt (u, ao) in the case pb(uao) ≥ ψ yields

         10U AOC log(8U AO/δ0 ) 32 log |X |          160U AOC log(8U AO/δ0 )
      N≥                                  2 + 31/6 +
                   ε                     µ0                    3ε

             U AOC log(1/δ) log |X |
       =Oe                             .
                     εµ20

D     D ETAILS OF THE EXPERIMENTS

In this appendix we describe each domain in detail and include examples of RDPs learned by
A DACT-H.

D.1    C ORRIDOR

This RDP example was introduced by Ronca & De Giacomo (2021). The environment consists of a
2 × m grid, with only two actions a0 and a1 which moves the agent to states (0, i + 1) and (1, i + 1)
respectively from state (·, i). The goal of the agent is to avoid an enemy which is present in position
(0, i) with probability p0i , and at (1, i) with probability p1i . The agent receives a reward of +1 for
avoiding the enemy at a particular column, and the probabilities p0i and pii are switched every time
it encounters the enemy. When the agent reaches the last column, its position is reset to the first
column. The observation space is given by (i, j, e), where i, j is the cell position of the agent and
e ∈ {enemy, clear} denotes the presence of the guard in the current cell. Fig 3 shows the minimal
automaton obtained by all three algorithms for H = 5.


Figure 3: Automaton obtained from the corridor environment. The edges are labelled as [action,
observation, enemy].


D.2    T- MAZE ( C )

The T-maze(c) environment was introduced by Bakker (2001) to capture long term dependencies
with RL-LSTMs. As shown in Figure 1, at the initial position S, the agent receives an observation X,
depending on the position of the goal state G in the last column. The agent can take four actions,
North, South, East and West. The agent receives a reward of +4 on taking the correct action at the
T-junction, and −1 otherwise, terminating the episode. The agent also receives a −1 reward for
standing still. At the initial state the agent receives observation 011 or 110, 101 throughout the
corridor and 010 at the T-junction. Figure 1 shows the optimal automaton obtained when the available
actions in the corridor are restricted to only East (the automaton obtained without this restriction is
shown in Figure 6). Table 1 shows our results with the unrestricted action space using the language
set X3,1 . Both our approaches find the optimal policy in this case, unlike FlexFringe which fails to
capture this long term dependency.
Note that T-maze(c) differs from the T-maze of Example 1 in a small but relevant detail: in T-maze(c)
the agent deterministically receives the observation 101 when it is in the corridor, but in the T-Maze


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Automaton obtained from T-maze(c) environment with restricted actions. The edges are
labelled as [action, observation].


  (a) Mini-hall environment (Littman et al., 1995).                (b) Simplified cookie domain.

                                         Figure 5: Environments.


of Example 1 the agent can receive 101 or 111 uniformly at random. The additional observation
111 is a distraction for the agent, rather than a help, since it does not convey any additional useful
information.


Figure 6: Automaton obtained from T-maze(c) (partially restricted action space), restricted language.



D.3    C OOKIE DOMAIN

We modify the original cookie domain as described in (Toro Icarte et al., 2019), to a simpler domain
consisting of 4 rooms, blue, white, green and red as shown in Fig. 5b. If the agent presses the button
in room red, a cookie appears in room blue or green with equal probability. The agent can move left,
right, up or down, can press the button in room red, and eat the cookie to receive a reward 1, and then
it may press the button again. There are 6 possible observations (4 for each room, and 2 for observing
the cookie in the two rooms). We use the set X3,1 for distinguishability in the restricted language
case. Our restricted language approach here finds the optimal policy and the smallest state space.


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.4    C HEESE MAZE

Cheese maze (McCallum, 1992) consists of 10 states, and 6 observations, and 4 actions. After reaching
the goal state, the agent receives a reward of +1, and the position of the agent is reintialised to one of
the non-goal states with equal probability. For a horizon of 6, the results for the restricted language
(using the language set X3,1 ) and FlexFringe are comparable, however upon further increasing the
horizon, FlexFringe outperforms A DACT-H by learning cyclic RDPs which is not possible in our
approach.

D.5    M INI - HALL

The mini-hall environment (Littman et al., 1995) shown in Fig 5a has 12 states, 4 orientations in 3
rooms, a goal state given by a star associated with a reward of +1, 6 observation and 3 actions, and
the position of the agent is reset after the goal is reached. This setting is much more complex than the
others because 12 states are mapped into 6 observations; for example, starting from observation 3,
3 actions are required under the optimal policy to solve the problem if the starting underlying state
was in Room B or C. We use the language set X3,1 and although we get a much larger state space,
our algorithm gets closer to the optimal policy. However our CMS approach is not efficient in this
case and exceeds the alloted time budget of 1800 seconds, as it requires to iterate over all possible
trajectories.


                                                   25
