Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A DAPT-∞: S CALABLE C ONTINUAL M ULTIMODAL I N -
STRUCTION T UNING VIA DYNAMIC DATA S ELECTION

          Adyasha Maharana∗          Jaehong Yoon∗          Tianlong Chen         Mohit Bansal

                         Department of Computer Science, UNC Chapel Hill



                                               A BSTRACT

            Visual instruction datasets from various distributors are released at different times
            and often contain a significant number of semantically redundant text-image pairs,
            depending on their task compositions (i.e., skills) or reference sources. This re-
            dundancy greatly limits the efficient deployment of continually adaptable mul-
            timodal large language models, hindering their ability to refine existing skills and
            acquire new competencies over time. To address this, we reframe the problem
            of lifelong Instruction Tuning (LiIT) via data selection, where the model auto-
            matically selects beneficial samples to learn from earlier and new datasets based
            on the current state of acquired knowledge in the model. Based on empirical
            analyses that show that selecting the best data subset using a static importance
            measure is often ineffective for multi-task datasets with evolving distributions,
            we propose Adapt-∞, a new multi-way and adaptive data selection approach that
            dynamically balances sample efficiency and effectiveness during LiIT. We first
            construct pseudo-skill clusters by grouping gradient-based sample vectors. Next,
            we select the best-performing data selector for each skill cluster from a pool of
            selector experts, including our newly proposed scoring function, Image Ground-
            ing score. This data selector samples a subset of the most important samples from
            each skill cluster for training. To prevent the continuous increase in the size of
            the dataset pool during LIT, which would result in excessive computation, we fur-
            ther introduce a cluster-wise permanent data pruning strategy to remove the most
            semantically redundant samples from each cluster, keeping computational require-
            ments manageable. We validate the effectiveness and efficiency of Adapt-∞ over
            a sequence of various multimodal instruction tuning datasets with various tasks,
            including (Knowledge) VQA, multilingual, grounding, reasoning, language-only,
            and multi-image comprehension tasks. Training with samples selected by Adapt-
            ∞ alleviates catastrophic forgetting, especially for rare tasks, and promotes for-
            ward transfer across the continuum using only a fraction of the original datasets.1


1       I NTRODUCTION

Multimodal instruction tuning (Liu et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2023a; Gan et al.,
2024; Yoon et al., 2024) has been actively explored to enhance visual reasoning or the generation
ability of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) (Zhu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a; Tang
et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023; Munasinghe et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024) fol-
lowing user intents by training models on human or machine-generated multi-task visual instruction
tuning datasets (Li et al., 2023c; Yin et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024). While many
distributors continue to release new high-quality instruction-tuning tasks and datasets, continually
adapting large models to these massive multi-task datasets over time is prohibitively costly and inef-
ficient. Given a pre-trained MLLM and the continuous expansion of the dataset pool with a stream
of multi-task instruction-tuning datasets, as commonly observed in the research community today,
the challenge lies in developing an ever-evolving, instruction-following MLLM in the most data-
and computation-efficient manner. This research question poses a realistic, sustainable instruction
    ∗
        Equal contribution.
    1
        Code is released at https://github.com/adymaharana/adapt-inf.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



          Temporal stream of instruction tuning datasets                           Step 1: Pseudo-Task Clustering
         t=0         t=1          t=2        t=3

                                                                       Gradient
                                                                       Vectors               k-means



                          Training Data Pool

                                  Step 3: Redundancy-based                        Step 2: Multi-way Data Selection
            Lifelong                 Permanent Pruning
        Multimodal LLM                                                                               𝑠0 ⋅   𝑠1 ⋅ …    𝑠N−1 ⋅
                                                    Retain few
                                                   from similar
                                                     samples
                                                                                                               Selection of
                                                                                                             scoring function
                                                Retain more from                                            and data samples
                                                 distant samples
               training

Figure 1: Illustration of Adapt-∞. When a new dataset is incorporated into the data pool at the beginning of
each timestep, Adapt-∞ extracts sample vectors and forms pseudo-task clusters based on their similarity. Using
a set of scoring functions, Adapt-∞ predicts the most suitable scoring function for each cluster and trains an
MLLM on the selected samples. To prevent excessive computation as the pool size grows, we introduce dataset
compression by permanently removing redundant samples.


tuning scenario for MLLMs, distinct from conventional continual learning (Zenke et al., 2017; Yoon
et al., 2018; Van de Ven & Tolias, 2019), which focuses on learning a sequence of disjoint tasks.
Specifically, at each time step, we assume a new multimodal multi-task instruction-tuning dataset
is added to the existing training pool, which already contains previous datasets. The model aims
to train on samples from this continually expanding dataset pool, a scenario we refer to as Lifelong
Instruction Tuning (LiIT). This scenario is critical as recent datasets tend to be exhaustively large
to cover a variety of skills in uni- and multimodal tasks. It poses the unique challenges of (1) data
redundancies over time due to significant overlap between datasets, (2) imbalanced task represen-
tations due to over-representation of simple tasks like captioning, (3) learning rare tasks, and (4)
learning new output modalities.
Our initial experiments with sequential multimodal instruction tuning, i.e., training on a sequence
of instruction tuning datasets, show catastrophic forgetting, particularly when new output modalities
such as bounding boxes and key points are introduced. While experience replay on a small subset of
past datasets helps mitigate forgetting, it is insufficient for retaining rare or unique tasks that appear
only once due to the skewed task distribution. This challenge is further compounded by the loosely
defined nature of ‘tasks’ in instruction tuning (e.g., multi-turn conversations across multiple tasks
on the same image) and the lack of sample-wise task labels. To address this, we explore LiIT from
a data selection perspective, enabling the model to learn skills in a balanced manner over time and
avoid overfitting to dominant tasks. Specifically, we explore how to prune both past and incoming
datasets to create a balanced training set at each time step, considering the model’s current state.
To build an efficient, lifelong-evolving MLLM, we introduce Adapt-∞: Adaptive Multi-way Prun-
ing, an efficient and dynamic multimodal data selection strategy. At each time step, Adapt-∞ selects
the most beneficial samples for the current model from the data pool, adapting to the model’s evolv-
ing knowledge and changing dataset distributions. This is crucial for LiIT, as sample importance
shifts over time. Adapt-∞ operates in two major steps: (1) Task-based clustering. When introduc-
ing a new dataset, we integrate it into the training data pool and create pseudo-task clusters using
gradient vectors to represent data samples. (2) Cluster-wise data selection. We select influential
samples from each cluster for model training. Motivated by the observation that different score
functions (Paul et al., 2021; Toneva et al.; Coleman et al.) define sample importance differently, we
propose a new multi-way data selection approach that chooses the best scoring function from a
pool of experts based on its discriminativeness (measured by entropy). It selects a skill-balanced
subset of highly influential samples from the current training data pool. In addition, to better assess
the influence of multimodal samples, we also propose a new scoring function, image grounding score
(IG), which measures the change in sample perplexity when grounded by visual information. This
metric prioritizes samples that enhance MLLM multimodal skills and serves as an effective data se-
lector in Adapt-∞. As the data pool grows, computing scores and representations in Adapt-∞, like
other data selection strategies, becomes costly. To ensure diversity while managing computational
costs, Adapt-∞ adds (3) Permanent data pruning that removes semantically redundant samples
from the data pool at the end of each time step, thereby continually controlling its size during LiIT.


                                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We design an experimental setup for this previously unexplored scenario of lifelong multimodal
instruction tuning using the pre-trained LLaVA 1.5 (Liu et al., 2023a) model on a stream of five
visual instruction tuning datasets. As discussed earlier, experience replay alone is insufficient to
mitigate forgetting, however, selecting a random subset from the data pool of past and new datasets
reduces the forgetting rate from 26% to nearly 2%. Score-based data-selection strategies largely
fail in this setting due to their inability to select task-balanced data subsets from multi-task datasets.
Adapt-∞ not only minimizes the forgetting to a mere 0.9% using only a fraction of the training data
pool, but also promotes forward transfer of skills and consistently achieves >100% relative gains.
We conduct extensive ablations of Adapt-∞ to identify best-performing settings. Our key finding
is that hidden layer outputs capture semantics, while gradient vectors represent skills, making them
more effective for pseudo-task clustering (see examples in Figures 2 and 4). Further, we find that
gradients from the middle layer of the model lead to the best performance, suggesting that skill
retention could be localized to a few layers in LLMs. We also find that zero-order gradients (Hinton,
2022; Sung et al., 2024) are promising, computationally cheaper alternatives to backpropagated
gradients for pseudo-task clustering (See Table 5). Lastly, skill-wise analysis shows language-only
skills are easiest to retain, while multilingual multimodal skills suffer significant forgetting in LiIT.
In summary, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to explore the realistic setting of life-
long multimodal instruction tuning where the temporal stream of datasets may contain new skills,
overlapping or rare tasks, and redundant samples. This scenario necessitates dynamic data selec-
tion strategies for efficient and effective learning. Our proposed method, Adapt-∞, demonstrates
superior retention as well as forward transfer of skills over time.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Multimodal Instruction Tuning Datasets. While multimodal data, such as image-text pairs, has
increased significantly, multimodal instruction-following data remains relatively scarce due to the
time-consuming nature of human data collection. To address this, recent works (Liu et al., 2023b;
Zhang et al., 2023a; Chen et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023; He et al., 2024a) have leveraged generative
models to collect such data from existing image datasets. Li et al. (2023c) introduce the M3IT
dataset with 2.4 million instances and 400 task instructions, translated into 80 languages. Xu et al.
(2024) develop VISION-FLAN, a large-scale dataset of 187 tasks with expert-written instructions,
ensuring diversity through iterative refinement. MultiInstruct (Xu et al., 2023) features 62 tasks
across 10 categories, sourced from 21 open datasets.

Continual Instruction Tuning. In the era of multimodal LLMs, instructional datasets have raised
several timely research problems. Therefore, it is crucial to develop sustainable models that can ad-
dress emerging data and real-world challenges. Inspired by continual learning (Van de Ven & Tolias,
2019; Srinivasan et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2024b), a paradigm focused on enabling models to adapt
to non-i.i.d., time-variant tasks, continual instruction tuning (CIT) (Chen et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
2023b) has recently been studied for (multimodal) LLMs that allows the model to adapt to multiple
instruction tuning datasets sequentially without costly retraining. KPIG (He et al., 2024b) introduces
a new CIT method that helps LLMs capture task-specific information and avoid overfitting general
instructions by computing key-part information gain on masked parts to replay data and refine train-
ing dynamically. EProj (He et al., 2023) and Fwd-Prompt (Zheng et al., 2024) expand the CIT to
the training of large multimodal models. EProj introduces new regularization and model expansion
methods based on task correlations for continual instruction tuning of LMMs. Fwd-Prompt proposes
a prompt-based approach that projects the prompt gradient into the residual space to minimize task
interference while utilizing pre-trained knowledge, reducing negative forward transfer.

Data Selection. Data selection has been explored in the form of coreset selection in many works
(Welling, 2009; Chen et al., 2010; Feldman et al., 2011). Uncertainty/loss/error-based methods es-
timate the difficulty of a sample from model confidence (Swayamdipta et al., 2020) or its training
dynamics (Toneva et al.; Paul et al., 2021; Bachem et al., 2015). Zheng et al. (2023) address catas-
trophic accuracy drop at high pruning rates; Maharana et al. (2024) represent datasets as undirected
graphs and employ message passing to select the best subset. Gadre et al. (2024) investigate data
selection for CLIP Radford et al. (2021) models. Evans et al. (2024) use learnability score (Minder-
mann et al., 2022) to accelerate training of CLIP models.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                       C. Importance score functions emphasize
                          A. Importance score distributions heavily overlap across tasks
                                                                                                       different data quality attributes
                                                                                                         High
                                                                                                         confidence


                                                                                            Density
      Density                                                                                                                             Low-quality


                                                                                                                           Perplexity Scores

                                                                                                                   Is the cabinet               What words are
                                     EL2N Scores                       Entropy Scores                              to the right                 on the sign to
                                                                                                                   of the laptop?               the left of
                                                                                                                                                the man’s
                                     B. Gradient vectors (left) are more separable by                              Yes.                         head?
                                             task than feature vectors (right)                                                                  Good vib.


                                                                                             Density
      t-SNE dimension 1


                                                                                                        Not                Highly-
                                                                                                        grounded           grounded


                                                                                                                       Image Grounding Scores

                                                                                                                      Who is she                  What is
                                                                                                                      talkin to?                  written on
                                                                                                                      A friend.                   the right
                                                                                                                                                  sign?
                                    t-SNE dimension 0               t-SNE dimension 0                                                             Frakkastigur


Figure 2: A: Sample distributions for different visual language tasks in M3IT (Li et al., 2023b) based on
two importance scores, EL2N and entropy. B: t-SNE visualization of sample vectors based on their gradients
and features. C: Histogram of Perplexity and Image Grounding scores. We visualize a few samples from
M3IT with prompts (black) and ground-truth answers (blue)
                                                                                        .

3     L IMITATIONS OF S CORE - BASED DATA S ELECTION IN L IFELONG
      M ULTIMODAL I NSTRUCTION T UNING

3.1     L OCALITY OF THE S AMPLE I MPORTANCE : DATA S ELECTION D EPENDS ON THE DATA

Score-based selection methods are widely used to assess the importance of training samples across
modalities (Zheng et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024; Marion et al., 2023; Evans et al., 2024; Gadre et al.,
2024). We analyze two importance scores in multimodal instruction tuning: the EL2N score (Paul
et al., 2021) and entropy score (Coleman et al.). EL2N measures the L2-norm of the output error
vector, while entropy reflects the uncertainty in the output probabilities. Using the M3IT dataset (Li
et al., 2023b), which includes eight tasks: captioning, multilingual (Chinese), classification, gener-
ation, knowledge VQA (kvqa), reasoning, videoQA, and VQA, we compute score distributions. As
shown in Figure 2A, relying on a single importance score metric, such as EL2N or entropy, is in-
sufficient to differentiate meaningful samples across a diverse range of tasks. For instance, selecting
higher EL2N scores tends to favor for generalization (Paul et al., 2021), captioning samples over
kvqa, leading to a skewed dataset.
In addition, the effectiveness of different importance scores varies based on the task and dataset at
hand. The perplexity score is effective for filtering out low-quality samples in VQA that generally
occur in the tail end of its distribution (see Figure 2C). Tasks such as kvqa (in purple) and captioning
(in blue) are more separable via their entropy scores than EL2N scores. Moreover, Zheng et al.
(2023); Swayamdipta et al. (2020) show that the most effective training subset contains a balanced
mix of easy, difficult, and ambiguous samples. A biased score estimator may assign higher or lower
scores to too many samples, making it hard to select the most effective subset. Thus, we need a
different, generalizable strategy for assessing sample importance across multiple datasets during
multimodal instruction tuning.


3.2     I MPORTANCE OF V ISION - LANGUAGE DATA WITH I MAGE G ROUNDING S CORE

The perplexity score measures the likelihood of a given sequence of tokens as predicted by an
autoregressive generative model and has been used for selecting samples with higher instruction
following difficulty in language datasets (Li et al., 2024). For MLLMs, the perplexity function
additionally conditions on the input image tokens within the model. A lower perplexity score implies
that the model assigns a higher probability to the output tokens. We compute the perplexity of a


                                                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


multimodal data instance zi for an MLLM with weights θ as:
                           1 X
        PPL(zi ) = exp(             NLL(ej )), where NLL(ej ) = −log(ej |e<j , I; θ).              (1)
                         |zi | e ∈z
                                 j   i


where NLL(ej ) indicates the negative log-likelihood of token ej in the sequence zi comprising of
image I and tokens e. As discussed in the previous section, perplexity is useful for detecting low-
quality multimodal samples (see Figure 2C top). Motivated by the effectiveness and generalizability
of the perplexity score (Marion et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024), we further modify this scoring func-
tion to distill the importance of the image in a multimodal data instance. We compute the image
grounding score of a multimodal data instance zi with image I and tokens e as:
                                                      PPL(e)
                                         IG(zi ) =                                                 (2)
                                                     PPL(e, I)
A higher IG score is assigned when the model assigns a higher probability to the text when condi-
tioned on the image, compared to when the image is absent. Conversely, a lower IG score indicates
that the image has little to no effect on the text’s probability. As shown in Figure 2C bottom, an
image-query pair with a higher IG score requires the model to carefully understand the visual scene
(e.g., reading the text on a sign in the image). In contrast, examples where the model can predict the
answer without seeing the images represent lower IG scores. Thus, the IG scoring function allows
us to discard multimodal samples that do not leverage the multimodal functionality of MLLMs.

4     L IFELONG M ULTIMODAL I NSTRUCTION T UNING VIA M ULTI - WAY DATA
      S ELECTION
4.1   P ROBLEM S TATEMENT

This paper tackles the problem of LiIT over a sequence of multiple large datasets. Let D0 , ..., DT −1
be a set of accessible datasets where Dt = {xti , pti }N t
                                                       i=1 denotes the dataset released in the timestep
t, composed of Ni image-text pairs. Formally, we aim to train a multimodal model over multiple
observed datasets for a given computational budget, such as FLOPs or training iterations. Given the
model f parameterized by θ, the training objective at time step T is formulated as follows:
                             T Nbt −1
                        1 X X
                                      L f x̂ti , p̂ti ; θ , ŷit

              arg min                                              s.t. T · (N
                                                                             bt − 1) ≤ τ,          (3)
                 θ    T + 1 t=0 i=0

where N bt = r(Nt , T, τ ) ∈ N , N
                                 bt ≤ Nt , and τ is the computational budget. r(·) denotes a decay
function conditioned on T and τ , and ŷ indicates the ground truth answer corresponding to the
input data sample. Here, we constrain the minibatch iterations for multimodal instruction tuning per
training timestep, by subsampling D b = {x̂i , p̂i }Nb , where D
                                                               b ⊆ D, D b ∼ P (D b | D, T, τ ). When
                                                    i=1
                                                                   T
a new multimodal instruction tuning dataset DT is released, {Dt }t=0 is (re-) drawn for finetuning θ.
                                                                 b
We propose the Adapt-∞ data selection method for the problem of lifelong multimodal instruction
tuning and describe each of its steps in detail in the following sections.

4.2   P SEUDO - TASK C LUSTERING VIA G RADIENTS

In the LiIT scenario, the model continuously updates its weights to incorporate new knowledge
and refine its capabilities in specific tasks by training on unseen, meaningful data. The relative
importance of each data sample evolves with changes in the model’s state and expansion of the data
pool at each time step. Therefore, adjusting the relative importance of samples within the data pool
over time is crucial to faster and better optimization under restricted conditions. We accomplish
this by first using gradient vectors from the model’s current state to estimate skill clusters within
the training data pool. As shown in Figure 2B and Figure 4, we find that gradient vectors are
significantly more separable by skills than hidden state outputs of the model.
For a model with weights θl for layer l, we compute the gradients of θl for a sample (zi , yi ) =
((xi , pi ), ŷi ) using backpropagation. We obtain the data representation for the sample by concate-
nating weight gradient vectors ∇θ zi = [∇θ0 zi ; ∇θ1 zi ; ...; ∇θL−1 zi ], where L denotes the number


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of layers, and construct pseudo-task clusters in the data pool by performing k-means clustering over
data representations of the seen and unseen datasets (see Figure 1). However, in practice, we find
that not all gradients are necessary for distinguishing samples into multiple meaningful skills. Fol-
lowing Yoon et al. (2022), we cluster samples based on the gradients of essential layers, which leads
to better performance compared to using gradients from all layers and is more memory-efficient as
well (see discussion in Section 6).

4.3   E NTROPY- BASED M ULTI - WAY DATA S ELECTION

As discussed in Section 3.1, different scoring functions provide distinct advantages when select-
ing meaningful samples from a wide range of vision-language instruction tuning tasks, such as
in-domain VQA, open-ended VQA, multilingual QA, visual grounding, commonsense reasoning,
scientific/physical understanding, and OCR. To address the limitations of relying on a single data
selection (pruning) method and promote collaborative decision-making when evaluating sample im-
portance, based on the model’s current state and data diversity, we propose a novel and versatile,
multi-way data pruning strategy. First, we construct a function pool S = {s0 (·), ..., sN −1 (·)} where
sn (·) denotes n-th sample selection operation based on the corresponding importance score func-
tion. Here, we aim to identify the function ŝ that maximizes the entropy of the distribution of scores
over the samples of each pseudo-task cluster. For the k-th cluster Ck with m samples, we first ex-
tract the corresponding scores for each sn using model weights θ at time step t. We approximate the
distribution of scores, Pnθ , by binning the range of normalized scores and calculating densities p̂bn
            (k)
over the Bn bins. Omitting cluster index k for brevity, the selection of ŝ is formulated as:

           ŝ(k) = arg max H P̂nθ , where P̂nθ = {p̂bn (x)}, ∀b ∈ B (k) and x ∈ Ck .                (4)
                        sn
A score function that yields higher average entropy in its distribution compared to other functions
indicates a better ability to assess the uncertainty of the system (i.e., the model θ at timestep t).
Moreover, we employ the CCS (Zheng et al., 2023) sampling strategy that aims to select a balanced
representation of seen and unseen samples as well as frequent and rare tasks by sampling uniformly
over the range of a score function. Hence, it is even more imperative to use a score function that
is discriminative over its entire range. Since the resulting pseudo-task clusters may vary in size,
we define a training budget T and divide it uniformly over the k clusters. The leftover data budget
from clusters with sizes |ci | smaller than T /k are equally distributed over other clusters. This results
in the selection of a skill-balanced subset from the pool of multi-task datasets in lifelong learning.
Importantly, our proposed multi-way approach is highly flexible since the scoring function pool can
be seamlessly extended with new scoring functions based on users’ needs.

4.4   C OMBINED P ERMANENT-T EMPORAL DATA P RUNING BY R EMOVING R EDUNDANCY

The steps of Adapt-∞ outlined in the previous sections enable the model to effectively select the
most beneficial samples for each pseudo-task (i.e., skill) and train on them adaptively, based on
the current model and evolving dataset distributions. However, as the data pool grows with the
release of new instruction-tuning datasets, the computational burden of updating gradient-based
sample vectors and ranking their importance increases. To keep the computational requirements
manageable over time, we further implement a permanent data pruning strategy to iteratively reduce
the size of the entire dataset pool. At the end of training at each timestep, we measure pairwise
cosine similarities between samples within each cluster and prune those with maximum similarities,
as they are highly redundant and contain overlapping knowledge. The similarity is computed in
the semantic space, which is well represented using hidden layer outputs of the model as shown in
Figure 4 (Abbas et al., 2023; Sorscher et al., 2022). Larger clusters are prioritized for pruning to fit
a predefined data pool budget D until all clusters retain a uniform number of samples. We refer to
the version of Adapt-∞ with this combined permanent-temporal pruning as L ITE -Adapt-∞.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Model. We conduct our experiments using the LLaVA 1.5 multimodal large language model (Liu
et al., 2023a). It is trained on top of the Vicuna LLM (Chiang et al., 2023) using a corpus of approx-


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison of multimodal instruction tuning datasets. Distribution of various skills in
the datasets. RE: Referring Expression, OD: Object Detection, KD: Keypoint Detection.
                                                                                                Skills
        Training Datasets               Dataset Size         Knowledge                Multi-        Non-text   Video   Complex     Language
                                                       VQA               Captioning
                                                               VQA                    lingual        Output     QA     Reasoning     Only
        LLaVA-1.5 (Liu et al., 2023b)      665K        ✓        ✓            ✓          ✗            RE         ✗         ✓           ✓
        M3IT (Li et al., 2023c)            2.1M        ✓        ✓            ✓          ✓             ✗         ✗         ✗           ✗
        MiniGPT4 (Zhu et al., 2023)         3K         ✗        ✗            ✓          ✗             ✗         ✗         ✗           ✗
        MANTIS (Jiang et al., 2024)        666K        ✓        ✗            ✗          ✗             ✗         ✗         ✓           ✗
        LaMM (Yin et al., 2023)            250K        ✓        ✗            ✓          ✗          OD & KD      ✗         ✗           ✗
        VisionFLAN (Xu et al., 2024)       191K        ✓        ✓            ✓          ✗             ✗         ✗         ✓           ✗



imately 600K image-text caption pairs for pretraining of the vision projectors from the pre-trained
CLIP visual encoder ViT-L/14 (Radford et al., 2021). Further, it is trained on the LLaVA instruc-
tion tuning dataset consisting of 665K text-only and vision-language instances. We adopt LoRA
finetuning (Hu et al., 2021) of the LLaVA-1.5-7B model with the recommended hyperparameters.2

Datasets. For training, in addition to the LLaVA-665K instruction tuning dataset at t = 0, we
consider the following order of datasets: M3IT (Li et al., 2023c), MiniGPT4 (Zhu et al., 2023),
MANTIS (Jiang et al., 2024), LAMM (Yin et al., 2023) and VisionFLAN (Xu et al., 2024). Each
dataset’s temporal order, size, and skill composition are summarized in Table 1. We select standard
evaluation datasets to measure performance on the skills enumerated in Table 1. These datasets and
their corresponding task-specific evaluation metrics are listed in Table 4.

Metrics. We report various evaluation metrics from existing literature designed for understand-
ing the continual learning phenomena in machine learning. The Average Accuracy (acc) at final
timestep t = T is the average of the model’s performance across all skills (and across datasets
within each skill). The Relative Gain (r) metric (Scialom et al., 2022) is the average of skill
                                                                    PS          Pst
performances as a % of the respective upper bounds i.e., rT = S1 s=1 upper bound       s × 100%.

We consider the best performances in each skill group in the sequential learning setting to be the
upper bound in performances and report r for the final time step T . We also report the Forget-
ting Rate(f ) which is the % drop in performance averaged across all skills and timesteps i.e.,
       1
          PS PT min(Pst −Pst−1 ,0)
f = S×T      s=1    t=1      P t−1
                                      × 100%.
                                                  s

Adapt-∞ Setup. The optimal value of k in the pseudo-task clustering step is computed from a grid
search over values of k between 5 and 50, and selected based on the WSS value of clusters.3 In the
score-based sample selection step, we use a bin size of 50 and discard the top and bottom 5% of
samples for computing entropy as well as for CCS sampling, to remove outliers, low-quality sam-
ples, and uninformative data (Zheng et al., 2023). We use perplexity, image grounding (Section 3.2),
EL2N (Paul et al., 2021) and entropy (Coleman et al.) score functions for S throughout the paper.
Baselines. We present baseline numbers on (1) Sequential and Multi-task training, (2) Random
selection for experience replay (10% of past datasets), (3) Score-based selection methods, including
Random, EL2N (Paul et al., 2021), Entropy (Coleman et al.), Perplexity (Marion et al., 2023),
and (3) recent competitive data pruning baselines: SemDeDup (Abbas et al., 2023), Density-based
Pruning (Abbas et al., 2024), and COINCIDE (Lee et al., 2024a). See Appendix for details.

5.2      M AIN R ESULTS

We present the main experimental results in Table 2 and show a breakdown of skill-wise accuracies
at each time step for various methods in Figure 3. Our main findings are as follows:
Sequential training leads to catastrophic forgetting of skills. Multiple skills learned at t=0
(LLaVA) are forgotten at t=1,2 upon training the model on datasets containing a different set of
skills. The M3IT dataset (t=1) does not contain grounding tasks and results in large drops in per-
formance for the same. Similarly, the MiniGPT4 dataset (t=2) predominantly contains high-quality
captions and causes forgetting of all other skills. The MANTIS dataset (t=3) improves performance
on the MMMU dataset because it contains training instances with documents, charts, and visualiza-
tion images. At t=4, the LAMM dataset contains object detection and keypoint detection tasks that
   2
       https://github.com/haotian-liu/LLaVA/tree/main
   3
       Within the sum of squares (WSS) is sum of squared distance between samples and their cluster centroids.


                                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Overall results for lifelong multimodal instruction tuning. Comparison of performance
of LLaVA models trained on datasets selected using Adapt-∞ vs. other data selection methods.
           Pruning Strategy                     Data size at t   Relative Gain % (↑)   Forgetting Rate % (↓)   Avg. Acc. (↑)
           Sequential                               Full                68.0                   26.0                32.0
           Multi-task                               Full                92.5                    -                  46.1
           Random Experience Replay                 Full                89.5                    6.6                43.4
           Random                                    25k                95.3                    2.1                47.2
           EL2N (Paul et al., 2021)                  25k                82.4                   12.2                43.9
           Entropy                                   25k                79.6                   15.1                41.6
           Perplexity (Marion et al., 2023)          25k                91.4                   9.6                 45.2
           Image-grounding (ours)                    25k                92.3                    5.6                45.6
           SemDeDup (Abbas et al., 2023)             25k                76.4                    6.4                38.5
           Density-based (Abbas et al., 2024)        25k                78.1                    5.1                39.6
           COINCIDE (Lee et al., 2024a)              25k                89.5                    3.9                44.7
           Adapt-∞                                   25k                102.3                   0.9                50.5
           Adapt-∞                                   50k                107.2                   0.2                51.7
           Adapt-∞                                  100k                109.7                   0.4                52.5
           L ITE-Adapt-∞                             25k                99.7                    1.3                49.6


Figure 3: Average accuracies per skill over time. Comparison of average accuracies over time for
each skill in our evaluation suite using various data selection methods. Higher is better.

promote recovery of the referring comprehension skill learned at t = 0, presumably due to a simi-
larity in their non-textual output modalities. Finally, VisionFLAN (t=5) recovers performance on all
skills except grounding and MMMU. Surprisingly, VisionFLAN also induces recovery of multilin-
gual and unimodal skills (MMLU) despite not containing those tasks in its dataset composition. This
method incurs nearly 26% forgetting across all timesteps and retains only 68% of its all-time high
performances at the final timestep (see Table 2). Models trained using Adapt-∞ also outperform
other models in multi-turn visual conversations (see Figs. 6, 7 and 8).
Random experience replay and pruning alleviate forgetting. Random experience replay using
10% data from past datasets significantly improves skills retention over sequential training, bringing
down the forgetting rate from 26% to 6.6%. Random pruning of the combined set of past and
incoming datasets results in better retention of skills with only a 2.1% forgetting rate using a fraction
of the datasets for training as seen in Figure 3. This result demonstrates the need for applying data
selection methods to the combined datasets rather than in isolation and serves as a strong baseline for
lifelong multimodal instruction tuning. Notably, random pruning also improves the language-only
skill of the underlying LLM in LLaVA. However, random pruning achieves a relative gain of 95%,
falling short of reaching the best performance seen during sequential training.
Adapt-∞ minimizes forgetting and promotes forward transfer. Adapt-∞ outperforms all exist-
ing data selection methods for retaining and learning skills via instruction tuning over time. Score-
based data selection methods generally fall short of random pruning because selecting samples from
multi-task datasets based on scores leads to a skewed representation of tasks in the subset (see Fig-
ure 2). Our proposed scoring function, Image grounding, prioritizes the data samples where the
outputs are strongly grounded in images (see Fig. 2C) and achieves relatively higher performance
for multimodal tasks. SemDeDup (Abbas et al., 2023), DBP (Abbas et al., 2024), and COINCIDE
(Lee et al., 2024a) rely on hidden layer outputs from the model to represent and prune data samples
which can lead to imbalanced task distributions in the selected subset.
The use of gradient vectors in Adapt-∞ to pool samples into pseudo-task clusters before pruning
ensures that all skills are well-represented at each time step, resulting in the lowest forgetting rate


                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Nearest-neighbors in gradient vector space          Nearest-neighbors in hidden state output space
         Query            dim=0             dim=15               dim=31              dim=0           dim=15             dim=31


                                                                                                 Translate from     Describe the
     What is around                                            How many         Describe the   English to Czech.       image.
      the baseball                                           players are           image.       A person playing
                         What type of     What is on the                                                           A man running
         field?                                             standing and     A baseball player cricket in an all
                        vehicle is in     green chair?                                                             on a baseball
                                                              watching?       is swinging at a    green outfit.
                       the background?                                                                                field in
      The answer is                       The answer is                        pitch by a wall Člověk hraje kriket
                        The answer is                        The answer                                              front of a
         fence.                               bird.                          that says France. v zeleném obleku.
                             bus.                              is two.                                                 crowd.


                        How many cats
                          有几只猫           How many cows
        How many
      有几个长颈鹿？                               有几头牛？                                                 Describe the
                          are there?       are there?                                                                  Describe the
      giraffes are                                             How many
                                                             有几个小孩？           Two giraffes in        image.
                                                                               动物园里两只长                                    image.
         there?                                              children are       the zoo are         A giraffe
                          There are       这里有两头牛。                              颈鹿正在试图吃                               A person holds
        There are                                               there?         trying to eat    standing on grass
       这里有三只猫           这里有三只猫
                         three cats      There are two
                                                           There are three     挂在木杆上的食
                                                                              food hanging on    inside a fenced
                                                                                                                      a carrot out
     three giraffes                                         这里有三个小孩。
                            here.         cows here.                                物 pole            area.          for a giraffe.
          here.                                            childeren here.     a wooden


Figure 4: Nearest neighbor samples for query samples from VQA (top) and Chinese VQA (bottom)
tasks in the gradient (left) and feature spaces (right).
Table 3: Ablation results for Adapt-∞. Comparison of performance of the Adapt-∞ method to
its ablated versions for lifelong multimodal instruction tuning.
      Ablation Type                           Values                  Relative Gain % (↑)    Forgetting Rate % (↓)     Avg. Acc. (↑)
      Within-cluster Pruning                Multi-way                        102.3                    0.9                  50.5
                                      Image Grounding Score                   96.3                    2.7                  48.8
                                             EL2N                            97.4                     1.5                  49.1
      Data Representations           Gradients (middle layer)                102.3                    0.9                  50.5
                                      Gradients (first layer)                 97.2                    1.8                  47.9
                                       Gradients (last layer)                101.5                    1.3                  50.1
                                       Gradients (all layers)                98.9                     2.5                  49.1
                                  Hidden layer outputs (all layers)           96.5                    4.3                  47.4
      Cluster Budget                         Uniform                         102.3                    0.9                  50.5
                                           Density-based                     101.7                    0.5                  49.5


i.e., 0.9%. Further, the multi-way score-based selection of important samples within those clusters
promotes forward transfer of skills and results in >100% relative gain, unlike any other method in
Table 2. The relative gain increases by nearly 5% on doubling the data budget from 25K to 50K
samples and shows signs of plateauing with further increase in data.
Semantic deduplication for managing data complexity over time is effective. L ITE-Adapt-∞
employs semantic deduplication of the training pool at the end of each timestep to reduce the com-
putation complexity of extracting data representations at the next step. For the deduplication size
of 100K samples (4x of training budget) across all timesteps, L ITE-Adapt-∞ suffers minor drops in
performance and forgetting as compared to Adapt-∞.


6   A NALYSIS

Relative gains per skill. We present the skill-wise breakdown of relative gains of each method
discussed in Table 2, in Figure 5A. The largest increases are observed for the language-only skill
across all methods, except the image-grounding score which deprioritizes unimodal samples. This
result is especially striking because none of the datasets in our experimental setting contain samples
similar to those in the MMLU evaluation dataset. It suggests that the underlying LLM in LLaVA
can recover this skill from similar multimodal samples. The next highest gains are seen for the
knowledge VQA dataset, using our image-grounding score and the Adapt-∞ method. Multilingual
skills appear to be the hardest skills to learn and retain over time, potentially because they utilize a
different part of the model’s vocabulary than other tasks and are included in the M3IT dataset only.
Multi-way pruning vs. single pruner. Adapt-∞ uses one among various importance score func-
tions (or pruner experts) for each cluster to select a representative subset of importance samples
from the cluster. This works better than using any one single metric across all clusters as shown in


                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                       layer=0                  layer=15                   layer=31


     A. Relative gain % of various data selection methods for each skill        B. t-SNE plots of gradient vectors from diff. layers of the model

Figure 5: A: Relative gain % for different skills using various data selection methods in the
lifelong multimodal instruction tuning setting. B: t-SNE visualization of gradient vectors of the
M3IT dataset from layers of varying depth in the LLaVA model.

Table 3. Importantly, this serves as a flexible framework for swapping or adding advanced ‘expert’
pruners, e.g., learnability score (Mindermann et al., 2022; Evans et al., 2024).
Source of data representations. Various data selection works propose different ways of represent-
ing data samples in a high-dimensional space. Methods designed for pruning pretraining datasets
or single-task finetuning can effectively use semantic representations such as sentence embeddings
(Abbas et al., 2023) and hidden state outputs (Sorscher et al., 2022; Maharana et al., 2024). However,
we observe subpar performance with the use of semantic representations for pseudo-task clustering,
as reported in Table 3. Gradient vectors are better representations of the skill component of a data
sample as we show in Figure 4. Further, we experimented with gradients from all layers (similar
to Xia et al. (2024); Liu et al. (2024)) as well as individual layers of the model. We observed the
best performance with gradients from the middle layer only. Gradients from the last layer also work
relatively well with Adapt-∞ but those from the first layer work poorly. This discrepancy correlates
with the compactness of task clusters in the t-SNE plots of gradients from the corresponding layers,
as demonstrated in Figure 5B.
Sampling budget across clusters. As outlined in Section 4, we sample a subset with an equal
number of samples from each pseudo-task cluster in Adapt-∞. The budgets leftover from smaller
clusters are distributed equally across the remaining clusters. We experimented with more intuitive
budgets for each cluster i.e., based on the density of the cluster members (Abbas et al., 2024).
However, it did not result in significant changes in the performance.
Efficiency. Most data selection methods require extra steps to select an influential data subset and
incur computational costs. Adapt-∞ expends additional memory and inference-time compute to ef-
fectively select data. We experiment with three methods to reduce this cost: (1) Zero-order gradients
(Hinton, 2022), (2) Varying size of data pool in L ITE -Adapt-∞, and (3) gradients from a smaller
model i.e., TinyLLaVA (Zhou et al., 2024). Using zero-order gradients instead of full gradients
leads to a 2% drop in average accuracy and a 2.4% drop in relative gains. TinyLLaVA gradients
demonstrate a similar drop, in addition to a higher forgetting rate. Conversely, the performance of
L ITE -Adapt-∞ improves with increasing size of the data pool post-deduplication (see Table 5).
See Appendix C for additional results using LLMs, analysis on efficiency and recovery of skills.


7   C ONCLUSION

Valuable visual instruction tuning datasets from various sources are released over time and often
contain overlapping text-image pairs. To efficiently train lifelong adaptive MLLMs on these growing
datasets, a scenario we call Lifelong Instruction Tuning (LiIT), we reformulate data selection so
the model automatically selects meaningful samples from both old and new datasets, maintaining
balance when incorporating new data. We observe that assessing sample informativeness with a
static importance measure is challenging in LiIT, as it depends on the model’s evolving capabilities
and the shifting dataset distribution. To address this, we propose a scalable lifelong multimodal
instruction tuning approach that dynamically balances sample efficiency and effectiveness through
temporal multi-way data pruning. We show that training with samples selected by this method
reduces catastrophic forgetting and enhances forward gain, using only a fraction of the original
dataset, particularly for rare tasks with limited resources.


                                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank the reviewers for their valuable feedback and input on the paper. This work was sup-
ported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under other transactions 1OT2OD038045-01,
NSF-CAREER Award 1846185, DARPA ECOLE Program No. HR00112390060, NSF-AI Engage
Institute DRL-2112635, DARPA Machine Commonsense (MCS) Grant N66001-19-2-4031, ARO
Award W911NF2110220, ONR Grant N00014-23-1-2356. The views contained in this article are
those of the authors and not of the funding agency.

E THICS S TATEMENT

The intended use of Adapt-∞ is to enhance the vision-language instruction-following capabilities
of MLLMs by training them on an integrated, ever-growing instructional dataset over time. This
system does not pose any specific potential for misuse beyond the general risks associated with AI
technology. However, instruction-tuned frameworks, including Adapt-∞, are required to carefully
consider the selection of training datasets and the intended purpose of usage to ensure the devel-
opment of a reliable and trustworthy video-language inference system that supports stable, reliable,
and safe AI.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

This paper fully discloses all the information needed to reproduce the main experimental results
of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions. To maximize repro-
ducibility, we have included our code in the supplementary material. Also, we report all of our
hyperparameter settings and model details in the Appendix.

R EFERENCES
Amro Kamal Mohamed Abbas, Kushal Tirumala, Daniel Simig, Surya Ganguli, and Ari S Morcos.
 Semdedup: Data-efficient learning at web-scale through semantic deduplication. In ICLR 2023
 Workshop on Mathematical and Empirical Understanding of Foundation Models, 2023.

Amro Kamal Mohamed Abbas, Evgenia Rusak, Kushal Tirumala, Wieland Brendel, Kamalika
 Chaudhuri, and Ari S Morcos. Effective pruning of web-scale datasets based on complexity
 of concept clusters. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Olivier Bachem, Mario Lucic, and Andreas Krause. Coresets for nonparametric estimation-the case
  of dp-means. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 209–217. PMLR, 2015.

Cheng Chen, Junchen Zhu, Xu Luo, Hengtao Shen, Lianli Gao, and Jingkuan Song. Coin: A
  benchmark of continual instruction tuning for multimodel large language model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.08350, 2024.

Lin Chen, Jisong Li, Xiaoyi Dong, Pan Zhang, Conghui He, Jiaqi Wang, Feng Zhao, and Dahua
  Lin. Sharegpt4v: Improving large multi-modal models with better captions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.12793, 2023.

Yutian Chen, Max Welling, and Alex Smola. Super-samples from kernel herding. In Proceedings of
  the Twenty-Sixth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 109–116, 2010.

Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot
 impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality. See https://vicuna. lmsys. org (accessed 14 April
 2023), 2023.

Cody Coleman, Christopher Yeh, Stephen Mussmann, Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Peter Bailis, Percy
  Liang, Jure Leskovec, and Matei Zaharia. Selection via proxy: Efficient data selection for deep
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ning Ding, Yulin Chen, Bokai Xu, Yujia Qin, Zhi Zheng, Shengding Hu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong
  Sun, and Bowen Zhou. Enhancing chat language models by scaling high-quality instructional
  conversations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14233, 2023.

Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

Talfan Evans, Nikhil Parthasarathy, Hamza Merzic, and Olivier J Henaff. Data curation via joint
  example selection further accelerates multimodal learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17711,
  2024.

Dan Feldman, Matthew Faulkner, and Andreas Krause. Scalable training of mixture models via
  coresets. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.

Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Gabriel Ilharco, Alex Fang, Jonathan Hayase, Georgios Smyrnis, Thao
  Nguyen, Ryan Marten, Mitchell Wortsman, Dhruba Ghosh, Jieyu Zhang, et al. Datacomp: In
  search of the next generation of multimodal datasets. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.

Yulu Gan, Sungwoo Park, Alexander Schubert, Anthony Philippakis, and Ahmed M Alaa. In-
  structcv: Instruction-tuned text-to-image diffusion models as vision generalists. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.

Jinghan He, Haiyun Guo, Ming Tang, and Jinqiao Wang. Continual instruction tuning for large
   multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16206, 2023.

Muyang He, Yexin Liu, Boya Wu, Jianhao Yuan, Yueze Wang, Tiejun Huang, and Bo Zhao. Efficient
 multimodal learning from data-centric perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11530, 2024a.

Yongquan He, Xuancheng Huang, Minghao Tang, Lingxun Meng, Xiang Li, Wei Lin, Wenyuan
  Zhang, and Yifu Gao. Don’t half-listen: Capturing key-part information in continual instruction
  tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10056, 2024b.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andrew Critch, Jerry Li, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Aligning ai with shared human values. Proceedings of the International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021a.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. Proceedings of the Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021b.

Geoffrey Hinton. The forward-forward algorithm: Some preliminary investigations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.13345, 2022.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

Drew A Hudson and Christopher D Manning. Gqa: A new dataset for real-world visual reasoning
  and compositional question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6700–6709, 2019.

Dongfu Jiang, Xuan He, Huaye Zeng, Cong Wei, Max Ku, Qian Liu, and Wenhu Chen. Mantis:
  Interleaved multi-image instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01483, 2024.

Sahar Kazemzadeh, Vicente Ordonez, Mark Matten, and Tamara Berg. Referitgame: Referring to
  objects in photographs of natural scenes. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical
  methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), pp. 787–798, 2014.

Jaewoo Lee, Boyang Li, and Sung Ju Hwang. Concept-skill transferability-based data selection for
  large vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10995, 2024a.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jaewoo Lee, Jaehong Yoon, Wonjae Kim, Yunji Kim, and Sung Ju Hwang. Stella: Continual audio-
  video pre-training with spatiotemporal localized alignment. In Proceedings of the International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024b.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In Proceedings of the Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023a.
Lei Li, Yuwei Yin, Shicheng Li, Liang Chen, Peiyi Wang, Shuhuai Ren, Mukai Li, Yazheng Yang,
  Jingjing Xu, Xu Sun, Lingpeng Kong, and Qi Liu. M3it: A large-scale dataset towards multi-
  modal multilingual instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04387, 2023b.
Lei Li, Yuwei Yin, Shicheng Li, Liang Chen, Peiyi Wang, Shuhuai Ren, Mukai Li, Yazheng Yang,
  Jingjing Xu, Xu Sun, et al. M3it: A large-scale dataset towards multi-modal multilingual instruc-
  tion tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04387, 2023c.
Ming Li, Yong Zhang, Zhitao Li, Jiuhai Chen, Lichang Chen, Ning Cheng, Jianzong Wang, Tianyi
 Zhou, and Jing Xiao. From quantity to quality: Boosting llm performance with self-guided data
 selection for instruction tuning. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American
 Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Vol-
 ume 1: Long Papers), pp. 7595–7628, 2024.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruction
  tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03744, 2023a.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023b.
Zikang Liu, Kun Zhou, Wayne Xin Zhao, Dawei Gao, Yaliang Li, and Ji-Rong Wen. Less is more:
  Data value estimation for visual instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09559, 2024.
Pan Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Tanglin Xia, Liang Qiu, Kai-Wei Chang, Song-Chun Zhu, Oyvind Tafjord,
  Peter Clark, and Ashwin Kalyan. Learn to explain: Multimodal reasoning via thought chains for
  science question answering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:2507–2521,
  2022.
Adyasha Maharana, Prateek Yadav, and Mohit Bansal. D2 pruning: Message passing for balanc-
  ing diversity and difficulty in data pruning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Kenneth Marino, Mohammad Rastegari, Ali Farhadi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Ok-vqa: A visual
  question answering benchmark requiring external knowledge. In Proceedings of the IEEE/cvf
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3195–3204, 2019.
Max Marion, Ahmet Üstün, Luiza Pozzobon, Alex Wang, Marzieh Fadaee, and Sara Hooker.
 When less is more: Investigating data pruning for pretraining llms at scale. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2309.04564, 2023.
Sören Mindermann, Jan M Brauner, Muhammed T Razzak, Mrinank Sharma, Andreas Kirsch, Win-
   nie Xu, Benedikt Höltgen, Aidan N Gomez, Adrien Morisot, Sebastian Farquhar, et al. Prioritized
   training on points that are learnable, worth learning, and not yet learnt. In International Confer-
   ence on Machine Learning, pp. 15630–15649. PMLR, 2022.
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-task generalization
  via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3470–3487, 2022.
Niklas Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, Lintang Sutawika, Adam Roberts, Stella Biderman, Teven Le
  Scao, M Saiful Bari, Sheng Shen, Zheng-Xin Yong, Hailey Schoelkopf, et al. Crosslingual gen-
  eralization through multitask finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01786, 2022.
Shehan Munasinghe, Rusiru Thushara, Muhammad Maaz, Hanoona Abdul Rasheed, Salman Khan,
  Mubarak Shah, and Fahad Khan. Pg-video-llava: Pixel grounding large video-language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13435, 2023.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sung Min Park, Kristian Georgiev, Andrew Ilyas, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. Trak:
  Attributing model behavior at scale. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  27074–27113. PMLR, 2023.
Mansheej Paul, Surya Ganguli, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Deep learning on a data diet:
 Finding important examples early in training. Advances in neural information processing systems,
 34:20596–20607, 2021.
Zheng Lin Qingyi Si. Alpaca-cot: An instruction fine-tuning platform with instruction data col-
  lection and unified large language models interface. https://github.com/PhoebusSi/
  alpaca-CoT, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Dustin Schwenk, Apoorv Khandelwal, Christopher Clark, Kenneth Marino, and Roozbeh Mottaghi.
  A-okvqa: A benchmark for visual question answering using world knowledge. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 146–162. Springer, 2022.
Thomas Scialom, Tuhin Chakrabarty, and Smaranda Muresan. Fine-tuned language models are
  continual learners. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 6107–6122, 2022.
Ben Sorscher, Robert Geirhos, Shashank Shekhar, Surya Ganguli, and Ari Morcos. Beyond neu-
  ral scaling laws: beating power law scaling via data pruning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:19523–19536, 2022.
Tejas Srinivasan, Ting-Yun Chang, Leticia Pinto Alva, Georgios Chochlakis, Mohammad Rostami,
  and Jesse Thomason. Climb: A continual learning benchmark for vision-and-language tasks. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Yi-lin Sung, Jaehong Yoon, and Mohit Bansal. Ecoflap: Efficient coarse-to-fine layer-wise pruning
  for vision-language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Swabha Swayamdipta, Roy Schwartz, Nicholas Lourie, Yizhong Wang, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
  Noah A Smith, and Yejin Choi. Dataset cartography: Mapping and diagnosing datasets with
  training dynamics. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 9275–9293, 2020.
Zineng Tang, Ziyi Yang, Chenguang Zhu, Michael Zeng, and Mohit Bansal. Any-to-any generation
  via composable diffusion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2023.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu,
  Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly
  capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Mariya Toneva, Alessandro Sordoni, Remi Tachet des Combes, Adam Trischler, Yoshua Bengio,
 and Geoffrey J Gordon. An empirical study of example forgetting during deep neural network
 learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Gido M Van de Ven and Andreas S Tolias. Three scenarios for continual learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1904.07734, 2019.
Yizhong Wang, Hamish Ivison, Pradeep Dasigi, Jack Hessel, Tushar Khot, Khyathi Chandu, David
  Wadden, Kelsey MacMillan, Noah A Smith, Iz Beltagy, et al. How far can camels go? exploring
  the state of instruction tuning on open resources. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36:74764–74786, 2023.
Max Welling. Herding dynamical weights to learn. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1121–1128, 2009.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mengzhou Xia, Sadhika Malladi, Suchin Gururangan, Sanjeev Arora, and Danqi Chen. Less: Se-
 lecting influential data for targeted instruction tuning. In Forty-first International Conference on
 Machine Learning, 2024.
Zhiyang Xu, Ying Shen, and Lifu Huang. Multiinstruct: Improving multi-modal zero-shot learning
  via instruction tuning. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
  2023.
Zhiyang Xu, Chao Feng, Rulin Shao, Trevor Ashby, Ying Shen, Di Jin, Yu Cheng, Qifan Wang, and
  Lifu Huang. Vision-flan: Scaling human-labeled tasks in visual instruction tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.11690, 2024.
Zhenfei Yin, Jiong Wang, Jianjian Cao, Zhelun Shi, Dingning Liu, Mukai Li, Xiaoshui Huang, Zhiy-
  ong Wang, Lu Sheng, Lei Bai, et al. Lamm: Language-assisted multi-modal instruction-tuning
  dataset, framework, and benchmark. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2023.
Jaehong Yoon, Eunho Yang, Jeongtae Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. Lifelong learning with dynamically
  expandable networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sk7KsfW0-.
Jaehong Yoon, Divyam Madaan, Eunho Yang, and Sung Ju Hwang. Online coreset selection for
  rehearsal-based continual learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Jaehong Yoon, Shoubin Yu, and Mohit Bansal. Raccoon: Remove, add, and change video content
  with auto-generated narratives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18406, 2024.
Licheng Yu, Patrick Poirson, Shan Yang, Alexander C Berg, and Tamara L Berg. Modeling context
  in referring expressions. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Amster-
  dam, The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 14, pp. 69–85. Springer, 2016.
Shoubin Yu, Jaehong Yoon, and Mohit Bansal. Crema: Multimodal compositional video reasoning
  via efficient modular adaptation and fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05889, 2024.
Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang, Tianyu Zheng, Ruoqi Liu, Ge Zhang, Samuel Stevens,
  Dongfu Jiang, Weiming Ren, Yuxuan Sun, et al. Mmmu: A massive multi-discipline multimodal
  understanding and reasoning benchmark for expert agi. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence.
  In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Yanzhe Zhang, Ruiyi Zhang, Jiuxiang Gu, Yufan Zhou, Nedim Lipka, Diyi Yang, and Tong Sun.
  Llavar: Enhanced visual instruction tuning for text-rich image understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.17107, 2023a.
Yuanhan Zhang, Bo Li, haotian Liu, Yong jae Lee, Liangke Gui, Di Fu, Jiashi Feng, Ziwei
  Liu, and Chunyuan Li. Llava-next: A strong zero-shot video understanding model. https:
  //llava-vl.github.io/blog/2024-04-30-llava-next-video/. 2024.
Zihan Zhang, Meng Fang, Ling Chen, and Mohammad-Reza Namazi-Rad. Citb: A benchmark for
  continual instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14510, 2023b.
Haizhong Zheng, Rui Liu, Fan Lai, and Atul Prakash. Coverage-centric coreset selection for high
  pruning rates. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2023.
Junhao Zheng, Qianli Ma, Zhen Liu, Binquan Wu, and Huawen Feng. Beyond anti-forgetting:
  Multimodal continual instruction tuning with positive forward transfer. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.09181, 2024.
Baichuan Zhou, Ying Hu, Xi Weng, Junlong Jia, Jie Luo, Xien Liu, Ji Wu, and Lei Huang. Tinyllava:
  A framework of small-scale large multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14289, 2024.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt-4: En-
  hancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.10592, 2023.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Evaluation datasets used for measuring the performance of the trained model at each time
step in our continual learning experiments.

      Skill                    Evaluation Datasets                            Evaluation Metric
      VQA                      GQA (Hudson & Manning, 2019), LLaVA-               Accuracy
                               Bench (Liu et al., 2023a)
      Knowledge VQA            ScienceQA (Lu et al., 2022), OK-VQA (Marino        Accuracy
                               et al., 2019), A-OK-VQA (Schwenk et al.,
                               2022)
      Multilingual (Chinese)   COCO-CN, Flickr-8K-CN (Li et al., 2023b)          BLEU Score
      Grounding                RefCOCO,       RefCOCO+,            RefCOCOg         IOU
                               (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2016)
      Reasoning                MMMU (Yue et al., 2024)                            Accuracy
      Language                 MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021a;b)                   Accuracy



A PPENDIX

A    BASELINES

Sequential Training. In this method, the model is naively trained on the stream of instruction
tuning datasets without any experience replay. Generally, this method sets a lower bound on the
performance of the model on each evaluation task.

Multi-task Training. This method comprises pooling all of the datasets across time steps and
training the model on this pooled dataset in one go. Generally, this method sets an upper bound on
the performance of the model on various skill sets. However, if there are low-resource tasks in the
dataset, it can lead to low performance on those tasks.

Coverage-based Coreset Selection (CCS). Zheng et al. (2023) introduces the method CCS where
they divide a range of difficulty scores into equal-sized bins and randomly data samples from each
bin with a uniform budget. This approach is motivated by maximizing coverage over the semantic
space while ensuring an equal distribution of easy and difficult samples in the selected subset. Easy
samples promote learning whereas difficult samples are information-dense and promote generaliza-
tion. We use this method in Adapt-∞ for score-based selection.

Score-based Selection. Multiple importance score functions have been proposed over the years
for various data types. We select the following for baseline experiments: (1) Perplexity: This metric
is widely used for filtering language corpora (Marion et al., 2023), (2) EL2N (Paul et al., 2021):
This metric is the L2-norm of the output error vector and is effective at low pruning ratios (or high
retention rates), (3) Entropy (Coleman et al.): This score function is the entropy value of the output
probability vector.

Embedding-based Selection. SemDeDup (Abbas et al., 2023) extracts semantic embeddings for
pertaining datasets using a universal embedding transformer such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) for
image-text pairs or Sentence Transformer4 for natural language corpora and performs deduplication
within k-means clusters. DBP (Abbas et al., 2024) assigns pruning budget to the clusters in SemD-
eDup using a cluster complexity score. COINCIDE (Lee et al., 2024a) clusters feature vectors into a
large number of cluster e.g., k=10,000 to identify skill-concept clusters and samples non-uniformly
from the clusters using a difficulty score metric.

  4
    https://www.tensorflow.org/hub/tutorials/semantic_similarity_with_tf_
hub_universal_encoder


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Efficiency results. Comparison of performance of efficient versions of the Adapt-∞
method for lifelong multimodal instruction tuning. T = Training data size; |D| = Size of data pool
after permanent pruning in L ITE -Adapt-∞.

            Method                                           Relative Gain % (↑)          Forgetting Rate % (↓)        Avg. Acc. (↑)
            Adapt-∞ (T=25k)                                           102.3                             0.9                   50.5
            + TinyLLaVA gradients (Zhou et al., 2024)                  99.6                             2.9                   48.1
            + Zero-order gradients (Hinton, 2022)                      99.9                             1.5                   48.5
            L ITE -Adapt-∞ (|D|=100k)                                  99.7                             1.3                   49.6
            L ITE -Adapt-∞ (|D|=200k)                                 101.8                             1.1                   50.1
            L ITE -Adapt-∞ (|D|=500k)                                 102.5                             0.7                   50.8


Table 6: Efficiency analysis. Comparison of total time taken for various data selection methods
across all time steps in our experiments with 25k training samples at each t. Numbers are in hours.

    Method               Random Selection   Scoring-based   LESS(Xia et al., 2024)   COINCIDE (Lee et al., 2024a)   Adapt-∞    L ITE -Adapt-∞
    Data scoring                -                48                  92                          48                   92             34
    k-means clustering          -                 -                   -                          3.5                  3.5            1.4
    Training                   21                21                  21                          21                   21             21
    Total                      21                69                  113                         72.5                116.5           56.4


B       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Additional details on Adapt-∞ setup. We use random projections (Park et al., 2023; Xia et al.,
2024) to reduce the dimensionality of gradient vectors extracted for the pseudo-task clustering step.
We use a constant projection dimension of 8192 throughout our experiments.


C       A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Efficiency analysis. We present a comparison of the time taken by various data selection methods
for our experimental setting (for training with 25k samples at each time step) in Table 6. Results are
presented for 8 A100 GPUs. The total time taken to train the model without any methodical data se-
lection (i.e., random pruning) is approximately 21 hours. Scoring-based selection methods generally
require a forward pass of the model to extract the score (e.g., EL2N, entropy), which takes nearly 48
hours on 8A100 GPUs for all datasets in our experiments. The COINCIDE (Lee et al., 2024a) takes
a similar amount of time since it uses a forward pass to extract hidden layer outputs from the models
as data representations. LESS (Xia et al., 2024) and our proposed method Adapt-∞ require longer
time i.e., 92 hours, to perform a backward pass over the model and extract gradients. However, with
L ITE -Adapt-∞, we are able to significantly reduce this time due to systematic compression of the
dataset at each timestep.

Ablations with scoring functions. We present ablation results for the different types of scoring
functions used in Adapt-∞. The results presented in Table 2 for Adapt-∞ include four scoring
functions as outlined in Sec. 5.1 i.e., perplexity, image grounding (Section 3.2), EL2N (Paul et al.,
2021) and entropy (Coleman et al.) score functions. We refer to this set of functions as {S}. We
performed additional experiments where we used (a) only the image grounding score as the scoring
function, and (b) all scoring functions except the Image-grounding score. Results are reported in
Table 7. We find that the image grounding score serves as a good scoring function when used as a
standalone scorer in Adapt-∞. In addition, Adapt-∞ performs well even when the image grounding
score is removed from the set of best performing score functions. This suggests that performance
with our method can improve with better scoring functions, making Adapt-∞ a versatile method.

Visual chat skill. Multimodal LLMs are equipped with chat-style multi-turn conversational skills
due to the chat capabilities of the underlying LLM as well as instruction tuning data tailored to
the skill. The LLaVA instruction tuning dataset contains such data; hence, the LLaVA model can
hold multi-turn chats with a user. However, the multi-turn visual chat task is not well-defined and
lacks quantitative evaluation metrics or benchmarks. Nevertheless, we are interested in seeing if


                                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      4. Roasted vegetables: Toss the carrots,                 What is behind the apples?
                                                      broccoli, and peppers with olive oil,
                                                      salt, and pepper, then roast them in the          Behind the apples, there are oranges and
                                                      oven for a flavorful side dish.                   grapes.
                                                      5. Vegetable soup: Combine the
                                                      vegetables with a broth, and add herbs                                     Give me the recipe.
                                                      and spices for a comforting and healthy
                                                      vegetable soup.                                   Here's a simple recipe for a fruit salad using
                                                                                                        the apples, oranges, and grapes available in
                                                      These are just a few examples of the              the refrigerator:
                                                      many meals you can create using the
                                                      fruits and vegetables in your                     Ingredients:
                                                      refrigerator.                                     - 2 green apples, peeled and sliced
                           What are the meals I                                                         - 2 oranges, peeled and segmented
                           can cook with these?
                                                           I would like to cook the fruit salad.        - 1 cup grapes, halved
     With the variety of fruits and                        Where is the apple located in the            - 1/4 cup honey (optional)
     vegetables in the refrigerator, you can               image?                                       - 1/4 cup lemon juice (optional)
     prepare a range of healthy and delicious                                                           - 1/4 cup chopped fresh mint leaves (optional)
     meals. Some examples include:                    In the image, the apples are located on           - Instructions:
                                                      the top shelf of the refrigerator, along          1. In a large bowl, combine the sliced apples,
     1. Fruit salad: Combine the apples,              with the other fruits and vegetables.                segmented oranges, and halved grapes.
     oranges, and bananas to create a                                                                   2. If desired, drizzle the fruit salad with
     refreshing and nutritious fruit salad.                Please provide the bounding box              honey and lemon juice for a sweet and tangy
     2. Vegetable stir-fry: Chop the                       coordinate of the region this sentence       flavor.
     broccoli, carrots, and peppers into                   describes: green apple.                      3. Gently toss the fruit salad to combine the
     bite-sized pieces and saute them in a                                                              flavors.
     pan with some oil, garlic, and your                                                                4. If using mint leaves, add them to the bowl
     choice of seasonings.                                                                              and toss again.
     3. Smoothie: Blend the apples, oranges,                                                            5. Serve the fruit salad chilled or at room
     and bananas with some yogurt or milk to                                                            temperature.
     create a nutritious and delicious                                                                  This recipe is a versatile and healthy option
     smoothie.                                                                                          for a refreshing and nutritious meal or snack.


Figure 6: Visual chat with LLaVA at t=0 (Liu et al., 2023a). We use a representative chat example
to evaluate the visual chat capability of MLLMs trained using various methods in our experiments.


                            What are the meals I can cook with these?                                  What are the meals I can cook with these?

    salad                                                                      salad

                         I would like to cook the salad. Where is the                               I would like to cook the salad. Where is the
                         apple located in the image?                                                apple located in the image?

    top left                                                                   top right

                         Please provide the bounding box coordinate of                              Please provide the bounding box coordinate of
                         the region this sentence describes: green apple.                           the region this sentence describes: green apple.


                         What is behind the apples?                                                 What is behind the apples?

    The grapes                                                                 eggs

                         Give me the recipe.                                                        Give me the recipe.

    Fruit salad                                                                No recipe


Figure 7: Visual chat with LLaVA at t=5 using sequential training (left) and random pruning (right)
baselines in our experiments. The conversational ability of the LLaVA model is greatly diminished
over time using these baseline data selection methods.

Table 7: Ablations results for scoring functions in Adapt-∞ for multimodal models. Compar-
ison of performance of LLaVA model trained on datasets selected using Adapt-∞ under different
combinations of scoring functions.

       Scoring Functions                               Relative Gain % (↑)                   Forgetting Rate % (↓)                Avg. Acc. (↑)
       {S}                                                         109.7                                 0.4                             52.5
       {S} - Image Grounding Score                                 106.9                                 0.3                             51.2
       Image Grounding Score only                                   92.3                                 5.6                             45.6



the multi-turn chat skill is retained in the LLaVA model during lifelong learning, especially since
none of the fine-tuning datasets, except for LLaVA-665K, contain conversational data. We perform
qualitative evaluation of the visual chat skill using a single representative example demonstrated in


                                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       I would like to cook the fruit salad.   - 1 cucumber
                                                       Where is the apple located in the       - 1 bunch of broccoli
                                                       image?                                  - 1 bunch of carrots
                                                                                               - 1 bunch of grapes
                                                  The apple is located on the top shelf        - 1 bunch of bananas
                                                  of the refrigerator, along with other        - 1 cup of blue water bottles
                                                  fruits and vegetables.                       - 1 cup of white eggs
                                                                                               Instructions:
                                                      Please provide the bounding box          1. Wash all fruits and vegetables thoroughly.
                                                      coordinate of the region this sentence   2. Cut the green apple into bite-sized pieces.
                                                      describes: green apple.                  3. Peel the orange and cut it into segments.
                                                                                               4. Cut the red bell pepper into bite-sized
                           What are the meals I                                                pieces.
                           can cook with these?                                                5. Wash and chop the lettuce, cucumber, and
                                                                                               broccoli.
                                                                                               6. Peel the carrots and cut them into bite-sized
     With the variety of fruits and
                                                                                               pieces.
     vegetables available in the
                                                                                               7. In a large bowl, combine the apple, orange,
     refrigerator, you can prepare a range            What is behind the apples?               bell pepper, lettuce, cucumber, broccoli,
     of healthy and delicious meals. Some
                                                                                               carrots, and grapes.
     ideas include a mixed fruit salad, a         Behind the apples, there are oranges
                                                  and grapes.
                                                                                               8. Pour the blue water bottles and white eggs
     vegetable stir-fry, a colorful fruit
                                                                                               over the fruit salad, and mix well.
     and vegetable smoothie, a vegetable
                                                      Give me the recipe.                      9. Cover the bowl and refrigerate the fruit
     soup, or a fresh vegetable and fruit
                                                                                               salad for at least 30 minutes to allow the
     salsa. These meals can be enjoyed as         Here's a simple recipe for a fruit           flavors to meld together.
     standalone dishes or as side dishes to       salad using the fruits available in          10. Serve the fruit salad chilled.
     complement other main courses. The           the refrigerator:
     fruits and vegetables provide a diverse      Ingredients:                                 This recipe is a simple and healthy way to enjoy
     range of flavors, textures, and              - 1 green apple                              the variety of fruits and vegetables available
     nutrients, making them an excellent          - 1 orange                                   in your refrigerator. You can customize the
     choice for creating nutritious and           - 1 red bell pepper                          ingredients and add any additional fruits or
     satisfying meals.                            - 1 head of lettuce                          vegetables you prefer.


Figure 8: Visual chat with LLaVA at t=5 using our proposed dynamic data selection method
Adapt-∞. Unlike other methods (see Fig. 7), the Adapt-∞ method identifies conversation as a
distinct task in the pseudo-task clustering step and retains sufficient samples from this task at each
time step to prevent forgetting the skill.


Fig. 6. In this example, the model is queried for VQA, knowledge VQA, and referring expression
comprehension tasks based on a single image. As seen in Fig. 6, the LLaVA model (at t=0 in our
experiments) can perform all these tasks effectively in a multi-turn chat scenario, except for fine-
grained visual reasoning. The models trained using sequential learning and random pruning in our
experiments lose this skill, as shown in Fig. 7. The models’ answers become less verbose and they
provide inaccurate answers for most tasks. We present results from our method in Fig. 8. Adapt-∞
identifies the multi-turn chat as a distinct task during the pseudo-task clustering step and selects
samples from this cluster for training at each time step. Thus, it can retain this skill effectively even
after many steps of fine-tuning on other datasets.

What is important for multimodal skill recovery?
As noted in Section 5.2, a model can recover previ-
ously learned skills without being re-trained on data
from that skill. Sequential training of the LLaVA
model in our experimental setting shows that the
model at t=4 has poor multilingual skills (introduced
at t=1), and recovers those skills at t=5 without be-
ing trained on multilingual data (See the result of
Sequential on Multilingual (CN) task in Figure 3). Figure 9: Recovery of multilingual skill
We use this phenomenon to understand what aspects with various training data selection methods.
of the training data induce skill recovery in a multi-
modal model. To this end, we train the model from t=4 timestep on different subsets of the Vision-
FLAN dataset at t=5 and evaluate its performance on the multilingual skill. Specifically, in t=5, we
train the model on an equal number of (a) randomly selected samples, most similar samples in (b)
LoRA gradient space, (c) vision projection layer gradient space, (d) hidden layer output space and
(e) projection layer output space. We compute the average cosine similarity of each sample in the
VisionFLAN dataset with the multilingual subset of the M3IT dataset (t=1). Gradients and outputs
are extracted from the vision projector layers and the decoder layers to represent the visual and mul-
timodal content of the samples, respectively. We report the relative gain of the trained model as a
measure of skill recovery. As presented in Figure 9, the best multilingual performance is achieved
by (b) training on VisionFLAN samples that have similar gradients in the LoRA modules, followed
by (e) samples with similar outputs from the visual projection layer. Since we have already estab-
lished that gradients represent the skill whereas hidden layer outputs represent the semantics (see
Section 4.2), these results suggest that multimodal models can retain as well as recover previously


                                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Overall results for lifelong instruction tuning in language models. Comparison of
performance of LLaMa3-8B models trained on datasets selected using Adapt-∞ vs. other data
selection methods.

         Method            Relative Gain % (↑)         Forgetting Rate % (↓)     Avg. Acc. (↑)
         Sequential                  -                         18.1                   36.8
         Random                     91.6                       5.6                    41.8
         L ITE-Adapt-∞              97.8                        2.3                   43.1


learned skills through reminding indirect representations of the skill in training datasets. We also
observe this phenomenon at t=4 in the sequential setting where training the LLaVA model on object
and keypoint detection tasks leads to recovery of the referring comprehension skill. These results
provide further evidence for the effectiveness of gradient-based clustering of datasets in Adapt-∞.

Data selection for language-only models. We performed experiments for lifelong instruction tun-
ing (LiIT) of language models to explore the efficacy of our proposed approach for language-only
data. For this purpose, we use the LLaMA3-8B (Dubey et al., 2024) model and five multi-task
language datasets in the following training order: Natural Instructions (Mishra et al., 2022), Alpaca-
CoT (Qingyi Si, 2023), xP3 (Muennighoff et al., 2022), UltraChat (Ding et al., 2023) and FireFly.5
We use the set of evaluation benchmarks used in Wang et al. (2023) to evaluate our models (MMLU,
GSM, BBH, TydiQA, CodexEval, AlpacaEval) and compute the following metrics based on perfor-
mance across these benchmarks: Average accuracy, Relative gain, and Forgetting rate (see Sec. 5.1
in main text). The model is trained on 25k samples at each time step, similar to the MLLM experi-
ments in our paper. We report results for sequential training, random selection and L ITE-Adapt-∞
on this setting in Table 8. We see up to 18% forgetting rate in the sequential setting, which comes
down to 5.6% and 2.3% with random pruning and Adapt-∞ pruning. The average accuracy is high-
est with our method at the final time step. These results suggest that lifelong learning from multi-task
instruction tuning datasets is a significant problem in the language-only domain as well. Our pro-
posed method can significantly alleviate forgetting of skills over time in the language domain, as
well as preserve the maximum accuracy that can be achieved from each dataset.


   5
       https://huggingface.co/datasets/YeungNLP/firefly-train-1.1M


                                                  21
