Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T HE R AMANUJAN L IBRARY - AUTOMATED D ISCOV-
ERY ON THE H YPERGRAPH OF I NTEGER R ELATIONS

 Itay Beit-Halachmi and Ido Kaminer
 The Ramanujan Machine Team, Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering
 Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
 Haifa 3200003, Israel
 itaybe@campus.technion.ac.il, ido.kaminer@gmail.com



                                            A BSTRACT
         Fundamental mathematical constants appear in nearly every ﬁeld of science, from
         physics to biology. Formulas that connect different constants often bring great in-
         sight by hinting at connections between previously disparate ﬁelds. Discoveries of
         such relations, however, have remained scarce events, relying on sporadic strokes
         of creativity by human mathematicians. Recent developments of algorithms for
         automated conjecture generation have accelerated the discovery of formulas for
         speciﬁc constants. Yet, the discovery of connections between constants has not
         been addressed. In this paper, we present the ﬁrst library dedicated to mathemati-
         cal constants and their interrelations. This library can serve as a central repository
         of knowledge for scientists from different areas, and as a collaborative platform
         for development of new algorithms. The library is based on a new representa-
         tion that we propose for organizing the formulas of mathematical constants: a
         hypergraph, with each node representing a constant and each edge representing
         a formula. Using this representation, we propose and demonstrate a systematic
         approach for automatically enriching this library using PSLQ, an integer relation
         algorithm based on QR decomposition and lattice construction. During its devel-
         opment and testing, our strategy led to the discovery of 75 previously unknown
         connections between constants, including a new formula for the ‘ﬁrst continued
         fraction’ constant C1 , novel formulas for natural logarithms, and new formulas
         connecting π and e. The latter formulas generalize a century-old relation between
         π and e by Ramanujan, which until now was considered a singular formula and
         is now found to be part of a broader mathematical structure. The code supporting
         this library is a public, open-source API that can serve researchers in experimental
         mathematics and other ﬁelds of science.


1   I NTRODUCTION
With the rise in computing power and the rise of artiﬁcial intelligence, efforts have been made to
harness these tools to further scientiﬁc discovery. Some of the earliest examples of such automated
discovery efforts include the Automated Mathematician and later Eurisko (Lenat and Brown, 1984),
systems that automatically discovered concepts in mathematics and later in other scientiﬁc domains.
Another notable early discovery system is Grafﬁti (Fajtlowicz, 1988), which automatically generated
conjectures in graph theory. Since then, the usage of computer algorithms as scientiﬁc tools (Wang,
1960; Davis and Lenat, 1982; Wolfram et al., 2002), and in particular as tools for aiding with math-
ematical proofs (Appel and Haken, 1976; Zeilberger, 1990; Wilf and Zeilberger, 1992; Buchberger
et al., 2006), has skyrocketed. Noteworthy recent examples include papers by Google DeepMind
(Davies et al., 2021; Fawzi et al., 2022; Romera-Paredes et al., 2023), which have utilized AI to
ﬁnd new algorithms for matrix multiplication, and generate conjectures in topology, representation
theory, and combinatorics.
A noteworthy example of computers assisting mathematicians is the Ramanujan Machine project
(Raayoni et al., 2021; Razon et al., 2023; Elimelech et al., 2024), which specializes in automated
conjecture generation in number theory. This project, named in honor of Srinivasa Ramanujan’s sub-
stantial mathematical contributions (Berndt, 2012) and his unconventional work style, demonstrated


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


an automated discovery of formulas involving fundamental mathematical constants. The discovered
formulas and the properties they exhibited (Ben David et al., 2024) enabled the construction of a
previously unknown mathematical structure (David, 2023; Elimelech et al., 2024) that forms a sys-
tematic framework for the generation of new formulas and for proofs of irrationality of constants,
even in places where no systematic proofs were known (e.g., Apéry (1979); David (2023)).
Fundamental mathematical constants like π, e, or ζ(3) are central in several branches of mathematics
and in other ﬁelds of science (Finch, 2003). The appearance of the same mathematical constant in
different ﬁelds that may seem unrelated can lead to surprising connections. One of the earliest such
connections is the Basel problem, posed in 1650 and solved by Euler (Euler, 1748; Ayoub, 1974),
establishing that one of the values of the Riemann zeta function is ζ(2) = π 2 /6, and also providing a
family of formulas expressing all positive even values ζ(2n) using π 2n . Due to the connection of the
Riemann zeta function to the distribution of prime numbers, this formula established the profound
and nontrivial importance of π in regards to prime numbers. This example shows how discovery
of new connections on fundamental constants has great potential in connecting different ﬁelds and
leading to new discoveries. Another such example is a connection involving π and e found by
Ramanujan, presented in ﬁgure 1. Though it is not known if π and e are algebraically independent
Morandi (1996), this is one of many formulas that show how else they can be connected.


                                  𝜋𝑒              1                              1 1          1
                                     =                                    +1+     +   + ⋯+              +⋯
                                  2                   1                          3 15      2𝑛 − 1
                                       1+                 2
                                            1+                3
                                                 1+             𝑛
         𝝅                                            ⋱+
                                                              1 +⋱

                                       𝜋𝑒                     1                             1Τ2
         𝒆                                =                                      +1+
                                       2                          1                           1Τ4
                                            1+                        2                1+
                                                 1+                                             1Τ6
                                                                          3               1+
                                                          1+                                     1Τ2𝑛
                                                                            𝑛                ⋱+
                                                                  ⋱+                             1 +⋱
                                                                          1 +⋱

Figure 1: Automatically discovered formulas, showing a section of the full hypergraph in ﬁgure 4.
The ﬁrst formula was found by Ramanujan (Berndt et al., 1999), and the second formula is novel.


In this paper, we propose a new approach to the discovery of relations between mathematical con-
stants, and collect its results in a publicly-accessible database. This database is the ﬁrst to collect and
organize the known mathematical constants and their relations, and will provide a unique resource
for experimental mathematicians and number theorists worldwide.
We expand our database into a library that also collects the known relations between the constants
and organizes them into a hypergraph, which we show to be an effective representation of the struc-
ture among formulas of mathematical constants and among the constants themselves. Going beyond
the collection of known relations, we develop algorithms that use the database to search for new rela-
tions between its constants, successfully generating 75 new formulas. These algorithms are used for
further (automated) enrichment of the library. We present two enrichment strategies: (1) automated
search of relations within the database using a polynomial integer relation algorithm (see section 2.1)
and (2) the identify algorithm (see section 4) executed on each new constant introduced to the library
to ﬁnd its relations to existing constants and formulas in the database. Both strategies rely on the
integer relation algorithm PSLQ (Ferguson and Bailey, 1992; Ferguson et al., 1999). We developed
a new methodology for quantifying the PSLQ results and for determining which ones constitute new
likely formulas, so they can be further analyzed to greater precision. Our algorithm is the ﬁrst to dis-
cover nonlinear (polynomial) relations, rather than focusing on linear relations. For comparison, we
show that identify succeeded in cases for which the state-of-the-art commercial solution (in Wolfram
Alpha) was unsuccessful.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2    I NTRODUCING THE HYPERGRAPH OF MATHEMATICAL CONSTANTS AND
     THEIR RELATIONS

Recall that an (ordinary) undirected graph on a vertex set V is deﬁned by an edge set E, each
connecting two vertices. An undirected hypergraph, then, generalizes the concept of an edge so
each one can connect more than two vertices. More explicitly, each edge is now a set of arbitrary
size, instead of a set of size 2. In our (undirected) hypergraph, the vertices will all be mathematical
constants, either given explicitly (e.g., π, e, up to a user-deﬁned precision) or given by a formula
converging to the constant. We choose to represent formulas using a canonical form that captures
general continued fractions and inﬁnite sums, namely the C-transforms of a complex sequence fn :
                                                             f1
                                        C[fn ] = 1 +                          .                            (1)
                                                                  f2
                                                       1+
                                                                       f3
                                                            1+
                                                                       ..
                                                                          .
This deﬁnition can always be treated as a formal expression, and when it converges it is instead
deﬁned as the limiting value. In practice, we generate each fn using a rational function. C-transforms
(and continued fractions in general) are powerful as they contain, for example, all inﬁnite sums (that
can be converted using Euler’s approach (Euler, 1748)), whereas not every continued fraction can be
converted back to an inﬁnite sum. The C-transform captures any continued fraction in a canonical
form that removes redundancy. The special case of fn being a rational function already generalizes
all polynomial continued fractions (Khinchin, 1964) , which are general mathematical constructs
that capture all trigonometric functions, Bessel functions, generalized hypergeometric functions and
much more. The C-transform notation helps facilitating the systematic automated research in our
work (see appendix A for further discussion).
The undirected edges (equivalently hyperedges) in our hypergraph are integer polynomial relations,
forming a representation that generalizes a large number of formula structures. To deﬁne an integer
polynomial relation, we ﬁrst introduce integer relations: An integer relation on a vector of real
numbers x1 , x2 , ... is a vector of integers a√1 , a2 , ..., not all of which are 0, such that a1 x1 + a2 x2 +
                                                                                                     √
... = 0. As an example, the formula ϕ = 5+1             is equivalent to the integer relation 2ϕ − 5 − 1 =
                                   √             2
0, with the constants being ϕ, 5, 1 and the integer coefﬁcients being 2, −1, −1. This example
illustrates how integer relations are a general structure that captures mathematical equalities.
We expand on this deﬁnition by introducing polynomial relations, which have a1 , a2 , ... as the
integer coefﬁcients of a (nonzero) multi-variable polynomial p, looking for a solution satisfying
p(x1 , x2 , ...) = 0. For each identiﬁed polynomial, we deﬁne its degree as the greatest sum of all
exponents in each monomial, and its order as the largest exponent that appears in it. These quantities
let us measure how “complex” a given polynomial is, which we use for eliminating redundancies in
our algorithm. As another example, consider the relation between π and e, captured by the Ramanu-
jan formula in ﬁgure 1. These types of relations constitute the edges of the hypergraph we construct
automatically in this work.
To account for possible numerical inaccuracies arising from our computational methods, we propose
a deﬁnition that allows for a (typically small) error ε := |a1 x1 + a2 x2 + ...| ≥ 0. This deﬁnition also
applies to polynomial relations, in which case ε = |p(x1 , x2 , ...)|. Then, the precision of the relation
is deﬁned as ⌊−log2 ε⌋. With the ability to quantify each constant’s numerical error as ε1 , ε2 , ...,
we instead replace ε in the precision with max {ε, ε1 , ε2 , ...}, allowing the discovered relation to
account for the inaccuracy of its constants.
                                                                                                  √
Hypergraph
      √
             edges stand for either linear relations with integer coefﬁcients, like that between 5 and
                                                                                        π2
ϕ = 5+1 2 , or nonlinear (polynomial) relations, like that between π and ζ(2) = 6 . Interestingly,
all edges representing linear relations satisfy a kind of transitivity in any subgraph they form: given
an integer relation on a set of constants A, and another on a set of constants B, such that A and B
share at least one constant x, it is possible to construct a relation on (A ∪ B) \ {x}. However, edges
like the ones we show between π and e impose a more intricate structure that does not conform
to regular transitivity but requires its generalization. A simple example of such transitivity is the
(non-linear) polynomial relations between π and its higher powers, or e and its rational exponents.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.1   A LGORITHMS FOR AUTOMATED ENRICHMENT OF THE HYPERGRAPH

Our algorithms populate the hypergraph of integer relations by searching for sets of constants
x1 , x2 , ... and polynomials p such that p(x1 , x2 , ...) = 0 up to some tolerance. Section 3.1 sum-
marizes the results, with a full listing in appendix F. The underlying mechanism is as follows:
Beginning with a totally disconnected hypergraph (i.e. no relations are known yet), choose the
search space of constants, partitioned into user-deﬁned subsets, one of which may be fundamental
mathematical constants, and another may be constants provided as limits of formulas (generally
described by C-transforms). Then, each run of the algorithm takes some or all of the subsets in the
partition, ﬁlters them further, and then takes their product space. In addition, the algorithm requires
a choice of maximum degree and order for the polynomials. For example, the hypergraph in ﬁgure
1 resulted from a search that yielded an edge of degree d = 6 and order o = 2 for the polynomials
on π and e, which can be represented using a simpler degree 5 edge on the constant πe instead.
Second, once the search space is decided, each set of constants is run through an integer relation
algorithm to obtain a polynomial relation, using multiple precision arithmetic (see section 3 for
details). For this we have chosen the PSLQ algorithm, whose supporting theorems ensure that it
can recover a relation with the working precision for almost all real vectors (Ferguson et al., 1999),
except for some special cases we note in appendix B. We discuss in the next section how we run
PSLQ and what heuristic we use to ﬁlter integer relations that are likely to be false positives. This is
the most resource-intensive part of the algorithm, with each run of PSLQ having a time complexity
of O(m4 ) where m is the maximal number of monomials in a polynomial with degree d and order
o (see appendix C for a more detailed analysis). However, each run of PSLQ is independent from
every other run, making the algorithm embarrassingly parallel, allowing us to scale the search space
with the number of processors available.
Lastly, once signiﬁcant relations have been collected in the previous step to populate the hypergraph,
these integer relations are then used in future runs of the algorithm to save time: Given a set of
constants X, if the hypergraph already has an edge e ⊆ X whose degree and order are no more
than the current maximal degree and order, then we do not run X through PSLQ again. Essentially,
as the algorithm learns more edges of the hypergraph of integer relations, future runs become more
efﬁcient. This also means that the algorithm can accept a hypergraph of integer relations at any point
(even if partially ﬁlled), using the given integer relations to save time.



                                                                                      PSLQ hyperedge


 Fundamental                               identify
  Constants
                                                                                   5𝑥𝑦 ln 2 − 5𝑥 + 2𝑦 <
                                                             Integer
                                                                                   < 2−50000
                                                             Relation
                                                             Machine       yes,
                                                                          return      Check Return on
               Library of Numerical       Automated                                     Investment
                Values and Integer          search
  Continued          Relations                                                      integer ?
  Fractions                                                                                 ≪ precision
                                                                            no,     lengths
                                                                           drop

Figure 2: Automated search of integer relations. The process begins by collecting fundamental
constants and continued fractions from the literature and organizing them into a database. Then,
the algorithm checks subsets of constants for polynomial relations using PSLQ. We identify that a
relation is signiﬁcant by a high Return on Investment (RoI), as described in section 3. Such events
are generally extremely rare, and each one is returned to the database and saved, enriching the
hypergraph and adding to our knowledge about mathematical constants and their relations. Each
such discovered relation also saves time on future runs of PSLQ. In addition, our novel identify
utility (see section 4) allows for manually adding constants and continued fractions to the database
regardless of the automated search.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3     I DENTIFYING INTEGER RELATIONS BETWEEN MATHEMATICAL
      CONSTANTS USING PSLQ

PSLQ is a numerically stable integer relation algorithm (Ferguson and Bailey, 1992). This algo-
rithm uses a partial sum of squares scheme to manipulate a lattice, in a similar manner to the PSOS
algorithm (Bailey and Ferguson, 1998), using LQ matrix decomposition (transposed QR decompo-
sition). Follow-up works on PSLQ applied it in a wide range of settings (Bailey and Broadhurst,
2001). PSLQ accepts a vector of real numbers x1 , x2 , ..., and returns integers a1 , a2 , ..., such that
a1 x1 + a2 x2 + ... = 0 within user-set tolerance, maximum number of steps, and maximum absolute
value for all ai (or nothing if no such relation exists). Ordinarily, any of the three user-set parameters
can terminate the algorithm’s calculations, but in this section, we demonstrate how and why we run
PSLQ only until tolerance is exhausted, and present a novel heuristic for deciding if its result is
signiﬁcant, which we have termed Return on Investment (RoI).
From a purely theoretical perspective, integer relations are either true or false, with the latter provid-
ing no insight towards the former. That is, if a certain integer relation is accurate to 100 digits of
accuracy, but is then found to be incorrect at the 101st digit, it does not imply that any “similar” inte-
ger relation will be fully accurate. To identify promising relations despite the ﬁnite precision, we rely
on a perspective motivated by data compression and statistics: Given d binary digits, one can express
about 21+d integers (including negatives). Thus, if our working precision is d binary digits, and an
integer relation algorithm yielded numbers with d binary digits, the result is most likely a false posi-
tive. With a tighter analysis, if one splits this reasoning into n integers, each with d1 , d2 , ..., dn binary
digits, then the total amount of options for all integers is about 21+d1 · 21+d2 · ... = 2n+d1 +d2 +... . As
such, for precision of d binary digits, any integer relation algorithm yielding integers with d1 , d2 , ...
binary digits such that n + d1 + d2 + ... ≈ d is most likely a false positive.
Based on the above analysis, we introduce and apply the concept of Return on Investment (RoI) to
analyse the validity of integer relations: Given an integer relation with a precision of d, on n integers
                                                                 d
each with d1 , d2 , ... binary digits, the RoI is deﬁned as n+d1 +d 2 +...
                                                                           . With this deﬁnition in mind, it
is reasonable to state that the higher the RoI, the more likely an integer relation is to be true. This
assertion matches theory, as in that case, if an integer relation is theoretically true, then the RoI
grows to ∞ as the working precision increases.
Experimenting with the PSLQ algorithm to determine an empirical lower bound for RoI, beyond
which integer relations can be considered signiﬁcant, shows that an RoI of 2 seems to comfortably
separate random results from false positives, with a generous margin of error (see ﬁgure 3). As such,
this has been decided as the lower cutoff for integer relations generated by PSLQ to be considered
signiﬁcant as part of the algorithm in section 2.1. In order to further show how general RoI can be,
we performed a similar experiment using a different integer relation algorithm called LLL (Lenstra
et al., 1982), and described its ﬁndings in appendix D.


3.1   C ONTINUED FRACTION CALCULATION AND CONVERGENCE

Motivated by previous works of the Ramanujan Machine (Raayoni et al., 2021; Elimelech et al.,
2024), generalized continued fractions (represented as C-transforms) are a highly expressive frame-
work of generating constants. One of the challenges of working with such mathematical formulas
is that it is not always known in advance whether a certain formula converges to a limit. Never-
theless, our numerical experiments suggest that the asymptotics of each sequence determines its
convergence properties and speed, leading to the following conjecture and analysis. This analysis
aids in populating our database of continued fractions by rejecting formulas that do not convergence
and helping with numerical identiﬁcation tasks (see section 4). We propose the following conjecture,
which generalizes on previous works (e.g., (Raayoni et al., 2021; Ben David et al., 2024)), providing
the complete convergence conditions that we use when given an arbitrary C-transform:

Conjecture 1 Let fn be a real sequence. The formula C[fn ] converges in the following cases, at a
rate provided by the error εn := |1 + f1 /(1 + f2 /(· · · + fn ))) − C[fn ]|.

       • If fn = O(nk ) for some k < 0, then εn = O((n!)k )


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  (a)                                           (b)

                                                                                   1                2Τ3
                        RoI = 5905.2, high confidence                                 =1+
                                                                                  𝑒−1                 4Τ15
                                                                                          1+
                                                                                                        6Τ35
                                                                                                1+
                        RoI = 2310.5, high confidence                                                 2𝑛Τ 4𝑛2 − 1
                                                                                                   ⋱+     1 +⋱



                                                                                 1                   2Τ15
                        ~3𝜎, moderate confidence                                     =1+
                                                                               6 𝑒−9                   4Τ35
                                                                                         1+
                                                                                                         2Τ21
                                                                                              1+
                                                                                                    2𝑛Τ 4𝑛2 + 8𝑛 + 3
                                                                                                 ⋱+        1 +⋱
                        ~2𝜎, minimal confidence
 average RoI


                                                                                                (c)


                                                                                                                       average RoI
                                                                   numbers 𝑛
                                                                                      binary digits 𝑑
                                             numbers 𝑛



Figure 3: Experimental analysis of the Return on Investment (RoI) property, showing its use
for identifying integer relations. (a) For each n, we ran PSLQ 100 times with a pre-selected binary
precision of 50 + 5n. We present the average RoI for each n. The standard deviation for each n
is presented as fading errorbars, with the half length of each darkest error bar being equal to one
standard deviation. The lighter dashed line is the constant RoI of 1.25 and the darker dashed line is
the constant RoI of 1.5, which the plot suggests are viable options for minimum RoI for ﬁltering integer
relations. (b) Sampled formulas are listed with their RoI on panel (a). Thanks to their high precision,
their RoI is much greater than our recommended RoI cutoff. (c) For each d, n, we ran PSLQ 100
times until tolerance (equal to 65% of the working precision, see appendix B for more details), each
with n numbers between 0 and 1, each with d uniformly random binary digits. Then, we present the
average RoI across all 100 runs for each d, n. For a ﬁxed n, the average RoI is close to constant in d.

                                                                                                √

                                                                                                   −n
                     • If 1 + 4fn = C + o(1) for some constant C ̸= 1, then εn = O            1+√C
                                                                                              1− C

                                                                                   √
                     • If 1 + 4fn = Cnk + o(nk ) for some k ∈ (0, 1], then εn = O e−4 n/C

                     • If 1 + 4fn = O(nk ) with k < 0 or k ∈ (1, 2], then εn = O(nm ) for some m < 0.

Otherwise, C[fn ] does not converge.

Another challenge we face when analyzing continued fraction formulas is explicitly determining the
limit of a converging C-transform. In lieu of this, if a C-transform converges then it is sufﬁcient to
stop at some ﬁnite evaluation depth and use the resulting convergents to calculate an approximation
of the limit. Then, though it would be beneﬁcial to know the exact error of the resulting approxi-
mation, it is much easier and readily available to calculate an error proxy based on the difference
to the previous depth’s approximation. Table 1 shows a few examples of this procedure, which also
showcase the convergence model in action.

4                  T HE R AMANUJAN LIBRARY: PROVIDING PUBLIC ACCESS TO THE
                   DATABASE OF INTEGER RELATIONS AND MATHEMATICAL CONSTANTS

The code we have written and the library we have curated are open-source and publicly-accessible,
1
  including the novel database of mathematical constants and the hypergraph of integer relations.
               1
                   https://github.com/RamanujanMachine/LIReC


                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: The predicted vs measured convergence properties of selected continued fractions
in their canonical forms: error analysis. Without prior knowledge, it is not possible to know exactly
how inaccurate a given C-transform’s approximations are. Thankfully, the error predicted by the con-
vergence model usually provides a good estimate of the error proxy, which is usually a lower bound
on the true error. Both the error proxy and the true error are measured in terms of how many decimal
digits agree between the approximation and the true limit. Each C-transform here was either taken
from the literature, in which case its limit is known, or otherwise found numerically, and then its limit is
denoted with an asterisk and awaits proof. Note the lack of predicted error for C[n2 ], due to no known
formula for such C-transforms (see conjecture 1).

   C-transform         Evaluation depth              Predicted error              Error proxy   Limit               True error
   C[1/n]              210
                                                     2640                         2644          e − 1√              2647
   C[1]                210                           428                          427           (1 + 5)/2           428
   C[n]                210                           27                           26            √ πe 1 1            26
                                                                                                            √
                                                                                                   2 erfc       2
   C[n2 ]              220                           N/A                          5             1/ln2 (*)           5

Table 2: Sampled formulas from the hypergraph of integer relations. Each formula here is taken
from ﬁgure 4. As an example, consider how the ﬁrst relation can be found using   [    PSLQ:]Assuming a
                                                                                        4
polynomial with degree 2 and order 1, and given Catalan’s constant G and C 9n4−2n    −3n2 +1
                                                                                              , PSLQ can
                                             [       4
                                                         ]         [       4
                                                                               ]
ﬁnd integers n1 , n2 , n3 , n4 such that n1 C 9n4−2n
                                                 −3n2 +1
                                                           G + n2 C 9n4−2n
                                                                       −3n2 +1
                                                                                 + n3 G + n4 = 0. In this
                                                                                 [      4
                                                                                             ]
case, one can ﬁnd n1 = 2, n2 = 0, n3 = 0, n4 = −1, and given that both C 9n4−2n      −3n +1
                                                                                         2      and G are
known to high precision, this is a signal that an integer relation exists. The other relations here can
be captured in a similar way, using more complex integer polynomials.

                                               Relation                                                Icon
                                   h                  i
                               C          −2n
                                       9n4 −3n2 +1
                                                  4
                                                              1
                                                           = 2G                                    G

                         ln 2 =        [    1
                                             n2
                                                    ] −        [     2
                                                                      n2
                                                                              ]                  ln2
                                   C       4−16n2
                                                          5C       25−100n2


                                                            1    2
                              πe
                              2 =              C[n] + C
                                                1
                                                           2n
                                                                                                 π                  e


                h                                     i                                                     π
                       −(n+4)(n+2)2 (2n+1)                   296−192π+180ζ(2)
            C                                             = 1444−912π+855ζ(2)
                    9n4 +84n3 +259n2 +294n+95                                                     ζ(2)



Our code also contains specialized algorithms for working with the hypergraph and for testing new
candidate constants and candidate formulas. Access to the database from our code is established
using psycopg2 and sqlalchemy (Bayer, 2012). Our code contains for example the automated search
algorithm described in section 2.1, along with additional utilities like the C-transform calculator and
the numerical identiﬁcation suite we call identify, which are described in this section.
The computation of continued fractions is fairly straightforward thanks to the recursive relation
mentioned in appendix A, and so the C-transform calculator was developed to allow us to compute
C-transforms to arbitrary depths. The calculator utilizes three libraries for its computation: sympy
(Meurer et al., 2017), gmpy2, and mpmath (mpmath development team, 2023). Using the above
libraries, computation up to a depth of 1 million can be achieved in a few minutes at most on a
typical personal computer, for most continued fractions. Using the error proxy and convergence
model mentioned in section 3.1, we also give a preemptive analysis of any given C-transform of a
rational function, which is also useful to warn of C-transforms that are expected to not converge


                                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


or to have a slow rate of convergence. This preemptive analysis also allows the user to specify
their desired error proxy instead of having to guess an explicit depth in advance. Finally, when
operating on C-transforms of rational functions speciﬁcally, the calculator automatically shifts the
given function so as to avoid its singularities and zeroes, resulting in an equivalent C-transform up to
some number of steps forwards or backwards (see ﬁgure 2 for a demonstration of this equivalence).
The integer relation machine depicted in ﬁgure 2 has two uses, one of which has been described in
section 2.1, and the other is identify: a novel numerical identiﬁcation tool.2 The input to identify is an
array of decimal expansions representing one or more constants and/or their implicit C-transforms.
The output is the result of putting all values into the integer relation machine to attempt to extract
meaningful relations. If enabled, identify can also automatically fetch speciﬁc mathematical con-
stants or C-transforms from our database and match them against its input, informing the user of
what the database is familiar with, if applicable. If at any point, identify is given a C-transform that
the database is unfamiliar with, identify will then automatically upload it to the database. Similarly,
if a new relation is found in the process, it will also be uploaded to the database.

5    S ELECTED DISCOVERED RELATIONS BETWEEN MATHEMATICAL
     CONSTANTS

The novel algorithm described in section 2.1 has yielded results which we summarize here. These
results were found after running the algorithm on a smaller scale (an 8-core AWS machine) for
several months. The total compute time of our results is, thus, about 16 compute months. However,
since the algorithm is embarrassingly parallel, runtimes of the algorithm in practice go down with
the number of CPU cores used. This shows the potential of our algorithm for running on much
larger compute resources. Figure 4 shows 118 of the relations found, of which 43 were known
in the literature and 75 are novel to the best of our knowledge. Figure 2 shows some example
relations. Appendix F catalogues all relations in detail. These results were found after starting with
a completely disconnected hypergraph, containing the constants of interest, and no initial relations.
Here we present notable discovered relations involving π, e, ln2 and the Lemniscate constants.
We recall the following formula, attributed to Ramanujan (Berndt et al., 1999) (using the notation
deﬁned in equation 1, section 2):
                         r
                            πe      1                   1
                                =       +
                             2    C[n] 2C[(1 − 2n)/(4n(n + 1))] − 1
The search job unearthed a family of conjectures that generalizes the second C-transform in this
relation, given in table 3.
Next, we examined the family of constants C[n2 /(k 2 (1 − 4n2 ))] for integers k ≥ 1, ﬁrst noted in
Ben David et al. (2024) (table 4 column 1). When they were ﬁrst discovered, these C-transforms
were known to converge but their limits were unknown. Our search algorithm connected three of
these C-transforms to ln2 in pairs:
                                        1                     1
                      ln2 =                        +                       =
                              2C[n2 /(4(1 − 4n2 ))] 7C[n2 /(49(1 − 4n2 ))]
                                      2                          2
                       =                           +                        =
                          5C[n2 /(25(1 − 4n2 ))] 7C[n2 /(49(1 − 4n2 ))]
                                        1                        2
                          =                        −
                             C[n2 /(4(1 − 4n2 ))] 5C[n2 /(25(1 − 4n2 ))]
Thanks to the high precision to which these equations have been veriﬁed, our Return on Investment
(RoI) measure (section 3) quantiﬁes how unlikely they are to be false conjectures. These conjectures
are also listed in appendix F. Later investigation has revealed:
                                h            i
                                      n2                2/k
Conjecture 2 For all k ≥ 1, C k2 (1−4n    2)   = ln(k+1)−ln(k−1)  .

    2
      See README in the Github link, or the tutorial hosted at:
https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1PXAn4FwTHn0YQIBNDmOSIHWensqKetcU


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                          √                                   √ πe
Table 3: Discovered Ramanujan-like formulas for πe. For brevity, we denote R2 =                    erf √12 .
                                                                         √                      2
The rows in this table represent the 8 formulas we discovered for πe, generalizing Ramanujan’s
original formula that was so far unique. We proved the ﬁrst 4 rows using transformations on Ramanu-
jan’s original formula. The latter 4 rows are still unproven (yet equivalent, such that proving any one
of them will prove all four). The last row of each set of four is an inﬁnite family of formulas: for any
integer k ≥ 0 there exist integers α, β, γ, δ that satisfy an equality between the two sides.

                     C-transform                              Limit
                     C[(1 − 2n)/(4n(n + 1))]                  (R2 + 1)/2R2
                     C[(1 − 2n)/(4(n + 1)(n + 2))]            (2R2 + 1)/4
                     C[(1 − 2n)/(4(n + 2)(n + 3))]            (R2 + 1)/(6R2 − 1)
                     C[(1 − 2n)/(4(n + k)(n + k + 1))]        (αR2 + β)/(γR2 + δ)
                     C[n/(2n(n + 1))]                         1/(2R2 − 1)
                     C[(n + 1)/(2n(n + 1))]                   R2
                     C[(n + 2)/(2n(n + 1))]                   (2R2 + 1)/(R2 + 1)
                     C[(n + k)/(2n(n + 1))]                   (αR2 + β)/(γR2 + δ)


As a ﬁnal example of notable results, we compared the performance of identify with commercial nu-
merical identiﬁcation tools such as Wolfram Alpha 3 . Our identify method was successful in cases for
which Wolfram Alpha was unsuccessful in identifying the constant. This was the case for formulas
such as C[−(2n + 3)2 /(18n(n + 1))] (as an example of a larger family of C-transforms). Executing
                                 5A+6B
identify found that the limit is 5A−9B (to 50 digits of accuracy initially, and further thousands upon
reconﬁrming), where A, B are respectively the ﬁrst and second Lemniscate constants.

6       L IMITATIONS AND O UTLOOK
Our work presented a successful approach to automated formula discovery in number theory. The
numerical nature of our algorithms means that results are not theorems, but rather conjectures await-
ing proofs. In many cases, the discovered relations between formulas led to patterns that enabled
generalizing formulas into families. Some of these families are connected such that proving one for-
mula proves the entire family. We provided proofs for selected cases (shown in appendix E), hinting
that the other discovered formulas can also be proven. In a similar vein, our ﬁndings reveal the com-
plete rules of convergence of general continued fractions, yet these discovered rules lack a formal
proof for many of the special cases. Future work by number theorists can follow on our groundwork
to complete the proof and build the complete theory of convergence of continued fractions.
The Return on Investment (RoI) mechanism that we presented to quantify the success of the PSLQ
algorithm can be directly extended to other integer relation algorithms such as LLL (Lenstra et al.,
1982) (see also appendix D). This quantitative approach can contribute to the application of such
algorithms in a wider range of ﬁelds, and will beneﬁt from a thorough theoretical investigation.
Our approach and implementation can beneﬁt from many improvements. The search algorithm was
implemented in a way that allows for distributed computing. We are now adapting the algorithm to
utilize additional computing power using the online distributing network BOINC (Anderson, 2004).
Such large-scale computing efforts will be very promising in generating new, more elaborate for-
mulas and interrelations. The increase in the number of interrelations will require corresponding
methods to eliminate false positives, which could be accomplished automatically by retesting them
over time with higher precision constants. Sufﬁcient precision will eventually reveal each potential
false positive. Moreover, the current automated search algorithm relies on a pre-selected, static set
of constants, which directly determines which relations can be found. Methods of automatically
adding "interesting" constants to the database can improve the potential for ﬁnding novel relations.
Looking forward, the publicly-available Ramanujan library that we developed can now serve number
theorists for investigating mathematical constants with more powerful tools that are easily accessible.
The hypergraph of integer relations may be viewed like a knowledge graph, and as a public resource,
it can help open such areas of investigations to a broader community with different levels of expertise.
    3
        https://www.wolframalpha.com/input?i=-0.34391017046397691140258013367681311419903292310618


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By presenting fascinating connections between constants, we hope that this resource will invoke
curiosity in younger audiences and encouraging mathematical experimentation as a path for learning
mathematics. In its next generations, the Ramanujan library can be improved by augmenting the
hypergraph with written explanations on constants and links to relevant papers, forming a public
hub of knowledge on constants and their relations.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is supported by the generosity of Eric and Wendy Schmidt by recommendation of the
Schmidt Futures Polymaths program.
This research received software engineering support from the Georgia Institute of Technology’s
Scientiﬁc Software Engineering supported by Schmidt Sciences, as part of the Virtual Institute for
Scientiﬁc Software (VISS) Program



                                                                          1              2
                                                            ln 2 =               −
                                                                          𝑛2              𝑛2
                                                                     𝒞         2   5𝒞
                                                                       4 − 16𝑛        25 − 100𝑛2


Figure 4: The hypergraph of integer relations: each vertex is a constant, and each edge is a
formula. The hypergraph summarizes our automated discovery of relations between mathematical
constants, presenting selected formulas from our database. This hypergraph does not show all dis-
covered relations for clarity’s sake. Empty circles denote constants (written inside). Colored circles
denote continued fractions. Black denotes continued fractions whose limit is known in the broader
literature. Green denotes continued fractions whose limit is found in (Raayoni et al., 2021). Blue de-
notes continued fractions whose limit was unknown before our work, to the best of our knowledge. We
denote order-1 connections (Mobius-like) with solid lines, and higher-order connections (constants
may appear squared, cubed, etc.) with dashed lines. Edges that connect more than two vertices
are marked with small empty squares, denoting formulas that involve more than two constants of
formulas (example in the inset at the top right). Each algebraic constant has an edge of size 1, also
marked with a small empty square (placed at the top left). Such degenerate edges correspond to the
minimal polynomial of the constant.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
David P Anderson. Boinc: A system for public-resource computing and storage. In Proceedings of
  the 5th IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Grid Computing, pages 4–10, 2004.
Roger Apéry. Irrationalité de ζ(2) et ζ(3). Astérisque, 61:11–13, 1979.
Kenneth I. Appel and Wolfgang Haken. Every planar map is four colorable. Bulletin of the American
  Mathematical Society, 82:711–712, 1976.
Raymond Ayoub. Euler and the Zeta Function. The American Mathematical Monthly, 81:1067–
  1086, 1974.
David Bailey and David Broadhurst. Parallel integer relation detection: Techniques and applications.
  Mathematics of Computation, 70:1719–1736, 2001.
David Bailey and Helaman Ferguson. Numerical results on relations between fundamental constants
  using a new algorithm. Mathematics of Computation, 53:649–656, 1998.
Michael Bayer. Sqlalchemy. In Amy Brown and Greg Wilson, editors, The Architecture of Open
 Source Applications Volume II: Structure, Scale, and a Few More Fearless Hacks. aosabook.org,
 2012.
Nadav Ben David, Guy Nimri, Uri Mendlovic, Yahel Manor, Carlos De la Cruz Mengual, and
  Ido Kaminer. On the Connection Between Irrationality Measures and Polynomial Continued
  Fractions. Arnold Mathematical Journal, 2024.
Bruce C. Berndt. Ramanujans notebooks: Part III. Springer Science & Business Media, New York,
  NY, United States, 2012.
Bruce C. Berndt, Youn-seo Choi, and Soon-Yi Kang. The problems submitted by ramanujan to the
  journal of the indian mathematical society. 236, 1999.
Bruno Buchberger, Adrian Crciun, Tudor Jebelean, Laura Kovács, Temur Kutsia, Koji Nakagawa,
  Florina Piroi, Nikolaj Popov, Judit Robu, Markus Rosenkranz, et al. Theorema: Towards
  computer-aided mathematical theory exploration. Journal of applied logic, 4:470–504, 2006.
Oﬁr David. The conservative matrix ﬁeld. arXiv:2303.09318, 2023.
Alex Davies, Petar Veličković, Lars Buesing, Sam Blackwell, Daniel Zheng, Nenad Tomašev,
  Richard Tanburn, Peter Battaglia, Charles Blundell, András Juhász, et al. Advancing mathematics
  by guiding human intuition with AI. Nature, 600:70–74, 2021.
Randall Davis and Douglas B Lenat. Knowledge-Based Systems in Artiﬁcial Intelligence: 2 Case
  Studies. McGraw-Hill Professional Book Group, New York, NY, United States, 1982.
Rotem Elimelech, Oﬁr David, Carlos De la Cruz Mengual, Rotem Kalisch, Wolfgang Berndt,
  Michael Shalyt, Mark Silberstein, Yaron Hadad, and Ido Kaminer. Algorithm-assisted discov-
  ery of an intrinsic order among mathematical constants. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 121:e2321440121, 2024.
Leonhard Euler. Introductio in analysin inﬁnitorum. Apud Marcum-Michaelem Bousquet & Socios,
  1748.
Siemion Fajtlowicz. On conjectures of Grafﬁti. Annals of Discrete Mathematics, 38:113–118, 1988.
Alhussein Fawzi, Matej Balog, Aja Huang, Thomas Hubert, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Moham-
  madamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Francisco J R Ruiz, Julian Schrittwieser, Grzegorz
  Swirszcz, et al. Discovering faster matrix multiplication algorithms with reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 610:47–53, 2022.
Helaman Ferguson, David Bailey, and Steve Arno. Analysis of PSLQ, an integer relation ﬁnding
  algorithm. Mathematics of Computation, 68:351–369, 1999.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Helaman RP Ferguson and David H Bailey. A polynomial time, numerically stable integer relation
  algorithm. Technical report, 1992.
Steven R. Finch. Mathematical constants. Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Aleksander Ya. Khinchin. Continued fractions. The University of Chicago Press, 1964.
Douglas B Lenat and John Seely Brown. Why AM and EURISKO appear to work. Artiﬁcial
  intelligence, 23:269–294, 1984.
Arjen Lenstra, Hendrik Lenstra, and Lovász László. Factoring polynomials with rational coefﬁcients.
  Mathematische Annalen, 261:515–534, 1982.
Aaron Meurer, Christopher P. Smith, Mateusz Paprocki, Ondřej Čertík, Sergey B. Kirpichev,
  Matthew Rocklin, AMiT Kumar, Sergiu Ivanov, Jason K. Moore, Sartaj Singh, Thilina Rath-
  nayake, Sean Vig, Brian E. Granger, Richard P. Muller, Francesco Bonazzi, Harsh Gupta, Shivam
  Vats, Fredrik Johansson, Fabian Pedregosa, Matthew J. Curry, Andy R. Terrel, Štěpán Roučka,
  Ashutosh Saboo, Isuru Fernando, Sumith Kulal, Robert Cimrman, and Anthony Scopatz. Sympy:
  symbolic computing in python. PeerJ Computer Science, 3:e103, jan 2017. ISSN 2376-5992. doi:
 10.7717/peerj-cs.103. URL https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.103.
Patrick Morandi. Field and Galois Theory. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, 1996.
The mpmath development team. mpmath: a Python library for arbitrary-precision ﬂoating-point
  arithmetic (version 1.3.0), 2023. http://mpmath.org/.
Gal Raayoni, Shahar Gottlieb, Yahel Manor, George Pisha, Yoav Harris, Uri Mendlovic, Doron
  Haviv, Yaron Hadad, and Ido Kaminer. Generating conjectures on fundamental constants with
  the Ramanujan Machine. Nature, 590:67–73, 2021.
Oﬁr Razon, Yoav Harris, Shahar Gottlieb, Dan Carmon, Oﬁr David, and Ido Kaminer. Automated
  Search for Conjectures on Mathematical Constants using Analysis of Integer Sequences. Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, 202:28809–28842, 2023.
Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog,
  M. Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco Ruiz, Jordan Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi,
  Pushmeet Kohli, and Alhussein Fawzi. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large
  language models. Nature, 625:468–475, 2023.
Hao Wang. Toward mechanical mathematics. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 4:2–22,
 1960.
Herbert S Wilf and Doron Zeilberger. An algorithmic proof theory for hypergeometric (ordinary and
  q) multisum/integral identities. Inventiones mathematicae, 108:575–633, 1992.
Stephen Wolfram et al. A new kind of science. Wolfram Media, Champaign, IL, United States, 2002.
Doron Zeilberger. A fast algorithm for proving terminating hypergeometric identities. Discrete
  mathematics, 80:207–211, 1990.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    O N G ENERALIZED C ONTINUED F RACTIONS
A generalized continued fraction, given two sequences an , bn , is the following formal expression:
                                                                               b1
                                 GCF [an , bn ] = a0 +
                                                                                    b2
                                                                     a1 +
                                                                  b3
                                                                               a2 +
                                                                 ..
                                                                    .
In practice, one deﬁnes two sequences pn , qn called the convergents, such that
                                                          b1                        pn
                                   a0 +                                        =
                                                               b2                   qn
                                            a1 +
                                                                     b3
                                                        a2 +
                                                               ..         bn
                                                                    .+
                                                                          an
and then both sequences satisfy a recurrence relation, summarized by the following matrix product:
                                        n
                                1 a 0 Y 0 bi             p      pn
                                                     = n−1
                                0 1          1 ai        qn−1 qn
                                             i=1

The special case of bn ≡ 1 is called a (regular) continued fraction. C-transforms are the special case
of an ≡ 1. Using basic transformations, any generalized continued fraction can be converted into
this latter form.

                           1       2𝑛              2𝑛
                              =𝒞         = 𝐺𝐶𝐹 1, 2     = 𝐺𝐶𝐹 2𝑛 + 1,2𝑛 = ⋯
                          𝑒−1    4𝑛2 − 1         4𝑛 − 1


             1            2𝑛                            2Τ15                                2Τ15
                 =𝒞                     =1+                                 =1+                           =⋯
           6 𝑒−9    2𝑛 + 1 2𝑛 + 3                       2𝑛 + 2                                4Τ35
                                                  𝒞                                  1+
                                                    2𝑛 + 3 2𝑛 + 5                             2𝑛 + 4
                                                                                        𝒞
                                                                                          2𝑛 + 5 2𝑛 + 7


Figure 5: Equivalences between continued fractions. Expanding on ﬁgure 1, our representation
of the continued fractions enables each integer relation to capture an inﬁnite family of formulas. This
redundancy is mostly eliminated by using the C-transform. Additional equivalences still exist, as
discussed in section 4 and shown by the second integer relation.

Our choice of C-transforms arises from the following equivalence transformation property of con-
tinued fractions: Given any GCF [an , bn ] and nonzero sequence cn , the following equality holds:
                                       b1                                    c 1 b1
                         a0 +                           = a0 +
                                            b2                                    c 1 c 2 b2
                                a1 +                                c1 a1 +
                                                 b3                                      c 2 c 3 b3
                                       a2 +                                 c2 a2 +
                                                 ..                                         ..
                                                    .                                           .
Or, more compactly, c0 GCF [an , bn ] = GCF [cn an , cn−1 cn bn ] (see ﬁgure 5 for more concrete ex-
amples). This equality holds even if neither side converges, in which case the convergents still coin-
cide for all n. As such, if an ̸= 0, the choice of cn = a1n yields a10 GCF [an , bn ] = C[bn /(an−1 an )].


                                                          13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    R EBOUNDING DETECTION

Since we have elected to nullify two of the three stopping conditions of PSLQ, we must consider
whether or not the remaining stopping condition can always be achieved. Namely, can every run of
PSLQ terminate when only stopping once tolerance has been achieved. Even with a fairly standard
choice of 75% tolerance, the answer is no, at least for the implementation we use. However, our ex-
periments show that all such cases appear to exhibit the same general behavior: PSLQ ﬁrst gradually
increases the precision of the integer relation as usual, and at some point before reaching tolerance,
it reverses course and starts reducing the precision (see ﬁgure 6 for an example run).
Our implementation of PSLQ includes a failsafe that detects this behavior: As PSLQ iterates in the
main algorithm, remember pbest the best precision ever obtained in the current run. If at any point
pcurrent the current precision satisﬁes 2pcurrent < pbest , abort the algorithm and return no integer
relation. However, this mechanism is only enabled after an initial grace period of 100 steps. This
grace period was chosen since it was observed that during the phase where the precision increases,
it does not always increase monotonically, and can ﬂuctuate.


                                                              target precision


                                                             identified
                                                            abort point
                            precision


                                                                   PSLQ gets
                                                                   stuck


                                              step number


Figure 6: Example run of PSLQ showcasing the rebounding phenomenon. The y axis represents
the precision of the best integer relation that PSLQ ﬁnds at each step number, which must reach the
dashed line to terminate. The red dot is where the failsafe would have triggered, except that it is
being prevented by the grace period to enable computing this example.



C    T IME C OMPLEXITY OF THE PSLQ A LGORITHM

Given x a vector of m real numbers, and assuming the minimal euclidean norm of all integer rela-
tions on it is Mx ∈ R, running PSLQ to retrieve an integer relation on x has a time complexity of
O(m4 + m3 log Mx ) (see (Ferguson et al., 1999) corollary 2). To estimate the time complexity of
our runs of PSLQ, we substitute Mx with a constant based on the working precision. When applying
PSLQ on a large scale, choosing an upper bound for the precisions of the constants involved prevents
this Mx term from dominating the runtime, and so we can asymptotically treat this as a constant,
leaving us with a time complexity of O(m4 ).
Since we run PSLQ to detect speciﬁcally polynomial relations, we should evaluate m in terms of
the amount of constants n, the maximal degree d, and the order o of the relation, as these dictate
how many monomials we expect the polynomial to have, and in turn determine m. If we ignore the
limitation on the order, counting all possible monomials of a polynomial on n variables with degree
d is identical to counting all multisets of size d on n + 1 items, each of which represents either one
of the variables, or a dummy variable that completes the monomial to degree d. This has a closed
form solution based on the stars and bars method:

                                  n+1+d−1               n+d         (n + d)!
                          m=                        =            =           .
                                         d                 d          d!n!
When including the limitation on the order, one obtains a smaller value than this through a more
delicate analysis, but to the best of our knowledge, no closed form
                                                                   solution exists. Regardless, this

                                                                   n+d 4
means that each run of PSLQ will have a time complexity of O        d     .


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D              T HE G ENERALIZEABILITY OF R ETURN ON I NVESTMENT (RO I)
The RoI measure that we introduced in section 3 is deﬁned on numerically-conjectured integer re-
lations. Our work relies on the PSLQ algorithm, which is one of many integer relation algorithms,
and so it is natural to ask if RoI can be applied to other integer relation algorithms and reach the
same conclusions. Here we motivate a positive answer to this question by demonstrating the same
experiment shown in section 3 (speciﬁcally ﬁgure 3), but performed on the LLL algorithm instead
(Lenstra et al., 1982).
Figure 7, which is structured in an identical manner to ﬁgure 3, demonstrates a nearly identical
experiment, except the PSLQ algorithm is replaced by the LLL algorithm. This experiment used the
olll python package for an implementation of LLL. The result shows how the algorithms are similar
yet different in terms of RoI: as n increases, both algorithms exhibit greater average RoI, up to some
apparent upper limit less than 1.5. However, PSLQ showed greater standard deviation than LLL,
which is also visible as greater noise on each ﬁgure’s (c) panel.

                                            (a)                                        (b)

                                                                          1                2Τ3
                  RoI = 5905.2, high confidence                              =1+
                                                                         𝑒−1                 4Τ15
                                                                                 1+
                                                                                               6Τ35
                                                                                       1+
                  RoI = 2310.5, high confidence                                              2𝑛Τ 4𝑛2 − 1
                                                                                          ⋱+     1 +⋱



                                                                        1                   2Τ15
                                                                            =1+
                                                                      6 𝑒−9                   4Τ35
                                                                                1+
                                                                                                2Τ21
                                                                                     1+
                  ~3𝜎, moderate confidence                                                 2𝑛Τ 4𝑛2 + 8𝑛 + 3
                                                                                        ⋱+        1 +⋱
 average RoI


                                                                                       (c)


                                                                                                              average RoI
                                                          numbers 𝑛


                                                                             binary digits 𝑑
                                       numbers 𝑛



Figure 7: Experimental analysis of the Return on Investment (RoI) property, demonstrated on
the LLL algorithm. (a) For each n we ran LLL 100 times, with a preselected binary precision of
50 + 5n, and present the average RoI for each n. The standard deviation for each n is presented as
fading errorbars, with the half length of each darkest error bar being equal to one standard deviation.
The dashed line is the constant RoI of 1.3, which the plot suggests is a viable option for minimum RoI
for ﬁltering integer relations from LLL. (b) Sampled formulas listed with their RoI on panel (a). Thanks
to their high precision, their RoI is much larger than our recommended RoI cutoff. (c) For each d, n,
we ran LLL 100 times, each with n numbers between 0 and 1, each with d uniformly random binary
digits. Then, we present the average RoI across all 100 runs for each d, n. For a ﬁxed n, the average
RoI is close to constant in d.


E              P ROVEN FORMULAS
After having found the formulas shown in the hypergraph (ﬁgure 4), we proved some of them, and
we list these proven formulas here. We also plan joint works with mathematicians that focus on
the proofs of the formulas and their potential impact in the relevant ﬁelds of mathematics, to be
submitted to mathematics journals. This effort complements our main contribution in this work,
which is concerned with the automated generation of the formulas.
In total, we proved 47 formulas of the form a0 + b1 /(a1 + b2 /(... + bn /(an + ...))), of which
22 we showcase in this table. 6 of the formulas can be generalized to three parametric families,


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


presented in lines 1-9. Lines 10-25 describe additional proven formulas. The proofs rely on (1)
inverting Euler’s continued fraction formula with parameters h1 , h2 , f to (2) create an inﬁnite sum,
which we (3) translate into a hypergeometric-function form, and (4) complete the proof using known
hypergeometric identities.

                            Table 4: Selected list of formulas that we proved.

 an                bn                       h1          h2         f        Known limit of resulting inﬁnite sum
 ω+1               n2 + ωn                  −n          n+ω        1        (1 + ω)(2 F1 (1, 1, ω + 2, −1)−1 − 1)
                                                                                −12
 5                 n2 + 4n                  −n          n+4        1        131+192 log 2
 4                 n2 + 3n                  −n          n+3        1             3
                                                                            −16+24 log 2
                                                                                                          −1
 ω                 (ωn + 1)2                −ωn − 1     ωn + 1     1                          ω , ω , −1)
                                                                            (ω + 1)(2 F1 (1, ω+1 2ω+1
                                                                                                             − 1)
 2                 4n2 + 4n + 1             −2n − 1     2n + 1     1         π
                                                                            4−π
                                                                            log (2)
 1                 n2 + 2n + 1              −n − 1      n+1        1        1−log 2

 ω                 n2 + (ω + 1)n + ω        −n − 1      n+ω        1        (ω + 1)(2 F1 (1, 2, ω + 2, −1)−1 − 1)
 3                 n2 + 4n + 3              −n − 1      n+3        1        −1 + 34−484 log 2
 2                 n2 + 3n + 2              −n − 1      n+2        1        −1 + 9−123log 2
                                                                                −2
 5                 n2 + 2n                  n           n+2        n + 32   17−24 log 2
                                                                            −3
 5                 n2 + 4n + 3              −n − 1      n+3        n + 52    5 + 5( −1162
                                                                                            28
                                                                                            +560 log 2)
                                                                                         3
 4                 n2 + n                   −n          n+1        n+1            4
                                                                            12−16 log 2
                                                                            −1
 4                 n2 + 3n + 2              −n − 1      n+2        n+2                      9
                                                                             2 + 2(−99+144 log 2)
 4                 4n2 + 4n                 −2n         2n + 2     1             4
                                                                            −2+4 log 2
 3                 n2                       −n          n          n + 21       3
                                                                            3−3 log 2
                                                                            −1
 3                 n2 + 2n + 1              −n − 1      n+1        n + 32                  10
                                                                             3 + 3(−20+30 log 2)
                                                                            −6
 3                 n2 + 4n + 4              −n − 2      −n + 2     n + 52    5 − 5( 147
                                                                                           21
                                                                                        2 +105 log 2)
 1                 n2 + 4n + 4              n+2         −n − 2     1        −2 + −3 +33 log 2
                                                                                      2
 4                 4n2 − 1                  −2n + 1     2n + 1     1        −3
                                                                               3
                                                                                  3π + 1
                                                                             2 + 4
 2                 4n − 4n − 1
                        2
                                            −2n + 1     2n − 1     1        4
                                                                            π +1
 5                 4n2 + 2n − 2             −2n − 1     2n + 2     1        −20
                                                                                 4 √
                                                                                    16 2
                                                                                          +1
                                                                              3 + √3
 5                 4n2 + 2n                 −2n − 1     2n         n + 34   3 + 2√ 2
 3                 4n2 − 2n                 −2n + 1     2n         1        2+ 2
 2n2 + 2n + 1      −n4                      n2          n2         1         1
                                                                            ζ(2)
 2n + 1            n4                       −n2         n2         1         2
                                                                            ζ(2)


F     D ETAILED INTEGER RELATIONS FROM THE HYPERGRAPH
This section provides the full data underlying the hypergraph (ﬁgure 4). Recall that according to
appendix A, each of the integer relations presented here can be connected to inﬁnitely many gen-
eralized continued fractions, and the C-transform is chosen as a representative for them all. Thus,
every vertex in the hypergraph could represent inﬁnite formulas that we consider trivially equivalent.
This reasoning motivated the use of the C-transform as the canonical representative that deﬁnes the
vertex. The edges in the hypergraph provide additional (non-trivial) equivalences. Some of the for-
mulas and relations shown here can be found in the literature, and others are novel, to the best of
our knowledge (as denoted in the left-most column). Every integer relation has been rearranged for
clarity, though binary precision and RoI (rounded down) are still computed in terms of the original
integer relation.

 Novelty     Integer relation                                                         Precision     RoI



                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                h                                                   i
                              −n6
 Known      C       1156n6 −765n4 +219n2 −25
                                                                            6
                                                                        = 5ζ(3)                   53147   6643.3
                h                                   i
                           −n         6
 Known      C       36n6 −21n4 +7n2 −1
                                                            8
                                                        = 7ζ(3)                                   53146   5905.1
                h                                       i
                             −16n         6
 Known      C                                                   6
                                                            = 7ζ(3)                               53147   6643.3
                h 100n −45n +21n 10
                                 −4
                         6            4        2
                                                                                    i
                                              −n
 New        C          10 +63n8 +264n6 −154n4 +57n2 −9
                                                                            2
                                                                = 6ζ(5)−6ζ(3)+3                   160     11.4
                h 4n                                             i
            C 4n10 +63n8 +296n−n
                                          10
                                                                               2
 New                                    6 +158n4 +137n2 −49        = 14ζ(5)+42ζ(3)−63             162     7.3
             h                                                       i
                                        −n10
 New        C 4n10 +143n8 +1364n           6 +286n4 +517n2 −169
                                                                                    64
                                                                        = 832ζ(5)+2288ζ(3)−3549   234     5.2
             h                                 i
            C 4n6 +99n4−n
                                6
                                                            8
 New                        +651n2 −169 = 104ζ(3)−117                                             197     9.3
             h                                    i
            C 4n6 +195n4−n
                                  6
                                                               216
 New                          +2451n2 −625 = 5400ζ(3)−6275                                        269     7.2
             h                                                 i
                                  4n6 −2n5
 New        C 9n6 +33n5 +25n         4 −13n3 −12n2 +2n+2          = 4ζ(3)5
                                                                                                  53147   6643.3
             h                               i
            C 4n6 +35n−n
                              6
                                                       1
 New                      4 +91n2 −25          = 5ζ(3)−5                                          122     12.2
             h                                       i
            C 16n6 +572n−4n
                                     6
                                                                     6750
 New                          4 +5332n2 −1369          = 874125ζ(3)−1043992                       226     4
             h                                      i
            C 16n6 +252n−4n
                                    6
                                                                 54
 New                          4 +1092n2 −289          = 3213ζ(3)−3808                             156     4.7
             h                                      i
            C 4n6 +323n4−n
                                   6
                                                                 1728
 New                          +6643n2 −1681 = 70848ζ(3)−83435                                     341     7.1
             h                                       i
                              −n6
 New        C 4n6 +675n4 +28731n           2 −7225
                                                                    4800
                                                       = 408000ζ(3)−485639                        487     9
             h                                       i
                              −n6
 New        C 4n6 +483n4 +14763n           2 −3721
                                                                      216000
                                                       = 13176000ζ(3)−15622283                    409     5.9
             h                                    i
            C 9n−2n    −9n3 −12n2 −4n
                     4
                                                             8
 Known           4 +48n3 +85n2 +56n+9                = 54−27ζ(2)                                  53146   2952.5
             h                       i
                      n4
 Known      C 121n4 −55n      2 +9      = 3ζ(2)5
                                                                                                  53149   7592.7
             h                                        i
            C 9n4−2n     −13n3 −22n2 −8n
                       4
                                                                  16
 Known             +72n3 +189n2 +180n+45 = 240−135ζ(2)                                            53144   2214.3
             h                                        i
                         −4n4 −6n3
 Known      C 25n4 +90n     3 +111n2 +54n+10
                                                                 9
                                                        = 30ζ(2)−40                               53146   2952.5
             h                                    i
            C 9n−2n   −5n3 −3n2 +n+1
                    4                                    3ζ(2)+2
 Known           4 +36n3 +51n2 +30n+7                = 42−21ζ(2)                                  53146   2797.1
             h                                        i
            C 9n4−2n     −9n3 −9n2 +n+3
                       4                                        9ζ(2)
 Known                    3 +139n2 +130n+39             = 208−117ζ(2)                             53144   2415.6
             h +60n                               i
            C 9n−2n     −7n3 −4n2 +4n
                      4
                                                             8
 Known           4 +48n3 +85n2 +56n+9                = 27ζ(2)−36                                  53146   2952.5
             h                                         i
            C 9n−2n    −11n3 −18n2 −4n+8
                     4                                        12ζ(2)−32
 Known           4 +72n3 +213n2 +276n+133                = 456−285ζ(2)                            53142   1660.6
             h                     i
                    8n4
 Known      C 49n4 −21n     2 +4       = ζ(2)2
                                                                                                  53151   10630.2
             h                 i
            C 9n−2n
                    4      3
                      +n                   4
 Known                             = 3ζ(2)                                                        53149   7592.7
             h −3n +14
                 4      2
                                                i
                      −4n +2n3
 Known      C 25n4 +10n     3 −9n2 −2n+2
                                                         3
                                                   = 2ζ(2)                                        53150   8858.3
             h                                    i
            C 9n−2n   −9n3 −9n2 +n+3
                    4                                     45ζ(2)−48π+66
 New             4 +48n3 +61n2 −8n−15                = 225ζ(2)−240π−370                           53143   1062.8
             h                     i
                    −n4
 New        C 4n4 +24n    2 +49
                                                 2
                                       = 14ζ(2)−21                                                101     7.2
             h                       i
                    −n4
 New        C 4n4 +48n    2 +169
                                                   18
                                        = 403−234ζ(2)                                             138     5.5
 New        5ln2 =           [       5        ] −       [           2       ]                     53150   4831.8
                                   −n2                         −n2
                         C       16n2 −4
                                                    C       100n2 −25

                                 [        2        ] +          [       7       ]
 New        14ln2 =                     −n2                           −n2
                                                                                                  53148   4429
                             C       196n2 −49
                                                            C       16n2 −4
                          10     ] + [ 14 2 ]
 New        35ln2 = [ −n     2           −n
                                                                                                  53147   3126.2
                     C 196n2 −49    C 100n
              h       i                    2 −25

                −n 2
 New        C 36n2 −9 = 3ln2 2
                                                                                                  53150   8858.3



                                                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                h                                i
                              −4n4 −6n3
 New        C       16n4 +24n3 +117n2 +81n+238
                                                            3
                                                     = 544ln2−374   108     4.5
                h                             i
                 −2n −10n −14n −6n
                          4      3        2
 Known      C    4       3       2 +130n+39
                                                         6
                                                = 221−234G          53144   2415.6
             h 9n +60n +139n              i
                     −2n4 −4n3
 Known      C 9n4 +24n   3 +13n2 −4n−3
                                                 2
                                            = 6G−3                  53149   5314.9
             h                             i
                   −2n4 −8n3 −8n2
 Known      C 9n4 +48n   3 +85n2 +56n+9
                                                    4
                                             = 54G−45               53146   2952.5
             h              i
               −2n4 −6n3
 New        C 9n                       720
                               = 450G−299                           53140   1714.1
             h −3n
                 4     2 +1
                                           i
               −2n4 −12n3 −24n2 −16n
 New        C 9n 4 +48n3 +85n2 +56n+9
                                                   32
                                             = 18G+45               53148   2657.4
             h                             i
               −2n4 −14n3 −32n2 −24n
 New        C 9n 4       3 +85n2 +56n+9
                                                   64
                                             = 54G+39               53146   2415.7
             h +48n         i
               −2n4 −2n3
 New        C 9n                    2
                               = 2G−1                               53149   6643.6
             h −3n +1
                 4     2
                                              i
                    −2n4 −12n3 −16n2
 New        C 9n4 +72n   3 +189n2 +180n+45
                                                        16
                                                = 450G−395          53143   2043.9
             h                                i
            C 9n−2n    −14n3 −28n2 −16n
                     4
                                                        32
 New             4       3 +189n2 +180n+45      = 285−270G          53144   1968.2
             h +72n                           i
            C 9n−2n    −16n3 −40n2 −32n
                     4
                                                       128
 New             4 +72n3 +189n2 +180n+45        = 255−90G           53145   2044
             h              i
               −2n4 −4n3
 New        C 9n               = 24                                 53145   3126.1
             h −3n4 +1 3 18G−11
                 4     2
                                               i
 New        C 9n4−2n    −12n −24n2 −16n
                   +72n3 +213n2 +276n+133 = 1026G−931
                                                           8
                                                                    53141   1897.8
             h                                 i
            C 9n4−2n    −14n −30n −18n
                      4       3      2
                                                           12
 New                     3       2 +406n+207     = 1909−2070G       53141   1771.3
             h +84n4 +283n                i
                   −2n −8n3 −8n2
 New        C 9n4 +24n   3 +13n2 −4n−3
                                                 16
                                            = 18G−3                 53147   3543.1
             h              i
            C 9n4−2n
                       4
 New                           = 1                                  53151   10630.2
             h −3n4 +1 3 2G2 i
                       2


 New        C 9n4−2n    −10n −12n
                         3 +13n2 −4n−3
                                                  96
                                            = 90G−31                53144   2415.6
             h +24n                        i
            C 9n−2n    −6n3 −6n2 −2n
                     4
                                                    1
 New             4 +36n3 +51n2 +30n+7        = 14−14G               53148   4429
             h                            i
                   −2n4 −6n3 −4n2
 New        C 9n4 +24n   3 +13n2 −4n−3
                                                 4
                                            = 6G+3                  53150   4831.8
             h                             i
                   −2n4 −10n3 −8n2
 New        C 9n4 +48n   3 +61n2 −8n−15
                                                   16
                                             = 30G−5                53147   3321.6
             h                             i
            C 9n4−2n     −12n3 −16n2
                       4
                                                   64
 New               +48n3 +61n2 −8n−15 = 90G+65                      53146   2214.4
             h                             i
                      −2n4 −8n3
 New        C 9n4 +48n   3 +61n2 −8n−15
                                                    24
                                             = 90G−55               53145   2530.7
             h                             i
                −2n4 −10n3 −16n2 −8n
 New        C 9n 4 +48n3 +85n2 +56n+9
                                                    8
                                             = 27−18G               53148   3126.3
 Known      ϕ2 − ϕ − 1 = 0                                          53148   8858
            √ 2
 Known        2 =2                                                  53147   10629.4
            √ 2
 Known        3 =3                                                  53147   10629.4
               −1   ϕ+2
 Known      C 5 = 5                                                 53149   5905.4
                 ϕ+1
 Known      C −19  = 3                                              53149   7592.7
              1
 Known      C 5 = 2ϕ−1
                    ϕ+1
                                                                    53149   5905.4
 Known      C [1] = ϕ+1ϕ                                            53150   8858.3
                1   √3+1
 Known      C 2 = 2                                                 53149   7592.7
                  √2+1
 Known      C −1 8    = 2√2                                         53149   7592.7
               1
 Known      C 4 = 2√12−2                                            53147   6643.3
                   2
 Known      9C 29 − 9C 29 − 2 = 0                                   53153   4088.6
              h 2         i     √       √
 New        C n6n    +3n
                  2 +3n+2   = ϕ 23+3ϕ+
                                  √
                                    3+2
                                          3
                                                                    53147   4088.2


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                h       √ √i    √    √
 New        C        4n
                    2n+3
                          2 3−2 2−2
                               =  √    3+2
                                                                              53146   3126.2
                h 2        i2 3−3 2
                                    h 2        i
 New        25C 3nn2 +9n+6
                     +3n
                              − 27C 3nn2 +9n+6
                                         +3n
                                                 −3=0                         53151   3543.4
              h      i2       h     i
 New             4n
            9C 2n+3     − 12C 2n+3
                                 4n
                                      −2=0                                    53152   4088.6
                 3
 Known      C       n   = 4C2 e+14e−17
                                9                                             53145   2657.2
            C2 = e 2−7
                  2
 Known                                                                        53146   5905.1
             h          i
 New        C n2 +7n+12
                  2n
                          = 15C12 −2                                          53147   5314.7
                h                  i
                       −2n
 New        C       n2 +9n+20          = 4C 2 +14
                                                                              53152   2952.8
                h                  i     5C2 +15
                       −2n
 New        C       n2 +7n+12          = 2C 2 +7
                                         2C2 +8                               53151   3543.4

 New        C n2 = C2 + 2                                                     53151   7593
              h        i
 New        C n2n+4
                 2 +n     = 2C     2 +8
                                                                              53152   4088.6
              h              i C2 +3
 New        C n2 +3n+2
                     2n
                                = 2                                           53149   6643.6
              h              i 3C2 +1
                   −2n
 New        C n2 +5n+6          = 2C2 +7                                      53153   3543.5
              h              i 3C2 +9
 New        C n2 +5n+6
                     2n
                                = 9C2 2                                       53148   6643.5
                              h                i2          h         i
 New        (36e − 81)C 4n2 +8n+3     2n
                                                  − 18C 4n2 +8n+3
                                                                2n
                                                                       −1=0   53143   2310.5
                        h            i2         h        i
 New        (e − 1)C 4n2n     2 −1      − 2C 4n2n   2 −1   −1=0               53147   5905.2
                          h                 i2         h           i
 New        (e − 1)9C 4n2−2n     +8n+3          − 6eC        −2n
                                                         4n2 +8n+3 + e = 0    53147   3321.6
              h                             i
            C 16n4−4n       −2n+2
                          2
                                                  2e−2
 Known                +48n3 +36n2 −5 = 5e−10                                  53147   3543.1
              h           i
 Known      C 16n12 −4 = 2e−2     e+1
                                                                              53148   5314.8
               1
 Known      C n =e−1                                                          53149   8858.1
              h              i
                    −n
 Known      C n2 +5n+6          = 3e                                          53149   10629.8
              h                                     i
            C 16n4 +80n−4n          −6n
                                  2
                                                             3
 Known                       3 +132n2 +80n+11         = 33−11e                53145   3543
              h              i
                    −n
 Known      C n2 +3n+2          = 2e−2 e
                                                                              53149   6643.6
              h                            i
                       −n3 −2n2
 Known      C n4 +4n    3 +7n2 +6n+3
                                                   4e
                                               = 6e−3                         53148   4831.6
              h              i
 Known      C n2 +5n+6
                     n
                                = 1                                           53144   3542.9
              h               i 18e−48
                     −n
 Known      C n2 +7n+12          = e                                          53147   4831.5
              h                 i 4e−8
                      −n
 Known      C n2 +11n+30           = 54e−144 e
                                                                              53143   2952.3
              h              i
 Known      C n2 +3n+2
                     n
                                = 1                                           53147   4831.5
              h               i 4e−10
                     −n
 Known      C n2 +9n+20          = 30−10e e
                                                                              53145   4088
              h                                 i
            C n4 +10n−n         −3n2
                              3
                                                         6e
 Known                    3 +33n2 +40n+14         = 14e−21                    53146   3543
              h               i
 New        C n2 +9n+20
                      n
                                 =           1
                                                                              53139   2125.5
              h               i 600e−1630
 New        C n2 +7n+12
                      n
                                 = 96e−260 1
                                                                              53142   2657.1
              h                 i
                −2n2 −n+1
 Known      C 9n   2               = 16−4π π
                                                                              53150   4429.1
              h 2+15n+4i
 Known      C 4nn2 +8n+3
                      +2n
                                 = 3π−6  4
                                                                              53150   4831.8
              h 2 i
 Known      C 4nn2 −1 = π4                                                    53151   8858.5



                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                h                i
                     −2n2 −n
 Known      C       9n2 +15n+4     = 20−6π   1
                                                                    53149   4429
                h     2
                                  i
 Known      C 4n2n+16n+15
                        +4n
                                    = 15π−40    8
                                                                    53147   3126.2
              h                   i
            C 9n−2n       −3n
                        2
                                                6
 Known             2                = 15π−40                        53148   3321.7
              h +21n+10 i
 Known      C 1−2n         = 9π−244
                                                                    53148   3543.2
              h 9n+92          i
 Known      C 9n−2n      +n
                   2 +3n−2       = π−2   1
                                                                    53152   7593.1
                1−2n   π+2
 Known      C 9n = 6                                                53153   5905.8
              h                   i
                −2n2 −3n+2
 Known      C 9n   2 +33n+28
                                             6π−32
                                    = 448−147π                      53145   1771.5
              h                   i
                 −2n2 −n+1
 Known      C 9n   2                = 4−3π                          53147   2530.8
              h +21n+10           i 30π−100
                −2n −3n+2
                      2
 Known      C 9n   2                = 2π+8                          53151   4429.2
              h +21n+10        i            5π
                  −2n2 +n
 Known      C 9n2 −3n−2 = π            2
                                                                    53152   10630.4
              h                                    i
                 −2n4 −9n3 −9n2 +n+3
 New        C 9n   4 +36n3 +39n2 +6n−5
                                                         6π+21
                                                      = 10π+25      53148   2530.8
              h                   i
                −2n2 −5n+3
 New        C 9n   2                = 256−72π  9π
                                                                    53146   2310.6
              h +39n+40  i
 New        C 9n+18
                 1−2n             32−15π
                            = 270π−864                              53144   1610.4
              h                   i
                −2n2 −5n+3
 New        C 9n   2                = 9π+24                         53148   2952.6
              h +33n+28           i           56

            C 9n−2n
                         2
                           +n                     48
 New               2                =                               53143   1771.4
              h +21n+10           i       525π−1600
                −2n2 −5n+3
 New        C 9n   2
                                           27π+84
                                    = 30π+100                       53147   1898.1
              h +21n+10           i
            C 9n−2n        −n
                         2
                                                 4
 New               2 +21n+10        = 240−75π                       53147   2530.8
              h                   i
                −2n2 −5n+3
 New        C 9n   2                = 5π+16                         53150   2657.5
              h +27n+18         i         6π+16
                  −2n2 +n
 New        C 9n2 +15n+4 = 15π−44             3
                                                                    53149   3543.2
                                                          2
            πe            1           [      1      ]
 Known       2  =       C[n] +                                      2946    84.1
                                            2 +4n −1
                                          1−2n
                                  2C 4n
                                              2
             2 = C[n] + C 2n ]
            πe           1              1
 New                                                                2947    245.5
                                    [             ]      2
                                  C 2nn+2 2 +2n −1
 New        πe
             2  =         1
                        C[n] −      [             ]                 2949    62.7
                                  C 2nn+2 2 +2n −2
              h         i
 Known      C n2 +n = C1
                   1            1
                                                                    53151   13287.75
              h              2
                                                      i
 New        C 4n4 +20n4n3 +39n +4n−3
                                    2 +35n+14           = 3C7C
                                                             1 +3
                                                               1
                                                                    53149   5314.9


                                                              20
